<doc id="23906" wikidata="Q172438" url="?curid=23906" title="Peterborough">
<text>Peterborough ( ) is a cathedral city in the City of Peterborough district in the ceremonial county of Cambridgeshire, England. The city is north of London, on the River Nene. As of the 2021 census, Peterborough had a population of 192,178, while the population of the district was 215,673. 

Human settlement in the area began before the Bronze Age, as can be seen at the Flag Fen archaeological site to the east of the city centre. There is evidence of Roman occupation. The Anglo-Saxon period saw the establishment of a monastery, Medeshamstede, which later became Peterborough Cathedral. In the 19th century, the population grew rapidly after the coming of the railway. The area became known for its brickworks and engineering. After the Second World War, industrial employment fell and growth was limited until Peterborough was designated a new town in the 1960s. The main economic sectors now are financial services and distribution. 

The city was the administrative centre of the Soke of Peterborough in the historic county of Northamptonshire, until the Soke was abolished in 1965. From 1965 to 1974, it formed part of the short-lived county of Huntingdon and Peterborough and since then has been part of Cambridgeshire. 

The cathedral city of Ely is east-southeast across the Fens and the university city of Cambridge is to the southeast. The local topography is flat, and in places, the land lies 
below sea level.

==History==
=== Toponymy ===
The original name of the town was Medeshamstede. The town&#x27;s name changed to &quot;Burgh&quot; from the late tenth century, possibly after Abbot Kenulf had built a defensive wall around the abbey which was dedicated to Saint Peter; eventually this developed into the form Peterborough. In the 12th century, the town was also known as &quot;Gildenburgh&quot;, which is found in the Peterborough version of the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; (see Peterborough Chronicle below) and a history of the abbey by the monk Hugh Candidus. The town does not appear to have been a borough until at least the 12th century.

=== Early history ===
Peterborough and its surrounding areas around have been inhabited for thousands of years because it is where permanently drained land in The Fens is created by the River Nene. Remains of Iron Age settlement and what is thought to be religious activity can be seen at the Flag Fen archaeological site to the east of the city centre. The Romans established a fortified garrison town at Durobrivae on Ermine Street, to the west in Water Newton, around the middle of the 1st century AD. Durobrivae&#x27;s earliest appearance among surviving records is in the Antonine Itinerary of the late 2nd century. There was also a large 1st century Roman fort at Longthorpe, designed to house half a legion, or about 3,000 soldiers; it may have been established as early as around AD 44–48. Peterborough was an important area of ceramic production in the Roman period, providing Nene Valley Ware that was traded as far away as Cornwall and the Antonine Wall, Caledonia.

Peterborough is shown by its original name Medeshamstede to have possibly been an Anglian settlement before AD 655, when Sexwulf founded a monastery on land granted to him for that purpose by Peada of Mercia, who converted to Christianity and was briefly ruler of the smaller Middle Angles sub-group. His brother Wulfhere murdered his own sons, similarly converted and then finished the monastery by way of atonement.

Hereward the Wake rampaged through the town in 1069 or 1070. Outraged, Abbot Turold erected a fort or castle, which, from his name, was called Mont Turold: this mound, or hill, is on the outside of the deanery garden, now called Tout Hill, although in 1848 Tot-hill or Toot Hill. The abbey church was rebuilt and greatly enlarged in the 12th century. The Peterborough Chronicle, a version of the Anglo-Saxon one, contains unique information about the history of England after the Norman conquest, written here by monks in the 12th century. This is the only known prose history in English between the conquest and the later 14th century. The burgesses received their first charter from &quot;Abbot Robert&quot; – probably Robert of Sutton (1262–1273). The place suffered materially in the war between King John and the confederate barons, many of whom took refuge in the monastery here and in Crowland Abbey, from which sanctuaries they were forced by the king&#x27;s soldiers, who plundered the religious houses and carried off great treasures. The abbey church became one of Henry VIII&#x27;s retained, more secular, cathedrals in 1541, having been assessed at the Dissolution as having revenue of £1,972.7s.0¾d per annum.
When civil war broke out, Peterborough was divided between supporters of King Charles I and the Long Parliament. The city lay on the border of the Eastern Association of counties which sided with Parliament, and the war reached Peterborough in 1643 when soldiers arrived in the city to attack Royalist strongholds at Stamford and Crowland. The Royalist forces were defeated within a few weeks and retreated to Burghley House, where they were captured and sent to Cambridge. While the Parliamentary soldiers were in Peterborough, however, they ransacked the cathedral, destroying the Lady Chapel, chapter house, cloister, high altar and choir stalls, as well as mediaeval decoration and records.

Among the privileges claimed by the abbot as early as the 13th century was that of having a prison for felons taken in the Soke of Peterborough, a liberty within Northamptonshire. This afforded it administrative and judicial independence from the rest of the county, with it having a quarter sessions separate from the rest of Northamptonshire from 1349. In 1576 Bishop Edmund Scambler sold the lordship of the hundred of &quot;Nassaburgh&quot;, which was coextensive with the Soke, to Queen Elizabeth I, who gave it to Lord Burghley, and from that time until the 19th century he and his descendants, the Earls and Marquesses of Exeter, had a separate gaol for prisoners arrested in the Soke. The abbot formerly held four fairs, of which two, St. Peter&#x27;s Fair, granted in 1189 and later held on the second Tuesday and Wednesday in July, and the Brigge Fair, granted in 1439 and later held on the first Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday in October, were purchased by the corporation from the Ecclesiastical Commissioners in 1876. The Bridge Fair, as it is now known, granted to the abbey by King Henry VI, survives. Prayers for the opening of the fair were once said at the morning service in the cathedral, followed by a civic proclamation and a sausage lunch at the town hall which still takes place. The mayor traditionally leads a procession from the town hall to the fair where the proclamation is read, asking all persons to &quot;behave soberly and civilly, and to pay their just dues and demands according to the laws of the realm and the rights of the City of Peterborough&quot;.

=== Modern history ===
Railway lines began operating locally during the 1840s, but it was the 1850 opening of the Great Northern Railway&#x27;s line from London to that transformed Peterborough from a market town to an industrial centre. Lord Exeter had opposed the railway passing through Stamford, so Peterborough, situated between two main terminals at London and Doncaster, increasingly developed as a regional hub.

Coupled with vast local clay deposits, the railway enabled large scale brickmaking and distribution to take place. The area was the UK&#x27;s leading producer of bricks for much of the twentieth century. Brick-making had been a small seasonal craft since the early nineteenth century, but during the 1890s successful experiments at Fletton using the harder clays from a lower level had resulted in a much more efficient process. The market dominance during this period of the London Brick Company, founded by the prolific Scottish builder and architect John Cathles Hill, gave rise to some of the country&#x27;s most well-known landmarks, all built using the ubiquitous Fletton Brick. Perkins Engines was established in Peterborough in 1932 by Frank Perkins, creator of the Perkins diesel engine. Thirty years later it employed more than a tenth of the population of Peterborough, mainly at Eastfield. Baker Perkins had relocated from London to Westwood, now the site of HM Prison Peterborough, in 1903, followed by Peter Brotherhood to Walton in 1906; both manufacturers of industrial machinery, they too became major employers in the city. British Sugar has moved its headquarters to Hampton from Woodston, the beet sugar factory, which opened there in 1926, was closed in 1991.

The Norwich and Peterborough (N&amp;P) was formed by the merger of the Norwich Building Society and the Peterborough Building Society in 1986. It was the ninth largest building society at the time of its merger into the Yorkshire Group in 2011. N&amp;P continued to operate under its own brand administered at Lynch Wood until 2018. Prior to merger with the Midlands Co-op in 2013, Anglia Regional, the UK&#x27;s fifth largest co-operative society, was also based in Peterborough, where it was established in 1876. The combined society began trading as Central England Co-operative in 2014.

Designated a New Town in 1967, Peterborough Development Corporation was formed in partnership with the city and county councils to house London&#x27;s overspill population in new townships sited around the existing urban area. There were to be four townships, one each at Bretton (originally to be called Milton, a hamlet in the Middle Ages), Orton, Paston/ Werrington and Castor. The last of these was never built, but a fourth, called Hampton, is now taking shape south of the city. It was decided that the city should have a major indoor shopping centre at its heart. Planning permission was received in late summer 1976 and Queensgate, containing over 90 stores and including parking for 2,300 cars, was opened by Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands in 1982. of urban roads were planned and a network of high-speed landscaped thoroughfares, known as parkways, was constructed.

Peterborough&#x27;s population grew by 45.4% between 1971 and 1991. New service sector companies like Thomas Cook and Pearl Assurance were attracted to the city, ending the dominance of the manufacturing industry as employers. An urban regeneration company named Opportunity Peterborough, under the chairmanship of Lord Mawhinney, was set up by the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister in 2005 to oversee Peterborough&#x27;s future development. Between 2006 and 2012 a £1 billion redevelopment of the city centre and surrounding areas was planned. The master plan provided guidelines on the physical shaping of the city centre over the next 15–20 years. Proposals are still progressing for the north of Westgate, the south bank and the station quarter, where Network Rail is preparing a major mixed use development. Whilst recognising that the reconfiguration of the relationship between the city and station was critical, English Heritage found the current plans for Westgate unconvincing and felt more thought should be given to the vitality of the historic core.

In recent years Peterborough has undergone significant changes with numerous developments underway, most notably are Fletton Quays, a project to construct 350 apartments, various office spaces as well as a new home for Peterborough City Council with other projects within the development to include a Hilton Garden Inn hotel with a sky bar, a new passport office and various leisure, restaurant and retail opportunities. Other projects within the city include the extension to Queensgate Shopping Centre, The Great Northern Hotel and more recently plans to extend the railway station and long stay car park to facilitate more office space in the city centre and further parking.

==Governance==
There is one main tier of local government covering Peterborough, at unitary authority level, being Peterborough City Council, which meets at Peterborough Town Hall and has its main offices at Sand Martin House on Bittern Way. The city council is also a member of the Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority, led by the directly elected Mayor of Cambridgeshire and Peterborough.

The area governed by the city council is the district of Peterborough, which extends beyond the urban area of Peterborough itself to include surrounding villages and rural areas, particularly to the north-west and north-east. Peterborough&#x27;s city status is formally held by the local government district rather than the urban area. Much of the Peterborough urban area is unparished, but some of the suburbs are included in civil parishes, including Bretton, Hampton Hargate and Vale, Orton Longueville, and Orton Waterville.

===Administrative history===
Peterborough was an ancient parish, which was historically in the Nassaburgh hundred of Northamptonshire. The parish was divided into five hamlets or townships: Dogsthorpe, Eastfield, Longthorpe, Newark and a Peterborough township covering the central part of the parish including the town. Within the Peterborough township was an extra-parochial area known as the Minster Precincts, covering St Peter&#x27;s Abbey and its close. When the former abbey church became Peterborough Cathedral in 1541, Peterborough was thereafter deemed to be a city. The area originally holding city status was the Peterborough township plus the Minster Precincts.

Although made a city in 1541, at that time Peterborough was not a borough (despite including the word in its name). Prior to the dissolution of the abbey in 1539, the abbey had been the manorial owner of the town; that ownership passed to the new cathedral authorities. A Peterborough constituency was also created in 1541, covering the same area as the city.

In 1790 a body of improvement commissioners was established to provide public services in the city. In 1874 Peterborough was incorporated as a municipal borough, with the commissioners replaced by an elected council initially comprising a mayor, six aldermen and eighteen councillors.

The municipal borough was abolished in 1974 when the modern district was created, being a lower tier non-metropolitan district, with the area also being transferred to Cambridgeshire at the same time. In 1998 the Peterborough district was removed from the non-metropolitan county of Cambridgeshire (the area governed by Cambridgeshire County Council) to become a unitary authority, whilst remaining part of the ceremonial county of Cambridgeshire for the purposes of lieutenancy and shrievalty.

== Economy ==

=== Regeneration ===
Figures plotting growth from 1995 to 2004, revealed that Peterborough had become the most successful economy among unitary authorities in the East of England. They also revealed that the city&#x27;s economy had grown faster than the regional average and any other economy in the region. It has a strong economy in the environmental goods and services sector and has the largest cluster of environmental businesses in the UK.

In 1994, Peterborough designated itself one of four environment cities in the UK and began working to become the country&#x27;s acknowledged environment capital. Peterborough Environment City Trust (PECT), an independent charity, was set up at the same time to work towards this goal, delivering projects promoting healthier and sustainable living in the city. Until 2017, PECT organised a yearly &#x27;Green Festival&#x27; centered around Cathedral Square, Peterborough, which also benefited local artists and arts organisations through attracting Arts Council funding grants aided by arts facilitator organisation Metal. During the summer of 2018 the last Green Festival was held at Nene Park, in 2019 Peterborough&#x27;s community environmental projects attracted ministerial attention from the environment secretary Michael Gove. During the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020–21 Peterborough&#x27;s culture and leisure umbrella charity, &quot;Vivacity&quot; ceased operating.

The council and regional development agency have taken advice on regeneration issues from a number of internationally recognised experts, including Benjamin Barber (formerly an adviser to President Bill Clinton), Jan Gustav Strandenaes (United Nations adviser on environmental issues) and Patama Roorakwit (a Thai &quot;community architect&quot;).

=== Employment ===
According to the 2001 census, the workplace population of 90,656 is divided into 60,118 people who live in Peterborough and 30,358 people who commute in. A further 13,161 residents commute out of the city to work. Earnings in Peterborough are lower than average. Median earnings for full-time workers were £11.93 per hour in 2014, less than the regional median for the East of England of £13.62 and the median hourly rate of £13.15 for Great Britain as a whole. As part of the government&#x27;s M11 corridor, Peterborough is committed to creating 17,500 jobs with the population growing to 200,000 by 2020.

Future employment will also be created through the plan for the city centre launched by the council in 2003. Predictions of the levels and types of employment created were published in 2005. These include 1,421 jobs created in retail; 1,067 created in a variety of leisure and cultural developments; 338 in three hotels; and a further 4,847 jobs created in offices and other workspaces. Recent relocations of large employers include both Tesco (1,070 employees) and Debenhams (850 employees) distribution centres. A further 2,500 jobs were to be created in the £140 million Gateway warehouse and distribution park. This was expected to compensate for the 6,000 job losses as a result of the decline in manufacturing, anticipated in a report cited by the cabinet member for economic growth and regeneration in 2006.

With traditionally low levels of unemployment, Peterborough is a popular destination for workers and has seen significant growth through migration since the postwar period. The leader of the council said in August 2006 that he believed that 80% of the 65,000 people who had arrived in East Anglia from the states that joined the European Union in 2004 were living in Peterborough. To help cope with this influx, the council put forward plans to construct an average of 1,300 homes each year until 2021. Peterborough Trades Council, formed in 1898, is affiliated to the Trades Union Congress.

== Transport ==

===Rail===
Peterborough railway station is a principal stop on the East Coast Main Line, 45–50 minutes&#x27; journey time from central London, with high-speed intercity services from King&#x27;s Cross to Edinburgh Waverley operated by the London North Eastern Railway at around a 20-minute frequency. It is the northern terminus of slower commuter services from , via and central London, operated by Govia Thameslink Railway.

It is a major railway junction where a number of cross-country routes converge:

* East Midlands Railway operates through services between , and Liverpool Lime Street that call at Peterborough, as well as trains on the line to .
* CrossCountry provides connections west to and Birmingham, and east to , and .
* Greater Anglia also runs trains to and from via .
===Water===
The River Nene, made navigable from the port at Wisbech to Northampton by 1761, passes through the city centre. The Nene Viaduct carries the railway over the river. It was built in 1847 by Sir William and Joseph Cubitt. William Cubitt was the chief engineer of Crystal Palace erected at Hyde Park in 1851. Apart from some minor repairs in 1910 and 1914 (the steel bands and cross braces around the fluted legs) the bridge remains as Cubitts built it. Now a Grade II* listed structure, it is the oldest surviving cast iron railway bridge in the UK. By the Town Bridge, the Customs House, built in the early eighteenth century, is a visible reminder of the city&#x27;s past function as an inland port. The Environment Agency navigation starts at the junction with the Northampton arm of the Grand Union Canal and extends for ending at Bevis Hall just upstream of Wisbech. The tidal limit used to be Woodston Wharf until the Dog-in-a-Doublet lock was built downstream in 1937.

===Road===

The A1/A1(M) primary route (part of European route E15) broadly follows the path of the historic Great North Road from St Paul&#x27;s Cathedral in the heart of London, passing Peterborough (Junction 17), and continuing north a further to central Edinburgh. In 1899 the British Electric Traction Company sought permission for a tramway joining the northern suburbs with the city centre. The system, which operated under the name Peterborough Electric Traction Company, opened in 1903 and was abandoned in favour of motor buses in 1930, when it was merged into the Eastern Counties Omnibus Company. Today, bus services in the city are operated by several companies including Stagecoach (formerly Cambus and Viscount) and Delaine Buses. Despite its large-scale growth, Peterborough has the fastest peak and off-peak travel times for a city of its size in the UK, due to the construction of the parkways. The Local Transport Plan anticipated expenditure totalling around £180 million for the period up to 2010 on major road schemes to accommodate development.

The combination of rail connections to the Port of Felixstowe and to the East Coast Main Line as well as a road connection via the A1(M) has led to Peterborough being proposed as the site of a rail-road logistics and distribution centre to be known as Magna Park.

===Green Wheel and City Cycling===

The Peterborough Millennium Green Wheel is a network of cycleways, footpaths and bridleways which provide safe, continuous routes around the city with radiating spokes connecting to the city centre. The project has also created a sculpture trail, which provides functional, landscape artworks along the Green Wheel route and a Living Landmarks project involving the local community in the creation of local landscape features such as mini woodlands, ponds and hedgerows. Another long-distance footpath, the Hereward Way, runs from Oakham in Rutland, through Peterborough, to East Harling in Norfolk. While cycling within the city received a boost during the COVID-19 pandemic with the introduction of new cycle lanes in busy streets, plans to connect the villages to the west of Peterborough with a new cycle track have been refused permission and some cycle lane decisions have been reversed in the city centre during easing of the corona virus lockdowns.

== Demography ==
=== Population ===
The City of Peterborough local authority area has a population of (). It is forecast to reach 230,000 in 2031 and 240,000 by around 2041.

Peterborough&#x27;s population growth was reportedly the second fastest of any British city over the ten years from 2004 to 2013, driven partly by immigration.

=== Ethnicity ===
According to the 2011 census, 82.5% of Peterborough&#x27;s residents categorised themselves as white, 2.8% of mixed ethnic groups, 11.7% Asian, 2.3% black and 0.8% other. Amongst the white population, the largest categories were indigenous groups, those being English/Welsh/Scottish/Northern Irish/British (70.9%), and other white (10.6%). Those of Pakistani ethnicity accounted for 6.6% of the population and those of Indian ethnicity 2.5.%. The largest black group were those of African ethnicity (1.4%).
Peterborough is home to one of the largest concentrations of Italian immigrants in the UK. This is mainly as a result of labour recruitment in the 1950s by the London Brick Company in the southern Italian regions of Apulia and Campania. By 1960, approximately 3,000 Italian men were employed by London Brick, mostly at the Fletton works. In 1962, the Scalabrini Fathers, who first arrived in 1956, purchased an old school and converted it into a mission church named after the patron saint of workers Saint Joseph (San Giuseppe). By 1991, over 3,000 christenings of second-generation Italians had been carried out there. In 1996, it was estimated that the Italian community of Peterborough numbered 7,000, making it the third largest in the UK after London and Bedford. The 2011 Census recorded 1,179 residents born in Italy.

In the late twentieth century the main source of immigration was from new Commonwealth countries. The 2011 Census showed that a total of 24,166 migrants moved to Peterborough between 2001 and 2011. The city has experienced significant immigration from the A8 countries that joined the European Union in 2004, and in 2011, 14,134 residents of the city were people born in Central and Eastern Europe.

According to a report published by the police in 2007, recent migration had resulted in increased translation costs and a change in the nature of crime in the county, with an increase in drink driving offences, knife crime and an international dimension added to activities such as running cannabis factories and human trafficking. The number of foreign nationals arrested in the north of the county rose from 894 in 2003, to 2,435 in 2006, but the report also said that &quot;inappropriately negative&quot; community perceptions about migrant workers often complicate routine incidents, raising tensions and turning them &quot;critical&quot;. It also noted there was &quot;little evidence that the increased numbers of migrant workers have caused significant or systematic problems in respect of community safety or cohesion&quot;. In 2007, Julie Spence, the then Chief Constable emphasised that the fact that the demographic profile of Cambridgeshire had changed dramatically from one where 95% of teenagers were white four years previously to one of the country&#x27;s fastest growing diverse populations, and said it had a positive impact on development and jobs. In 2008, the BBC broadcast &quot;The Poles are Coming!&quot;, a controversial documentary on the impact of Polish migration to Peterborough by Tim Samuels, as part of its &quot;White Season&quot;.

The number of languages in use is growing where previously few languages other than English were spoken. , Peterborough offered classes in Italian, Urdu and Punjabi in its primary schools.

=== Religion ===

Christianity has the largest following in Peterborough, in particular the Church of England, with a significant number of parish churches and a cathedral. 56.7% of Peterborough&#x27;s residents classified themselves as Christian in the 2011 Census. Recent immigration to the city has also seen the Roman Catholic population increase substantially. Other denominations are also in evidence; the latest church to be constructed is a £7 million &quot;superchurch,&quot; KingsGate, formerly Peterborough Community Church, which can seat up to 1,800 worshippers. In comparison with the rest of England, Peterborough has a lower proportion of Christians, Buddhists, Hindus, Jews and Sikhs. The city has a higher percentage of Muslims than England as a whole (9.4% compared to 5% nationally). The majority of Muslims reside in the Millfield, West Town and New England areas of the city, where two large mosques (including the Faidhan-e-Madina Mosque and Husaini Islamic Center-Peterborough) are based. Peterborough also has both Hindu (Bharat Hindu Samaj) and Sikh (Singh Sabha Gurdwara) temples in these areas.

The Anglican Diocese of Peterborough covers roughly , including the whole of Northamptonshire, Rutland and the Soke of Peterborough. The parts of the city that lie south of the river, which were historically in Huntingdonshire, fall within the Diocese of Ely, which covers the remainder of Cambridgeshire and western Norfolk. The current Bishop of Peterborough has been appointed Assistant Bishop in the Diocese of Ely, with pastoral care for these parishes delegated to her by the Bishop of Ely. The city falls wholly within the Roman Catholic Diocese of East Anglia (which has its seat at the Cathedral Church of Saint John the Baptist, Norwich) and is served by Saint Peter and All Souls Church, built in 1896 and decorated in the Gothic style. The Greek Orthodox Community of Saint Cyril, Patriarch of Jerusalem was established in 1991 under the Orthodox Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain.

== Culture ==
=== Education ===
Peterborough has one independent boarding school: The Peterborough School at Westwood House, founded in 1895. The school caters for girls and now boys up to the age of 18. Peterborough&#x27;s state schools have recently undergone significant change. Five of the city&#x27;s fifteen secondary schools were closed in July 2007, to be demolished over the coming years. John Mansfield (now an adult learning centre), Hereward (formerly Eastholm, now City of Peterborough Academy, sponsored by the Greenwood Dale Foundation Trust) and Deacon&#x27;s were replaced with the flagship Thomas Deacon Academy, designed by Lord Foster of Thames Bank which opened in September 2007.

Queen Katharine Academy (previously The Voyager School), which has specialist media arts status, replaced Bretton Woods and Walton Community School. It is part of the Thomas Deacon Education Trust. The schools that remain have been extended and enlarged. Over £200 million was spent and the changes on-going to 2010. The King&#x27;s School is one of seven schools established, or in some cases re-endowed and renamed, by King Henry VIII during the dissolution of the monasteries to pray for his soul. In 2006, 39.4% of Peterborough local education authority pupils attained five grades A* to C, including English and Mathematics, in the General Certificate of Secondary Education, lower than the national average of 45.8%.

The city has two colleges of further and higher education, Peterborough College (established in 1946 as Peterborough Technical College) and City College Peterborough (known as Peterborough College of Adult Education until 2010). By 2004, Peterborough College attracted over 15,000 students each year from the UK and abroad and was ranked in the top five per cent of colleges in the UK. Greater Peterborough University Technical College is a new education facility set to open in September 2015.

In 2020, planning permission was granted for a new university campus, ARU Peterborough, which subsequently opened its doors in September 2022 on Bishops Road, a five-minute walk from the City Centre. It is operated by Anglia Ruskin University with four faculties: Business, Innovation and Entrepreneurship; Creative and Digital Arts and Sciences; Agriculture, Environment and Sustainability; Health and Education. The new campus took its first cohort of students in 2022, expecting to recruit up to 12,500 by 2028. ARU Peterborough is not expected to receive independent degree awarding powers before 2030, when a review is to take place to determine its future as part of Anglia Ruskin University or whether it should become an independent entity. 

The former public library on Broadway was funded by Scottish philanthropist Andrew Carnegie and opened in 1906; Carnegie was made first freeman of the city on the day of the opening ceremony.

=== Arts ===

Peterborough enjoys a wide range of events including the annual East of England Show, Peterborough Festival and CAMRA beer festival, which takes place on the river embankment in late August. The yearly festivals have attracted arts funding and enabled further community projects within the city. Nationally published cartoonist John Elson, from Peterborough, has provided imagery for many of the events.

The city acts as the central hub for the region&#x27;s visual arts community, with the Peterborough Artists Open Studio organisation (PAOS), celebrating its 21st anniversary year as of 2021. A number of statues by the British sculptor Antony Gormley were re-installed in the city in 2018. Removed for repair works from their original setting on concrete pillars next to the rowing lake in Nene Park, they can now be seen on top of buildings surrounding Cathedral Square in the town centre.

The Key Theatre, built in 1973, is situated on the embankment, next to the River Nene. The theatre aims to provide entertainment, enlightenment and education by reflecting the rich culture Peterborough has to offer. The programme is made up of home-grown productions, national touring shows, local community productions and one-off concerts. There is disabled access, an infrared hearing system for the deaf and hard of hearing and there are also regular signed performances.

In 1937, the Odeon Cinema opened on Broadway, where it operated successfully for more than half a century. In 1991, the Odeon showed its last film to the public and was left to fall into a state of disrepair, until 1997, when a local entrepreneur purchased the building as part of a larger project, including a restaurant and art gallery. The Broadway, designed by Tim Foster Architects, was one of the largest theatres in the region and offered a selection of live entertainment, including music, comedy and films. In 2009, it was severely damaged by arsonists, resulting in closure when its insurers refused to pay the claim due to faulty fire detection systems.

The Embassy Theatre, a large Art Deco building designed by David Evelyn Nye, also opened on Broadway in 1937. Nye was usually a cinema architect, and this was his only theatre. The Embassy was converted into a cinema in 1953, becoming the ABC and later the Cannon Cinema, before it was closed in 1989. Since 1996, the premises have been occupied by the Edwards bar chain.

The John Clare Theatre within the new central library, again on Broadway, is home to the Peterborough Film Society. One of the region&#x27;s leading venues, the Cresset in Bretton, provides a wide range of events for the residents of the city and beyond, including theatre, comedy, music and dance. Peterborough has a 13-screen Showcase Cinema, an ice rink and two indoor swimming pools open to the general public.

A diverse range of restaurants can be found throughout the city, including Chinese, Indian, Thai and many Italian restaurants. Peterborough has recently been used as the setting in popular literature: &quot;A Short History of Tractors in Ukrainian&quot; by Marina Lewycka, &quot;A Spot of Bother&quot; by Mark Haddon and, the first in a projected series, &quot;Long Way Home&quot;, a debut novel by Eva Doran.

=== Sport ===

Peterborough United Football Club, known as &quot;The Posh&quot;, has been the local football team since 1934. They play their home matches at London Road on the south bank of the River Nene. Peterborough United have a history of cup giant-killings. They set the record for the highest number of league goals (134, Terry Bly alone scoring 52) in the 1960–61 season, when they won the Fourth Division title in their first season in the Football League. The club&#x27;s highest finish position to date was 10th place in Division One, then the second tier of English football, in the 1992–93 season. Irish property developer Darragh MacAnthony was appointed chairman in 2006 and is now owner, having undertaken a lengthy purchase from Barry Fry who remains director of football, having also been manager of the club from 1996 to 2005. Peterborough also has a non-league club, Peterborough Sports, who play in the National League North.

As well as football, Peterborough has teams competing in rugby, cricket, hockey, ice hockey, rowing, athletics, American and Australian rules football. Although Cambridgeshire is not a first-class cricket county, Northamptonshire staged some home matches in the city between 1906 and 1974. Peterborough Town Cricket Club and the City of Peterborough Hockey Club compete at their shared ground in Westwood.

After reforming in 2005, rugby union club Peterborough Lions RFC now compete in National League 3 Midlands. Meanwhile, the city&#x27;s oldest rugby team, Peterborough RUFC, play at Second Drove (otherwise known as &quot;Fortress Fengate&quot;), and have struggled in recent seasons. Relegation in 2013–14 season, from Midlands 1 East, has been followed by a season in the lower-mid table of the Midlands 2 East (South).

Peterborough City Rowing Club moved from its riverside setting to the current Thorpe Meadows location in 1983. The spring and summer regattas held there attract rowers and scullers from competing clubs all over the country. Every February the adjacent River Nene is host to the head of the river race, which again attracts hundreds of entries. Peterborough Athletic Club train and compete at the embankment athletics arena. In 2006, after 10 years, the Great Eastern Run returned to the racing calendar. Around 3,000 runners raced through the flat streets of Peterborough for the half-marathon, supported by thousands of spectators along the course.

Peterborough Phantoms are the city&#x27;s ice hockey team, playing in the NIHL at Planet Ice Peterborough, located on Mallard Way in Bretton. Motorcycle speedway is also a popular sport in Peterborough, with race meetings held at the East of England Showground. The team, known as the Peterborough Panthers, have operated regularly in the Elite League. The Showground hosts the annual British Motorcycle Federation Rally each May. In 2009, Peterborough hosted one of the first rounds of the Tour Series, a new series of televised town and city centre cycling races. , the city has hosted a round of the Tour Series each year since, with the exception of 2013.

In March 2017 the first bandy session in England for over a century was held in Peterborough, in the form of rink bandy.
In 2018 Peterborough Bandy Club was founded. At the 2022 Women&#x27;s Bandy World Championship Great Britain made its debut in the tournament, represented by a Peterborough team.

=== Media ===
There is a major radio transmitter at Morborne, approximately west of Peterborough, for national FM radio (BBC Radios 1–4 and Classic FM) and BBC Radio Cambridgeshire which is the BBC Local Radio station that covers the city. This facility includes a high guyed radio mast which collapsed in 2004 after a fire and has since been re-built. Another transmission site at Gunthorpe in the north east of the city transmits AM/MW and local FM radio. The site is only above sea level and has an high active insulated guyed mast situated on it. 

The national commercial multiplex, Digital One, is also available in the city. 

Peterborough is covered by six local radio stations and one regional station, though only two community stations broadcast from the city. These are Salaam FM, catering for the local Muslim population, which started broadcasting on 106.2 MHz in 2016 and Peterborough Community Radio (PCR FM), a station formed as a result of a merger between former internet stations Peterborough FM and Radio Peterborough, which started broadcasting on 103.2 MHz in 2017.

Heart Cambridgeshire (now Heart East), the original independent local radio station launched as Hereward Radio in 1980 and becoming Heart Peterborough in 2009, still holds a large section of the market on 102.7 MHz but relocated to Cambridge in 2012, where it began sharing the localised programming (of mainly national output) with Heart Cambridge. Hereward&#x27;s sister station, WGMS, was launched on the old 1332 kHz (225 meters) frequency in 1992; known as Classic Gold from 1994 to 2007, it is now part of Heart&#x27;s sister Gold Radio network, but has no programming made in Peterborough. Connect Radio (from 1999 to 2010, known as Lite FM), was the city&#x27;s second commercial station on 106.8;MHz, but was sold and rebranded as Smooth East Midlands on 1 October 2019.

Local TV coverage is provided by &quot;BBC Look East&quot; and &quot;ITV News Anglia&quot;. 

The &quot;Peterborough Telegraph&quot; (established 1948) is the city&#x27;s newspaper. The &quot;Telegraph&quot; is owned by National World Publishing Ltd. Its website, Peterborough Today, is updated six days a week. The &quot;PT&#x27;s&quot; sister paper, the &quot;Peterborough Citizen&quot; (1898), was a weekly paper delivered free to many homes in the city. The &quot;Peterborough Herald and Post&quot; (1989, a replacement for the &quot;Peterborough Standard&quot;, established 1872) ceased publication in 2008. The publisher Emap, which specialises in the production of magazines and the organisation of business events and conferences, traces its origins back to Peterborough in 1854. The 33rd Mayor of Peterborough, Sir Richard Winfrey , founder of what would become the East Midland Allied Press, was perhaps the last person to read the Riot Act in 1914.

Peterborough has been used as a location for various television programmes and films. The 1982 BBC production of &quot;The Barchester Chronicles&quot; was filmed largely in and around Peterborough. In 1983 opening scenes for the 13th James Bond film, &quot;Octopussy&quot;, starring Sir Roger Moore, were filmed at Orton Mere. A music video for the song &quot;BreakThru&quot; by the band Queen was also shot on the preserved Nene Valley Railway in 1989. In 1995 Pierce Brosnan filmed train crash sequences for the 17th Bond film, &quot;GoldenEye&quot;, at the former sugar beet factory. A scene for the film &quot;The Da Vinci Code&quot; was filmed at Burghley House during five weeks&#x27; secret filming in 2006; and actor, Lee Marvin, found himself camping in Ferry Meadows during the filming of &quot;The Dirty Dozen: Next Mission&quot; in 1985. In October 2008 Hollywood returned to Wansford for the filming of the musical &quot;Nine&quot;, starring Penélope Cruz and Daniel Day-Lewis.

== Landmarks ==

Peterborough Cathedral, formally the Cathedral Church of Saint Peter, Saint Paul and Saint Andrew, whose statues look down from the three high gables of the West Front, was founded as a monastery in AD 655 and re-built in its present form between 1118 and 1238. It has been the seat of the Bishop of Peterborough since the diocese was created in 1541, when the last abbot was made the first bishop and the abbot&#x27;s house was converted into the episcopal palace. Peterborough Cathedral is one of the most intact large Norman buildings in England and is renowned for its imposing early English Gothic West Front which, with its three enormous arches, is without architectural precedent and with no direct successor. The cathedral has the distinction of having had two queens buried beneath its paving: Catherine of Aragon and Mary, Queen of Scots. The remains of Queen Mary were removed to Westminster Abbey by her son James I when he became King of England.

The general layout of Peterborough is attributed to Martin de Vecti who, as abbot from 1133 to 1155, rebuilt the settlement on dry limestone to the west of the monastery, rather than the often-flooded marshlands to the east. Abbot Martin was responsible for laying out the market place and the wharf beside the river. Peterborough&#x27;s 17th-century Guildhall was built in 1671 by John Lovin, who also restored the bishop&#x27;s palace shortly after the restoration of King Charles II. It stands on columns, providing an open ground floor for the butter and poultry markets which used to be held there. The Market Place was renamed Cathedral Square and the adjacent Gates Memorial Fountain moved to Bishop&#x27;s Road Gardens in 1963, when the (then weekly) market was transferred to the site of the old cattle market.

Peterscourt on City Road was designed by Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1864, housing St. Peter&#x27;s Teacher Training College for men until 1938. The building is mainly listed for the 18th century doorway, brought from the London Guildhall following war damage. Nearby Tout Hill, the site of a castle bailey, is a scheduled monument. The city has a large Victorian park containing formal gardens, children&#x27;s play areas, an aviary, bowling green, tennis courts, pitch and putt course and tea rooms. The Park has been awarded the Green Flag Award, the national standard for parks and green spaces, by the Civic Trust. A Cross of Sacrifice was erected in Broadway cemetery by the Imperial War Graves Commission in the early 1920s. The Lido, a striking building with elements of art deco design, was opened in 1936 and is one of the few survivors of its type still in use.

Peterborough Museum and Art Gallery, built in 1816, housed the city&#x27;s first infirmary from 1857 to 1928. The museum has a collection of some 227,000 objects, including local archaeology and social history, from the products of the Roman pottery industry to Britain&#x27;s oldest known murder victim; a collection of marine fossil remains from the Jurassic period of international importance; the manuscripts of John Clare, the &quot;Northamptonshire Peasant Poet&quot; as he was commonly known in his own time; and the Norman Cross collection of items made by French prisoners of war. These prisoners were kept at Norman Cross on the outskirts of Peterborough from 1797 to 1814, in what is believed to be the world&#x27;s first purpose-built prisoner of war camp. The art collection contains an impressive variety of paintings, prints and drawings dating from the 1600s to the present day. Peterborough Museum also holds regular temporary exhibitions, weekend events and guided tours.

Burghley House to the north of Peterborough, near Stamford, was built and mostly designed by Sir William Cecil, later 1st Baron Burghley, who was Lord High Treasurer to Queen Elizabeth I for most of her reign. The country house, with a park laid out by Lancelot &#x27;Capability&#x27; Brown in the 18th century, is one of the principal examples of 16th-century English architecture. The estate, still home to his descendants, hosts the Burghley Horse Trials, an annual three-day event. Another Grade I listed building, Milton Hall near Castor, ancestral home of the Barons and later Earls Fitzwilliam, also dates from the same period. For two centuries following the restoration the city was a pocket borough of this family.

The John Clare Cottage in the village of Helpston was purchased by the John Clare Trust in 2005. The cottage, home of John Clare from his birth in 1793 until 1832, has been restored using traditional building methods to create a resource where visitors can learn about the poet, his works and how rural people lived in the early 19th century. The John Clare Cottage and Thorney Heritage Museum form part of the Greater Fens Museum Partnership, along with Peterborough Museum and Flag Fen.

Longthorpe Tower, a 14th-century three-storey tower and fortified manor house in the care of English Heritage, is situated about west of the city centre. It is a scheduled monument, and contains the finest and most complete set of domestic paintings of their period in northern Europe. Nearby Thorpe Hall is one of the few mansions built in the Commonwealth period. A maternity hospital from 1943 to 1970, it was acquired by the Sue Ryder Foundation in 1986 and is currently in use as a hospice.

Flag Fen, the Bronze Age archaeological site, was discovered in 1982, when a team led by Dr Francis Pryor carried out a survey of dykes in the area. Probably religious, it comprises a large number of poles arranged in five long rows, connecting Whittlesey with Peterborough across the wet fenland. The museum exhibits many of the artefacts found, including what is believed to be the oldest wheel in Britain. An exposed section of the Roman road known as the Fen Causeway also crosses the site.

The Nene Valley Railway, which is now a heritage railway, was one of the last passenger lines to fall under the Beeching Axe in 1966, although it remained open for freight traffic until 1972. In 1974, the former development corporation bought the line, which runs from the city centre to Yarwell Junction just west of Wansford via Orton Mere and the Ferry Meadows country park, and leased it to the Peterborough Railway Society. Railworld is a railway museum located beside Peterborough Nene Valley railway station.

The Nene Park, which opened in 1978, covers a site long, from slightly west of Castor to the centre of Peterborough. The park has three lakes, one of which houses a watersports centre. Ferry Meadows, one of the major destinations and attractions signposted on the Green Wheel, occupies a large portion of Nene Park. Orton Mere provides access to the east of the park.

Southey Wood, once included in the Royal Forest of Rockingham, is a mixed woodland maintained by the Forestry Commission between the villages of Upton and Ufford. Nearby, Castor Hanglands, Barnack Hills and Holes and Bedford Purlieus national nature reserves are each sites of special scientific interest. In 2002, the Hills and Holes, one of Natural England&#x27;s 35 spotlight reserves, was designated a special area of conservation as part of the Natura 2000 network of sites throughout the European Union.

== Notable people ==
Peterborough is the birthplace of many notable people, the astronomer George Alcock, one of the most successful visual discoverers of novas and comets; John Clare, from Helpston, the nineteenth century poet; artist, Christopher Perkins – brother of Frank; and Sir Henry Royce, 1st Baronet of Seaton, engineer and co-founder of Rolls-Royce. Physician, actor and author, &quot;Sir&quot; John Hill, credited with 76 separate works in the &quot;Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, the most valuable of which dealing with botany, is also said to have been born here. The socialist writer and illustrator, Frank Horrabin, who was born in the city, and was elected as the Labour Member of Parliament in 1929.

The utilitarian philosopher, Dr Richard Cumberland, was 14th Lord Bishop of Peterborough from 1691 until his death in 1718; and Norfolk-born nurse and humanitarian, Edith Cavell, who received part of her education at Laurel Court in the Minster Precinct, is commemorated by a plaque in the cathedral and by the name of the hospital. A gravedigger called Old Scarlett, whose portrait can be seen above the west door of Peterborough Cathedral, is considered a folk hero. He died in 1594 at the age of 98, having spent much of his life as the sexton at Peterborough Cathedral; having buried two monarchs, he has also been suggested as the inspiration for the gravedigger in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Hamlet&quot;. Two prominent historical figures were born locally, Hereward the Wake, an outlaw who led resistance to the Norman Conquest and now lends his name to several places and businesses in the city; and St. John Payne, one of the group of prominent Catholics martyred between 1535 and 1679 and later designated the Forty Martyrs of England and Wales, who was beatified by Pope Leo XIII in 1886 and canonised with the other 39 by Pope Paul VI in 1970.

Musicians include Sir Thomas Armstrong, organist, conductor and former principal of the Royal Academy of Music; Andy Bell, lead vocalist of the electronic pop duo Erasure; Barrie Forgie, leader of the BBC Big Band; Don Lusher, trombonist and former professor of the Royal College of Music and the Royal Marines School of Music; Paul Nicholas, actor and singer; Maxim Reality and Gizz Butt of The Prodigy and Aston Merrygold of Brit Award-winning pop group JLS. Comedian Ernie Wise lived on Thorpe Avenue for many years, next door to Canadian baritone and actor Edmund Hockridge. Jimmy Savile also lived in the city in the early 1990s.

Other media personalities include actors Simon Bamford, known for the &#x27;Hellraiser&#x27; franchise, Adrian Lyne, director of &quot;Fatal Attraction&quot;, Oscar Jacques, known for playing Tom Tupper in the CBBC Series &quot;M.I. High&quot;, Luke Pasqualino, known for his roles in &quot;Skins&quot; and &quot;The Musketeers&quot;; television presenter, Sarah Cawood, who grew up in Maxey; BBC Formula One presenter, Jake Humphrey; football journalist and Talksport radio presenter, Adrian Durham; and the biologist, author and broadcaster, Prof. Brian J. Ford, who attended the King&#x27;s School and still lives in Eastrea near Whittlesey. Local businessman, Peter Boizot, founder of the Pizza Express restaurant chain and Deputy Lieutenant of Cambridgeshire, has supported the cultural and sporting life of Peterborough and received its highest accolade, the freedom of the city. The thalidomide victim Terry Wiles, subject of the 1979 film &quot;On Giant&#x27;s Shoulders&quot;, was born in the city.

In the sporting world, former Tottenham Hotspur and England footballer, David Bentley, was born in the city, as was Louis Smith, who at the 2008 games became Great Britain&#x27;s first gymnast to win an individual Olympic medal in a century. Chelsea Football player, currently on loan at Luton Town footballer Isaiah Brown, was born in Peterborough, before joining Leicester City and later West Bromwich Albion, becoming the second youngest player to play in the Premier League. Harry Wells, a rugby union player for Leicester Tigers in Premiership Rugby, was born in Peterborough and attended The King&#x27;s (The Cathedral) School.

== Geography ==
=== Climate ===
According to the Köppen classification the British Isles experience a maritime climate characterised by relatively cool summers and mild winters. Compared with other parts of the country, East Anglia is slightly warmer and sunnier in the summer and colder and frostier in the winter. Owing to its inland position, furthest from the landfall of most Atlantic depressions, Cambridgeshire is one of the driest counties in the UK, receiving, on average, around of rain per year. The Met Office weather station at Wittering, within the unitary authority of Peterborough, recorded a maximum temperature of on 19 July 2022. The lowest temperature in recent years was during February 2012.

=== Topography ===

East Anglia is most notable for being almost flat (it is mainly on a floodplain). During the Ice Age much of the region was covered by ice sheets and this has influenced the topography and nature of the soils. Much of Cambridgeshire is low-lying, in some places below present-day mean sea level. The lowest point on land is supposedly just to the south of the city at Holme Fen, which is below sea level. The largest of the many settlements along the Fen edge, Peterborough has been called the &quot;Gateway to the Fens&quot;. Before they were drained the Fens were liable to periodic flooding so arable farming was limited to the higher areas of the Fen edge, with the rest of the Fenland dedicated to pastoral farming. In this way, the mediaeval and early modern Fens stood in contrast to the rest of southern England, which was primarily arable. Since the advent of modern drainage in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the Fens have been radically transformed such that arable farming has almost entirely replaced pastoral. The unitary authority extends north west to the settlements of Wothorpe and Wittering and east beyond Thorney into the historic Isle of Ely and includes the Ortons, south of the River Nene. It borders Northamptonshire to the west, Lincolnshire to the north, and the Cambridgeshire districts of Fenland and Huntingdonshire to the south and east. The city centre is located at 52°35&#x27;N latitude 0°15&#x27;W longitude or Ordnance Survey national grid reference TL 185 998.

Urban areas
&quot;Townships are in bold type. In addition to the surrounding villages, Bretton, Orton Longueville and Orton Waterville are parished. The city council also works closely with Werrington neighbourhood association which operates on a similar basis to a parish council.&quot;
Bretton – Dogsthorpe – Eastfield – Eastgate – Fengate – Fletton – Gunthorpe – The Hamptons – Longthorpe – Millfield – Netherton – Newark – New England – The Ortons – Parnwell – Paston – Ravensthorpe – Stanground – Walton – Werrington – West Town – Westwood – Woodston

Rural areas
&quot;Civil parishes do not cover the whole of England and mostly exist in rural hinterland. They are usually administered by parish councils which have various local responsibilities.&quot;
Ailsworth – Bainton – Barnack – Borough Fen – Castor – Deeping Gate – Etton – Eye – Eye Green – Glinton – Helpston – Marholm – Maxey – Newborough – Northborough – Peakirk – Southorpe – St. Martin&#x27;s Without – Sutton – Thorney – Thornhaugh – Ufford – Upton – Wansford – Wittering – Wothorpe

These are further arranged into 24 electoral wards for the purposes of local government. 15 wards comprise the Peterborough constituency for elections to the House of Commons, while the remaining nine fall within the North West Cambridgeshire constituency.

=== Linguistics ===
Peterborough lies in the middle of several distinct regional accent groups and as such has a hybrid of Fenland East Anglian, East Midland and London Estuary English features. The city falls just north of the A vowel isogloss and as such most native speakers will use the flat A, as found in &quot;cat&quot;, in words such as &quot;last&quot;. &quot;Yod&quot;-dropping is often heard from Peterborians, as in the rest of East Anglia, for example &quot;new&quot; as . However, the large number of newcomers has impacted greatly on the English spoken by the younger generation. Common so-called Estuary English features such as &quot;L&quot;-vocalisation, T glottalisation and &quot;Th&quot;-fronting give today&#x27;s Peterborough accent a definite south-eastern sound.

=== Affiliations ===

Town twinning started in Europe after the Second World War. Its purpose was to promote friendship and greater understanding between the people of different European cities. A twinning link is a formal, long-term friendship agreement involving co-operation between two communities in different countries and endorsed by both local authorities. The two communities organise projects and activities addressing a range of issues and develop an understanding of historical, cultural, lifestyle similarities and differences. Peterborough is twinned with the following municipalities:

* Alcalá de Henares, Spain (birthplace of Queen Katherine, 1986)
* Ballarat, Australia (1947)
* Bourges, France (1957)
* Forlì, Italy (1981)
* Viersen, Germany (1981)
* Vinnytsia, Ukraine (1991)

Bourges and Forlì are also twinned with each other. The city also has more informal friendship links with Foggia, Italy; Kwe Kwe, Zimbabwe; Pécs, Hungary; and all Peterboroughs around the world. The county of Cambridgeshire has been twinned with Kreis Viersen, Germany since 1983.

==Paleontology==
Fossils of a hybodontiform fish &quot;Planohybodus&quot; were found in the Callovian (Middle Jurassic) deposits near Peterborough. The type species &quot;Planohybodus peterboroughensis&quot; was named after Peterborough in 2008.

==Freedom of the City==
The following people, military units and organisations and groups have received the Freedom of the City of Peterborough.

===Individuals===
* Peter Boizot: 2007
* Wyndham Thomas, British architect, 19 September 2015
* Louis Smith: 21 March 2017
* James Fox: 21 March 2017
* Lee Manning: 21 March 2017
* Tommy Robson: 12 March 2020.

===Military units===
* RAF Wittering: 1983.
* 158 (Royal Anglian) Transport Regiment, Royal Logistic Corps (Volunteers): 25 July 2009.
* 115 (Peterborough) Squadron Air Training Corps: 28 April 2014.

===Organisations and groups===
* The Salvation Army (Peterborough Branch): 4 March 2015.
* Royal British Legion (Peterborough Branch): 28 July 2021.

== References ==
===Notes===
=== Footnotes ===
=== Bibliography ===

* Banham, John &quot;Final Recommendations for the Future Local Government of Cambridgeshire&quot; HMSO, London, 1994.
* Banham, John &quot;Final Recommendations on the Future Local Government of Basildon &amp; Thurrock, Blackburn &amp; Blackpool, Broxtowe, Gedling &amp; Rushcliffe, Dartford &amp; Gravesham, Gillingham &amp; Rochester upon Medway, Exeter, Gloucester, Halton &amp; Warrington, Huntingdonshire &amp; Peterborough, Northampton, Norwich, Spelthorne and the Wrekin&quot; HMSO, London, 1995.
* Bennett, Jack Arthur Walter &quot;Middle English Literature&quot; (ed. and completed by Douglas Gray) Oxford University Press, 1986 ().
* Brandon, David and Knight, John &quot;Peterborough Past: The City and The Soke&quot; Phillimore &amp; Co., Chichester, 2001 ().
* Chisholm, Hugh (ed.) &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; (11th ed., 28 vols.) Cambridge University Press, 1911 (text in the public domain).
* Clark, Cecily (ed.) &quot;The Peterborough Chronicle 1070–1154&quot; Oxford University Press, 1958 ().
* Colpi, Terry &quot;The Italian Factor: The Italian Community in Great Britain&quot; Mainstream Publishing, Edinburgh, 1991 ().
* Davies, Elizabeth et al. &quot;Peterborough: A Story of City and Country, People and Places&quot; Peterborough City Council and Pitkin Unichrome, 2001 ().
* Garmonsway, George Norman (trans.) &quot;The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; J. M. Dent &amp; Sons, London, 1972 &amp; 1975 ().
* Grainger, Margaret &quot;A Descriptive Catalogue of the John Clare Collection&quot; Peterborough Museum and Art Gallery, 1973 ().
* Hancock, Henry Drummond &quot;Report and Proposals for the East Midlands General Review Area&quot; (LGCE Report No.3) HMSO, London, 1961.
* Hancock, Henry Drummond &quot;Report and Proposals for the Lincolnshire and East Anglia General Review Area&quot; (LGCE Report No.9) HMSO, London, 1965.
* Hancock, Tom &quot;Greater Peterborough Master Plan&quot; Peterborough Development Corporation, 1971.
* Ingram, James Henry (trans.) &quot;The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; J. M. Dent &amp; Sons, London, 1823 (1847 Everyman&#x27;s Library ed. with additional readings from the translation of John Allen Giles).
* King, Richard John &quot;Handbook to the Cathedrals of England&quot; John Murray, London, 1862.
* Labrum, Edward A. &quot;Civil Engineering Heritage: Eastern and Central England&quot; Thomas Telford, London, 1994 ().
* Leatham, Victoria &quot;Burghley: The Life of a Great House&quot; The Herbert Press, London, 1992 ().
* Matthew, Henry Colin Gray and Harrison, Brian Howard (eds.) &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot; (60 vols.) Oxford University Press in association with the British Academy, 2004–2006 ().
* Mellows, William Thomas (ed.) &quot;The Chronicle of Hugh Candidus a Monk of Peterborough&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1949 (scholarly ed. in Latin).
* Mellows, William Thomas (ed.) &quot;The Peterborough Chronicle of Hugh Candidus&quot; (trans.) Peterborough Natural History, Scientific and Archæological Society, 1941 (popular ed. in English).
* Newton, David &quot;Men of Mark: Makers of East Midland Allied Press&quot; Emap, Peterborough, 1977 ().
* Parthey, Gustav and Pinder, Moritz (eds.) &quot;Itinerarivm Antonini Avgvsti et Hierosolymitanum: ex libris manu scriptis&quot; Friederich Nicolaus, Berlin, 1848.
* Pryor, Francis &quot;Flag Fen: Life and Death of a Prehistoric Landscape&quot; Tempus Publishing, Stroud, 2005 ().
* Rhodes, John &quot;The Nene Valley Railway&quot; Turntable Publications, Sheffield, 1976 ().
* Salter, Mike &quot;The Castles of East Anglia&quot; Folly Publications, Malvern, 2001 ().
* Skinner, Julia (with particular reference to the work of Robert Cook) &quot;Did You Know? Peterborough: A Miscellany&quot; The Francis Frith Collection, Salisbury, 2006 ().
* Sweeting, Walter Debenham &quot;The Cathedral Church of Peterborough: A Description of its Fabric and a Brief History of the Episcopal See&quot; G. Bell &amp; Sons, London, 1898 (1926 reprint of the 2nd ed. of Bell&#x27;s Cathedrals).
* Tebbs, Herbert F. &quot;Peterborough: A History&quot; The Oleander Press, Cambridge, 1979 ().
* Turner, Roger &quot;Capability Brown and the Eighteenth Century English Landscape&quot; Phillimore &amp; Co., Chichester, 1999 ().
* Youngs, Frederic A. &quot;Guide to the Local Administrative Units of England&quot; (2 vols.) The Offices of the Royal Historical Society, University College London, 1991 ().
== External links ==

* Peterborough City Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172438" start="0" end="12" title="Peterborough" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="22" end="36" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="cathedral city"/>
<link wikidata="Q12956645" start="44" end="64" title="City of Peterborough" label="City of Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q23112" start="102" end="116" title="Cambridgeshire" label="Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19722" start="163" end="173" title="River Nene" label="River Nene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="338" end="348" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356788" start="372" end="380" title="Flag Fen" label="Flag Fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="454" end="459" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="476" end="487" title="History of Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382847" start="533" end="546" title="Medeshamstede" label="Medeshamstede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259104" start="567" end="589" title="Peterborough Cathedral" label="Peterborough Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q198632" start="703" end="713" title="brickworks" label="brickworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10270157" start="845" end="853" title="New towns in the United Kingdom" label="new town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444416" start="987" end="1007" title="Soke of Peterborough" label="Soke of Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138494" start="1015" end="1030" title="Historic counties of England" label="historic county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="1034" end="1050" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q364022" start="1153" end="1180" title="Huntingdon and Peterborough" label="Huntingdon and Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="1235" end="1249" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="cathedral city"/>
<link wikidata="Q209176" start="1253" end="1256" title="Ely, Cambridgeshire" label="Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="1286" end="1290" title="The Fens" label="Fens"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="1318" end="1327" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382847" start="1490" end="1503" title="Medeshamstede" label="Medeshamstede"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="1624" end="1638" title="defensive wall" label="defensive wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="1679" end="1690" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="1875" end="1896" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930259" start="1977" end="1990" title="Hugh Candidus" label="Hugh Candidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752944" start="2032" end="2039" title="Ancient borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="2233" end="2241" title="The Fens" label="The Fens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19722" start="2260" end="2270" title="River Nene" label="River Nene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356788" start="2367" end="2375" title="Flag Fen" label="Flag Fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267429" start="2480" end="2490" title="Durobrivae (Water Newton)" label="Durobrivae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355961" start="2494" end="2507" title="Ermine Street" label="Ermine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q512256" start="2651" end="2669" title="Antonine Itinerary" label="Antonine Itinerary"/>
<link wikidata="Q88205" start="2730" end="2740" title="castra" label="Roman fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762555" start="2744" end="2754" title="Longthorpe, Peterborough" label="Longthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="2781" end="2787" title="Roman legion" label="legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051400" start="2960" end="2976" title="Nene Valley Colour Coated Ware" label="Nene Valley Ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q210957" start="3025" end="3038" title="Antonine Wall" label="Antonine Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="3134" end="3141" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207995" start="3173" end="3180" title="Sexwulf" label="Sexwulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q729723" start="3244" end="3259" title="Peada of Mercia" label="Peada of Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3278" end="3290" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520931" start="3328" end="3341" title="Middle Angles" label="Middle Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q164499" start="3365" end="3373" title="Wulfhere of Mercia" label="Wulfhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="3459" end="3468" title="Atonement in Christianity" label="atonement"/>
<link wikidata="Q37591" start="3471" end="3488" title="Hereward the Wake" label="Hereward the Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q160742" start="3755" end="3760" title="abbey" label="abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242458" start="3826" end="3848" title="Peterborough Chronicle" label="Peterborough Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755949" start="3922" end="3940" title="history of England" label="history of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="3951" end="3966" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="4271" end="4280" title="John, King of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q549614" start="4363" end="4377" title="Crowland Abbey" label="Crowland Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="4547" end="4557" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="4700" end="4709" title="English Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="4768" end="4782" title="Charles I of England" label="King Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q535158" start="4791" end="4806" title="Long Parliament" label="Long Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329993" start="4842" end="4861" title="Eastern Association" label="Eastern Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000662" start="5012" end="5020" title="Stamford, Lincolnshire" label="Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q581158" start="5025" end="5033" title="Crowland" label="Crowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015079" start="5105" end="5119" title="Burghley House" label="Burghley House"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="5158" end="5167" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800075" start="5278" end="5289" title="Lady chapel" label="Lady Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416310" start="5291" end="5304" title="chapter house" label="chapter house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="5306" end="5314" title="cloister" label="cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444416" start="5514" end="5534" title="Soke of Peterborough" label="Soke of Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883346" start="5538" end="5545" title="Liberty (division)" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="5553" end="5569" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269253" start="5675" end="5691" title="quarter sessions" label="quarter sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339808" start="5761" end="5776" title="Edmund Scambler" label="Edmund Scambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679845" start="5786" end="5794" title="Lord paramount" label="lordship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="5883" end="5894" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q354309" start="5911" end="5924" title="Lord Burghley" label="Lord Burghley"/>
<link wikidata="Q366520" start="6006" end="6026" title="Marquess of Exeter" label="Marquesses of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="6364" end="6375" title="municipal corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332237" start="6385" end="6413" title="Ecclesiastical Commissioners" label="Ecclesiastical Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="6484" end="6497" title="Henry VI of England" label="King Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q97463160" start="6661" end="6670" title="Peterborough Town Hall" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q181811" start="7097" end="7119" title="Great Northern Railway (Great Britain)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976604" start="7221" end="7232" title="Brownlow Cecil, 2nd Marquess of Exeter" label="Lord Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q58900" start="7350" end="7359" title="Doncaster" label="Doncaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458857" start="7736" end="7743" title="Fletton, Peterborough" label="Fletton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748031" start="7880" end="7900" title="London Brick Company" label="London Brick Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225524" start="7957" end="7974" title="John Cathles Hill" label="John Cathles Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071252" start="8089" end="8104" title="Perkins Engines" label="Perkins Engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488970" start="8148" end="8161" title="Frank Perkins (engineer)" label="Frank Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330652" start="8295" end="8304" title="Eastfield, Peterborough" label="Eastfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4849195" start="8306" end="8319" title="Baker Perkins" label="Baker Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989848" start="8349" end="8357" title="Westwood, Peterborough" label="Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635244" start="8375" end="8397" title="HM Prison Peterborough" label="HM Prison Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q19830548" start="8420" end="8437" title="Peter Brotherhood" label="Peter Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966703" start="8441" end="8447" title="Walton, Peterborough" label="Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971114" start="8546" end="8559" title="British Sugar" label="British Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646140" start="8590" end="8597" title="Hampton, Peterborough" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033478" start="8603" end="8611" title="Woodston, Peterborough" label="Woodston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="8617" end="8627" title="beet sugar" label="beet sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061559" start="8690" end="8714" title="Norwich and Peterborough Building Society" label="Norwich and Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q12073381" start="8906" end="8921" title="Yorkshire Building Society" label="Yorkshire Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842527" start="9044" end="9058" title="Midlands Co-operative Society" label="Midlands Co-op"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763414" start="9068" end="9083" title="Anglia Regional Co-operative Society" label="Anglia Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986583" start="9239" end="9267" title="Central England Co-operative" label="Central England Co-operative"/>
<link wikidata="Q10270157" start="9291" end="9299" title="New towns in the United Kingdom" label="New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177999" start="9309" end="9345" title="Peterborough Development Corporation" label="Peterborough Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671138" start="9429" end="9438" title="London overspill" label="overspill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830212" start="9457" end="9466" title="Township (England)" label="townships"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784409" start="9550" end="9557" title="Bretton, Peterborough" label="Bretton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="9607" end="9618" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105082" start="9621" end="9626" title="Orton, Peterborough" label="Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265622" start="9628" end="9634" title="Paston, Peterborough" label="Paston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983588" start="9636" end="9646" title="Werrington, Peterborough" label="Werrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311667" start="9651" end="9657" title="Castor, Cambridgeshire" label="Castor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646140" start="9715" end="9722" title="Hampton, Peterborough" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270873" start="9906" end="9916" title="Queensgate shopping centre, United Kingdom" label="Queensgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29574" start="10002" end="10028" title="Beatrix of the Netherlands" label="Beatrix of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q130954" start="10129" end="10136" title="parkway" label="parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141800" start="10259" end="10270" title="Thomas Cook Group" label="Thomas Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186887" start="10275" end="10290" title="Phoenix Group" label="Pearl Assurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899996" start="10387" end="10413" title="urban regeneration company" label="urban regeneration company"/>
<link wikidata="Q333410" start="10472" end="10486" title="Brian Mawhinney, Baron Mawhinney" label="Lord Mawhinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q601819" start="10506" end="10541" title="Office of the Deputy Prime Minister" label="Office of the Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="10915" end="10927" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="11079" end="11095" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664413" start="11442" end="11467" title="Peterborough City Council" label="Peterborough City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162859" start="11524" end="11541" title="Hilton Garden Inn" label="Hilton Garden Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270873" start="11700" end="11726" title="Queensgate shopping centre, United Kingdom" label="Queensgate Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206677" start="11791" end="11806" title="Peterborough railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561328" start="11987" end="12004" title="Unitary authorities of England" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664413" start="12018" end="12043" title="Peterborough City Council" label="Peterborough City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q97463160" start="12060" end="12082" title="Peterborough Town Hall" label="Peterborough Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451058" start="12186" end="12236" title="Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority" label="Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Combined Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530239" start="12266" end="12306" title="Mayor of Cambridgeshire and Peterborough" label="Mayor of Cambridgeshire and Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="12354" end="12362" title="non-metropolitan district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q12956645" start="12366" end="12378" title="City of Peterborough" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="12555" end="12566" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897276" start="12684" end="12694" title="unparished area" label="unparished"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="12736" end="12750" title="civil parishes" label="civil parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784409" start="12762" end="12769" title="Bretton, Peterborough" label="Bretton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646140" start="12771" end="12795" title="Hampton Hargate and Vale" label="Hampton Hargate and Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105082" start="12797" end="12814" title="Orton Longueville" label="Orton Longueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105082" start="12820" end="12836" title="Orton Waterville" label="Orton Waterville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="12888" end="12902" title="ancient parish" label="ancient parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444416" start="12934" end="12952" title="Nassaburgh hundred" label="Nassaburgh hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="12956" end="12972" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="13007" end="13014" title="Hamlet (place)" label="hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288470" start="13029" end="13039" title="Dogsthorpe" label="Dogsthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330652" start="13041" end="13050" title="Eastfield, Peterborough" label="Eastfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762555" start="13052" end="13062" title="Longthorpe" label="Longthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016586" start="13064" end="13070" title="Newark, Peterborough" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422121" start="13199" end="13219" title="extra-parochial area" label="extra-parochial area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237364" start="13291" end="13296" title="Cathedral close" label="close"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259104" start="13334" end="13356" title="Peterborough Cathedral" label="Peterborough Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="13409" end="13413" title="City status in the United Kingdom" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006876" start="13580" end="13587" title="Borough status in the United Kingdom" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="13643" end="13654" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="13700" end="13708" title="manorialism" label="manorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050650" start="13786" end="13811" title="Peterborough (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Peterborough constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007851" start="13893" end="13918" title="improvement commissioners" label="improvement commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q518343" start="14018" end="14035" title="municipal borough" label="municipal borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364526" start="14125" end="14133" title="aldermen" label="aldermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q708492" start="14147" end="14158" title="councillors" label="councillors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="14262" end="14287" title="non-metropolitan district" label="non-metropolitan district"/>
<link wikidata="Q769603" start="14417" end="14440" title="non-metropolitan county" label="non-metropolitan county"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025648" start="14481" end="14510" title="Cambridgeshire County Council" label="Cambridgeshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="14572" end="14589" title="ceremonial county" label="ceremonial county"/>
<link wikidata="Q914752" start="14628" end="14639" title="Lord-lieutenant" label="lieutenancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="14644" end="14654" title="shrievalty" label="shrievalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q333937" start="15939" end="15951" title="Michael Gove" label="Michael Gove"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="15964" end="15981" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309207" start="16107" end="16134" title="regional development agency" label="regional development agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q817665" start="16239" end="16254" title="Benjamin Barber" label="Benjamin Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="16289" end="16301" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="16328" end="16342" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="16476" end="16487" title="2001 United Kingdom census" label="2001 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="16722" end="16728" title="Median" label="Median"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="16895" end="16908" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481366" start="16954" end="16966" title="M11 Corridor" label="M11 corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q487494" start="17505" end="17510" title="Tesco" label="Tesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181484" start="17533" end="17542" title="Debenhams" label="Debenhams"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="18168" end="18179" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="18201" end="18234" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="joined the European Union in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q521207" start="18452" end="18473" title="Trades Union Congress" label="Trades Union Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206677" start="18504" end="18532" title="Peterborough railway station" label="Peterborough railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q672271" start="18560" end="18580" title="East Coast Main Line" label="East Coast Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q219867" start="18676" end="18693" title="London King&amp;#x27;s Cross railway station" label="King&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q800716" start="18697" end="18715" title="Edinburgh Waverley railway station" label="Edinburgh Waverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q53649859" start="18732" end="18760" title="London North Eastern Railway" label="London North Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18737011" start="18893" end="18917" title="Govia Thameslink Railway" label="Govia Thameslink Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090907" start="19003" end="19024" title="East Midlands Railway" label="East Midlands Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q801113" start="19065" end="19086" title="Liverpool Lime Street railway station" label="Liverpool Lime Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141120" start="19151" end="19163" title="CrossCountry" label="CrossCountry"/>
<link wikidata="Q683063" start="19197" end="19207" title="Birmingham New Street railway station" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q318679" start="19231" end="19245" title="Greater Anglia" label="Greater Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19722" start="19297" end="19307" title="River Nene" label="River Nene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012031" start="19341" end="19348" title="Wisbech" label="Wisbech"/>
<link wikidata="Q192240" start="19352" end="19363" title="Northampton" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17553973" start="19409" end="19421" title="Nene Viaduct" label="Nene Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007343" start="19486" end="19493" title="William Cubitt" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994386" start="19498" end="19511" title="Joseph Cubitt" label="Joseph Cubitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381011" start="19997" end="20015" title="Environment Agency" label="Environment Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q19914" start="20082" end="20099" title="Grand Union Canal" label="Grand Union Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="20232" end="20236" title="Lock (water transport)" label="lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q279859" start="20284" end="20306" title="A1 road (Great Britain)" label="A1/A1(M) primary route"/>
<link wikidata="Q862476" start="20316" end="20334" title="European route E15" label="European route E15"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599636" start="20377" end="20393" title="Great North Road (Great Britain)" label="Great North Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="20399" end="20423" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="20526" end="20535" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969908" start="20549" end="20582" title="British Electric Traction" label="British Electric Traction Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178034" start="20708" end="20746" title="Peterborough Tramways" label="Peterborough Electric Traction Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454176" start="20843" end="20875" title="First Norfolk &amp;amp; Suffolk" label="Eastern Counties Omnibus Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596842" start="20953" end="20963" title="Stagecoach East" label="Stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596839" start="20974" end="20993" title="Stagecoach Cambridgeshire" label="Cambus and Viscount"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253083" start="20999" end="21012" title="Delaine Buses" label="Delaine Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664588" start="21185" end="21205" title="Local transport plan" label="Local Transport Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398484" start="21380" end="21398" title="Port of Felixstowe" label="Port of Felixstowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603401" start="21666" end="21677" title="Green Wheel" label="Green Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738314" start="22145" end="22157" title="Hereward Way" label="Hereward Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001942" start="22169" end="22175" title="Oakham" label="Oakham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687567" start="22213" end="22225" title="East Harling" label="East Harling"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="22967" end="22978" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="23045" end="23050" title="White people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883863" start="23060" end="23079" title="Mixed (United Kingdom ethnicity category)" label="mixed ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722871" start="23087" end="23092" title="British Asian" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244280" start="23099" end="23104" title="Black British" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108636" start="23269" end="23280" title="Other White" label="other white"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580491" start="23299" end="23318" title="British Pakistanis" label="Pakistani ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115170" start="23369" end="23385" title="British Indians" label="Indian ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675084" start="23518" end="23536" title="Italian diaspora" label="Italian immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440398" start="23578" end="23584" title="workforce" label="labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="23673" end="23679" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="23684" end="23692" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458857" start="23780" end="23787" title="Fletton" label="Fletton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15141148" start="23808" end="23826" title="Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo" label="Scalabrini Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="23934" end="23946" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="23958" end="23970" title="Saint Joseph" label="Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="24007" end="24019" title="baptism" label="christenings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804346" start="24023" end="24049" title="Italian Briton" label="second-generation Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q208257" start="24218" end="24225" title="Bedford" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="24358" end="24370" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="24540" end="24552" title="A8 countries" label="A8 countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q250062" start="24871" end="24884" title="Driving under the influence" label="drink driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="24974" end="24982" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181784" start="24997" end="25014" title="trafficking in human beings" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308528" start="25526" end="25538" title="Julie Spence" label="Julie Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242291" start="25549" end="25564" title="Chief Constable" label="Chief Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="25865" end="25868" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="25959" end="25965" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804225" start="25995" end="26006" title="Tim Samuels" label="Tim Samuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="26198" end="26202" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="26207" end="26214" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="26332" end="26349" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="26612" end="26625" title="Christian denomination" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413225" start="26725" end="26734" title="Kingsgate Community Church" label="KingsGate"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="26907" end="26916" title="Buddhists" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="26918" end="26924" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="26926" end="26930" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="26935" end="26940" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="26978" end="26985" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859469" start="27082" end="27091" title="Millfield, Peterborough" label="Millfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986688" start="27093" end="27102" title="West Town, Peterborough" label="West Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007121" start="27107" end="27118" title="New England, Peterborough" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306284" start="27368" end="27400" title="Anglican Diocese of Peterborough" label="Anglican Diocese of Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q23330" start="27575" end="27590" title="Huntingdonshire" label="Huntingdonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q868644" start="27608" end="27622" title="Diocese of Ely" label="Diocese of Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649070" start="27702" end="27724" title="Bishop of Peterborough" label="Bishop of Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809054" start="27744" end="27760" title="Assistant Bishop" label="Assistant Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="27813" end="27821" title="parishes" label="parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q461013" start="27846" end="27859" title="Bishop of Ely" label="Bishop of Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q868590" start="27909" end="27931" title="Diocese of East Anglia" label="Diocese of East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736143" start="27959" end="27975" title="St John the Baptist Cathedral, Norwich" label="Cathedral Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="27985" end="28001" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595357" start="28029" end="28061" title="Saint Peter and All Souls Church" label="Saint Peter and All Souls Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="28116" end="28130" title="Greek Orthodox" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q298654" start="28144" end="28155" title="Cyril of Jerusalem" label="Saint Cyril"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="28214" end="28222" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860071" start="28223" end="28265" title="Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain" label="Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756792" start="28350" end="28373" title="The Peterborough School" label="The Peterborough School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246649" start="28666" end="28680" title="John Mansfield School" label="John Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245008" start="28830" end="28843" title="Deacon&amp;#x27;s School" label="Deacon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788914" start="28876" end="28897" title="Thomas Deacon Academy" label="Thomas Deacon Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104898" start="28911" end="28937" title="Norman Foster, Baron Foster of Thames Bank" label="Lord Foster of Thames Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773129" start="28971" end="28994" title="Queen Katharine Academy" label="Queen Katharine Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744421" start="29288" end="29310" title="The King&amp;#x27;s School, Peterborough" label="The King&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="29397" end="29407" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="29419" end="29449" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664350" start="29503" end="29528" title="local education authority" label="local education authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501560" start="29608" end="29650" title="General Certificate of Secondary Education" label="General Certificate of Secondary Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q765192" start="29724" end="29731" title="further education" label="further"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="29736" end="29752" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652710" start="29754" end="29774" title="Peterborough College" label="Peterborough College"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872145" start="29835" end="29860" title="City College Peterborough" label="City College Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894959" start="30102" end="30130" title="University Technical College" label="University Technical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q540751" start="30409" end="30433" title="Anglia Ruskin University" label="Anglia Ruskin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="31018" end="31033" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329756" start="31213" end="31233" title="East of England Show" label="East of England Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178003" start="31235" end="31256" title="Peterborough Festival" label="Peterborough Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q925258" start="31261" end="31266" title="Campaign for Real Ale" label="CAMRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q360371" start="31789" end="31803" title="Antony Gormley" label="Antony Gormley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19722" start="32120" end="32130" title="River Nene" label="River Nene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127470" start="32535" end="32547" title="Odeon Cinemas" label="Odeon Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q22087306" start="33192" end="33207" title="Embassy Theatre, Peterborough" label="Embassy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="33217" end="33225" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233471" start="33247" end="33263" title="David Evelyn Nye" label="David Evelyn Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q742958" start="33427" end="33430" title="Associated British Cinemas" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033465" start="33445" end="33458" title="Cannon Films" label="Cannon Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939537" start="33541" end="33558" title="Mitchells &amp;amp; Butlers" label="Edwards bar chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784409" start="33733" end="33740" title="Bretton, Peterborough" label="Bretton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503170" start="33889" end="33904" title="Showcase Cinemas" label="Showcase Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="33909" end="33917" title="ice rink" label="ice rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="34052" end="34059" title="Han Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="34061" end="34067" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="34069" end="34073" title="Thai cuisine" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="34083" end="34090" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549380" start="34184" end="34224" title="A Short History of Tractors in Ukrainian" label="A Short History of Tractors in Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q270487" start="34234" end="34248" title="Marina Lewycka" label="Marina Lewycka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659763" start="34256" end="34272" title="A Spot of Bother" label="A Spot of Bother"/>
<link wikidata="Q356357" start="34282" end="34293" title="Mark Haddon" label="Mark Haddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19495" start="34403" end="34436" title="Peterborough United Football Club" label="Peterborough United Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156350" start="34546" end="34557" title="London Road stadium" label="London Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704126" start="34718" end="34727" title="Terry Bly" label="Terry Bly"/>
<link wikidata="Q915850" start="34753" end="34767" title="1960–61 in English football" label="1960–61 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436315" start="34787" end="34802" title="Football League Fourth Division" label="Fourth Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="34838" end="34853" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="34921" end="34933" title="Football League First Division" label="Division One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997332" start="34984" end="34998" title="1992–93 in English football" label="1992–93 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5224229" start="35025" end="35043" title="Darragh MacAnthony" label="Darragh MacAnthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864242" start="35135" end="35144" title="Barry Fry" label="Barry Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15266049" start="35276" end="35295" title="Peterborough Sports F.C." label="Peterborough Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q59041" start="35313" end="35334" title="National League North" label="National League North"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="35348" end="35356" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="35394" end="35399" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="35401" end="35408" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="35410" end="35416" title="field hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="35418" end="35428" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="35430" end="35436" title="Rowing (sport)" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="35449" end="35457" title="American football" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="35462" end="35487" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825385" start="35498" end="35512" title="Cambridgeshire County Cricket Club" label="Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344193" start="35550" end="35566" title="Northamptonshire County Cricket Club" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901885" start="35627" end="35657" title="Town Ground, Peterborough" label="Peterborough Town Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127286" start="35786" end="35808" title="Peterborough Lions RFC" label="Peterborough Lions RFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974050" start="35824" end="35850" title="National League 3 Midlands" label="National League 3 Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178024" start="35898" end="35915" title="Peterborough RUFC" label="Peterborough RUFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842485" start="36062" end="36077" title="Midlands 1 East" label="Midlands 1 East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842489" start="36139" end="36162" title="Midlands 2 East (South)" label="Midlands 2 East (South)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599097" start="36618" end="36635" title="Great Eastern Run" label="Great Eastern Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q956952" start="36816" end="36837" title="Peterborough Phantoms" label="Peterborough Phantoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q120431" start="36890" end="36894" title="National Ice Hockey League" label="NIHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q750080" start="36958" end="36977" title="Motorcycle speedway" label="Motorcycle speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q110064435" start="37050" end="37076" title="East of England Showground" label="East of England Showground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178018" start="37101" end="37122" title="Peterborough Panthers" label="Peterborough Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383252" start="37155" end="37167" title="Elite League (speedway)" label="Elite League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641897" start="37307" end="37318" title="Tour Series" label="Tour Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="37501" end="37506" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844480" start="37586" end="37596" title="rink bandy" label="rink bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109330026" start="37650" end="37692" title="2022 Women&amp;#x27;s Bandy World Championship" label="2022 Women&amp;#x27;s Bandy World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178046" start="37815" end="37826" title="Peterborough Transmitter" label="transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q730736" start="37830" end="37838" title="Morborne" label="Morborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="37889" end="37897" title="FM radio" label="FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="37899" end="37908" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128150" start="37918" end="37928" title="Classic FM (UK)" label="Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834912" start="37934" end="37958" title="BBC Radio Cambridgeshire" label="BBC Radio Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q795546" start="37972" end="37987" title="BBC Local Radio" label="BBC Local Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619469" start="38160" end="38169" title="Gunthorpe, Peterborough" label="Gunthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="38210" end="38212" title="AM radio" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q466814" start="38213" end="38215" title="Mediumwave" label="MW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="38253" end="38268" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275940" start="38366" end="38377" title="Digital One" label="Digital One"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825373" start="38868" end="38888" title="Heart Cambridgeshire" label="Heart Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066880" start="38894" end="38904" title="Heart East" label="Heart East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016767" start="38920" end="38943" title="independent local radio" label="independent local radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692060" start="39000" end="39018" title="Heart Peterborough" label="Heart Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691921" start="39201" end="39216" title="Heart Cambridge" label="Heart Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776181" start="39250" end="39254" title="The Worlds Greatest Music Station" label="WGMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128159" start="39330" end="39342" title="Classic Gold 1332" label="Classic Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129015" start="39380" end="39392" title="The Heart Network" label="Heart&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578576" start="39400" end="39410" title="Gold (British radio network)" label="Gold Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161378" start="39465" end="39478" title="Connect Radio 106.8" label="Connect Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546632" start="39608" end="39628" title="Smooth East Midlands" label="Smooth East Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834841" start="39688" end="39701" title="BBC Look East" label="BBC Look East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975082" start="39718" end="39733" title="ITV News Anglia" label="ITV News Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178002" start="39753" end="39775" title="Peterborough Evening Telegraph" label="Peterborough Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q60776211" start="39869" end="39898" title="National World" label="National World Publishing Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178007" start="40117" end="40145" title="Peterborough Herald and Post" label="Peterborough Herald and Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310500" start="40276" end="40280" title="Emap" label="Emap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330039" start="40473" end="40488" title="Richard Winfrey" label="Richard Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q927105" start="40591" end="40599" title="Riot Act" label="Riot Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715616" start="40729" end="40754" title="The Barchester Chronicles" label="The Barchester Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="40844" end="40854" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q204398" start="40867" end="40876" title="Octopussy" label="Octopussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q134333" start="40897" end="40908" title="Roger Moore" label="Roger Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q849262" start="40970" end="40979" title="Breakthru (song)" label="BreakThru"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="40998" end="41003" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962386" start="41035" end="41054" title="Nene Valley Railway" label="Nene Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q81520" start="41072" end="41086" title="Pierce Brosnan" label="Pierce Brosnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19089" start="41146" end="41155" title="GoldenEye" label="GoldenEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q160560" start="41224" end="41241" title="The Da Vinci Code (film)" label="The Da Vinci Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q76895" start="41336" end="41346" title="Lee Marvin" label="Lee Marvin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41415" end="41444" title="The Dirty Dozen: Next Mission" label="The Dirty Dozen: Next Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q752989" start="41544" end="41548" title="Nine (2009 live-action film)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39666" start="41565" end="41578" title="Penélope Cruz" label="Penélope Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="41583" end="41599" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259104" start="41619" end="41641" title="Peterborough Cathedral" label="Peterborough Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="41676" end="41687" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="41689" end="41699" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="41704" end="41716" title="Saint Andrew" label="Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="41805" end="41814" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="41942" end="41949" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="42140" end="42146" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="42207" end="42221" title="English Gothic architecture" label="English Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270912" start="42283" end="42306" title="Cathedral architecture of Western Europe" label="architectural precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="42423" end="42442" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="42447" end="42467" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="42511" end="42528" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="42540" end="42547" title="James VI and I" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q17554012" start="42932" end="42941" title="Peterborough Guildhall" label="Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="43036" end="43047" title="Stuart Restoration" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="43056" end="43066" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q26419892" start="43402" end="43413" title="Peterscourt" label="Peterscourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q681007" start="43447" end="43467" title="George Gilbert Scott" label="George Gilbert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q81279" start="43624" end="43640" title="Guildhall, London" label="London Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177990" start="43670" end="43679" title="Peterborough Castle" label="Tout Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="43715" end="43733" title="scheduled monument" label="scheduled monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="43756" end="43765" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743484" start="43904" end="43912" title="Central Park, Peterborough" label="The Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602556" start="43934" end="43950" title="Green Flag Award" label="Green Flag Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832778" start="44009" end="44020" title="Civic Voice" label="Civic Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735243" start="44024" end="44042" title="Cross of Sacrifice" label="Cross of Sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="44083" end="44113" title="Commonwealth War Graves Commission" label="Imperial War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178013" start="44134" end="44142" title="Peterborough Lido" label="The Lido"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="44181" end="44189" title="art deco" label="art deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178015" start="44276" end="44311" title="Peterborough Museum and Art Gallery" label="Peterborough Museum and Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="44628" end="44636" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q981572" start="44692" end="44702" title="John Clare" label="John Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052120" start="44895" end="44907" title="Norman Cross Prison" label="Norman Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015079" start="45267" end="45281" title="Burghley House" label="Burghley House"/>
<link wikidata="Q354309" start="45360" end="45377" title="William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley" label="Sir William Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q944583" start="45413" end="45432" title="Lord High Treasurer" label="Lord High Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="45481" end="45494" title="English country houses" label="country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q454635" start="45520" end="45557" title="Lancelot &amp;#x27;Capability&amp;#x27; Brown" label="Lancelot &amp;#x27;Capability&amp;#x27; Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015058" start="45703" end="45724" title="Burghley Horse Trials" label="Burghley Horse Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q838781" start="45746" end="45751" title="eventing" label="event"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="45769" end="45784" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861132" start="45786" end="45797" title="Milton Hall" label="Milton Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q78014929" start="45850" end="45867" title="Earl Fitzwilliam" label="Earls Fitzwilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q573455" start="45961" end="45975" title="pocket borough" label="pocket borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q17554143" start="45997" end="46015" title="John Clare Cottage" label="John Clare Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533390" start="46483" end="46499" title="Longthorpe Tower" label="Longthorpe Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="46576" end="46592" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796693" start="46776" end="46787" title="Thorpe Hall (Peterborough)" label="Thorpe Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="46828" end="46840" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634271" start="46912" end="46932" title="Sue Ryder Foundation" label="Sue Ryder Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356788" start="46980" end="46988" title="Flag Fen" label="Flag Fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482233" start="47072" end="47085" title="Francis Pryor" label="Francis Pryor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144458" start="47100" end="47106" title="Archaeological field survey" label="survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="47110" end="47115" title="Dike (construction)" label="dykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335054" start="47225" end="47235" title="Whittlesey" label="Whittlesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442948" start="47439" end="47451" title="Fen Causeway" label="Fen Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962386" start="47480" end="47499" title="Nene Valley Railway" label="Nene Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q420962" start="47516" end="47532" title="heritage railway" label="heritage railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q814018" start="47588" end="47600" title="Beeching Axe" label="Beeching Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266682" start="47688" end="47711" title="development corporation" label="development corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049606" start="47764" end="47780" title="Yarwell Junction" label="Yarwell Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487258" start="47794" end="47802" title="Wansford, Cambridgeshire" label="Wansford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261674" start="47807" end="47817" title="Orton Mere" label="Orton Mere"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261674" start="47826" end="47839" title="Ferry Meadows" label="Ferry Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284354" start="47905" end="47914" title="Railworld" label="Railworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178016" start="47950" end="47990" title="Peterborough Nene Valley railway station" label="Peterborough Nene Valley railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261674" start="47997" end="48006" title="Nene Park, Peterborough" label="Nene Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603401" start="48257" end="48268" title="Green Wheel" label="Green Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355392" start="48403" end="48423" title="Rockingham Forest" label="Forest of Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437242" start="48463" end="48482" title="Forestry Commission" label="Forestry Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050690" start="48533" end="48549" title="Castor Hanglands NNR" label="Castor Hanglands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861383" start="48551" end="48574" title="Barnack Hills &amp;amp; Holes NNR" label="Barnack Hills and Holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879186" start="48579" end="48595" title="Bedford Purlieus NNR" label="Bedford Purlieus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974560" start="48596" end="48619" title="national nature reserve (United Kingdom)" label="national nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="48630" end="48666" title="site of special scientific interest" label="sites of special scientific interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699627" start="48705" end="48720" title="Natural England" label="Natural England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191622" start="48768" end="48796" title="special area of conservation" label="special area of conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q503021" start="48812" end="48823" title="Natura 2000" label="Natura 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="48856" end="48870" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361158" start="48964" end="48977" title="George Alcock" label="George Alcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="49028" end="49032" title="nova" label="nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="49038" end="49043" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q981572" start="49046" end="49056" title="John Clare" label="John Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113053" start="49110" end="49129" title="Christopher Perkins (artist)" label="Christopher Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q516276" start="49158" end="49169" title="Henry Royce" label="Henry Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q282019" start="49175" end="49182" title="Baronet" label="Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q243278" start="49221" end="49232" title="Rolls-Royce Plc" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q510400" start="49279" end="49288" title="John Hill (author)" label="John Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="49335" end="49367" title="Dictionary of National Biography" label="Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="49415" end="49421" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105666" start="49498" end="49512" title="J. F. Horrabin" label="Frank Horrabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q517639" start="49594" end="49598" title="1929 UK general election" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="49605" end="49616" title="utilitarian" label="utilitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984623" start="49630" end="49632" title="Doctor of Divinity" label="Dr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706259" start="49633" end="49651" title="Richard Cumberland (philosopher)" label="Richard Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q237564" start="49766" end="49778" title="Edith Cavell" label="Edith Cavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="50297" end="50303" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37591" start="50363" end="50380" title="Hereward the Wake" label="Hereward the Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="50418" end="50433" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809536" start="50511" end="50521" title="John Payne (martyr)" label="John Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="50563" end="50571" title="martyred" label="martyred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542263" start="50619" end="50653" title="Forty Martyrs of England and Wales" label="Forty Martyrs of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="50663" end="50672" title="Beatification" label="beatified"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="50676" end="50689" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="50702" end="50711" title="Canonization" label="canonised"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="50733" end="50745" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067323" start="50778" end="50794" title="Thomas Armstrong (conductor)" label="Thomas Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144673" start="50844" end="50866" title="Royal Academy of Music" label="Royal Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q514969" start="50868" end="50877" title="Andy Bell (singer)" label="Andy Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="50900" end="50914" title="Synthpop" label="electronic pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q484885" start="50919" end="50926" title="Erasure (duo)" label="Erasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834791" start="50957" end="50969" title="BBC Big Band" label="BBC Big Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q562609" start="50971" end="50981" title="Don Lusher" label="Don Lusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q304985" start="51022" end="51044" title="Royal College of Music" label="Royal College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="51053" end="51066" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152723" start="51084" end="51097" title="Paul Nicholas" label="Paul Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776781" start="51117" end="51130" title="Maxim Reality" label="Maxim Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503325" start="51135" end="51144" title="Gizz Butt" label="Gizz Butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="51148" end="51159" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868461" start="51164" end="51179" title="Aston Merrygold" label="Aston Merrygold"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="51183" end="51193" title="Brit Award" label="Brit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165439" start="51212" end="51215" title="JLS (Group)" label="JLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398699" start="51226" end="51236" title="Ernie Wise" label="Ernie Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q667843" start="51317" end="51333" title="Edmund Hockridge" label="Edmund Hockridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q713479" start="51335" end="51347" title="Jimmy Savile" label="Jimmy Savile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518223" start="51433" end="51446" title="Simon Bamford" label="Simon Bamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q373474" start="51496" end="51507" title="Adrian Lyne" label="Adrian Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q504157" start="51527" end="51543" title="Fatal Attraction" label="Fatal Attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q935802" start="51602" end="51606" title="CBBC (TV channel)" label="CBBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040434" start="51620" end="51629" title="M.I. High" label="M.I. High"/>
<link wikidata="Q437665" start="51637" end="51652" title="Luke Pasqualino" label="Luke Pasqualino"/>
<link wikidata="Q326180" start="51683" end="51688" title="Skins (TV series)" label="Skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q15632463" start="51705" end="51719" title="The Musketeers (2014 TV series)" label="The Musketeers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422171" start="51749" end="51761" title="Sarah Cawood" label="Sarah Cawood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="51789" end="51800" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856679" start="51812" end="51825" title="Jake Humphrey" label="Jake Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679885" start="51851" end="51860" title="Talksport" label="Talksport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684995" start="51878" end="51891" title="Adrian Durham" label="Adrian Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964156" start="51942" end="51955" title="Brian J. Ford" label="Brian J. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172877" start="52056" end="52068" title="Peter Boizot" label="Peter Boizot"/>
<link wikidata="Q662845" start="52085" end="52098" title="Pizza Express" label="Pizza Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023512" start="52120" end="52137" title="Deputy Lieutenant" label="Deputy Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q203174" start="52282" end="52293" title="thalidomide" label="thalidomide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705144" start="52301" end="52312" title="Terry Wiles" label="Terry Wiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010042" start="52345" end="52370" title="On Giant&amp;#x27;s Shoulders" label="On Giant&amp;#x27;s Shoulders"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="52431" end="52448" title="Tottenham Hotspur" label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="52453" end="52460" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q310055" start="52473" end="52486" title="David Bentley" label="David Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q639998" start="52517" end="52528" title="Louis Smith (gymnast)" label="Louis Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="52541" end="52551" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 games"/>
<link wikidata="Q749109" start="52559" end="52572" title="Great Britain at the Olympics" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18520" start="52689" end="52699" title="Luton Town" label="Luton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409790" start="52711" end="52723" title="Isaiah Brown" label="Isaiah Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q26706895" start="52880" end="52891" title="Harry Wells (rugby union)" label="Harry Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="52895" end="52906" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071691" start="52918" end="52934" title="Leicester Tigers" label="Leicester Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960" start="52938" end="52955" title="Premiership Rugby" label="Premiership Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744421" start="52995" end="53033" title="The King&amp;#x27;s (The Cathedral) School" label="The King&amp;#x27;s (The Cathedral) School"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="53085" end="53106" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="53111" end="53124" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="53138" end="53154" title="oceanic climate" label="maritime climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="53417" end="53425" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990514" start="53577" end="53586" title="Wittering, Cambridgeshire" label="Wittering"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="53864" end="53871" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497688" start="54139" end="54148" title="Holme, Cambridgeshire" label="Holme Fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q514050" start="54222" end="54225" title="Fen" label="Fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="54323" end="54331" title="the Fens" label="the Fens"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="54368" end="54382" title="Arable land" label="arable farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="54453" end="54460" title="The Fens" label="Fenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="54474" end="54490" title="pastoral farming" label="pastoral farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070153" start="54866" end="54874" title="Wothorpe, Cambridgeshire" label="Wothorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990514" start="54879" end="54888" title="Wittering, Cambridgeshire" label="Wittering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729964" start="54905" end="54912" title="Thorney, Cambridgeshire" label="Thorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q935339" start="54931" end="54942" title="Isle of Ely" label="Isle of Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105082" start="54960" end="54966" title="Orton, Peterborough" label="Ortons"/>
<link wikidata="Q176029" start="55097" end="55104" title="Fenland District" label="Fenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23330" start="55109" end="55124" title="Huntingdonshire" label="Huntingdonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="55191" end="55199" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="55212" end="55221" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q548721" start="55225" end="55240" title="Ordnance Survey" label="Ordnance Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967305" start="55241" end="55264" title="British national grid reference system" label="national grid reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784409" start="55566" end="55573" title="Bretton, Peterborough" label="Bretton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288470" start="55576" end="55586" title="Dogsthorpe, Peterborough" label="Dogsthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330652" start="55589" end="55598" title="Eastfield, Peterborough" label="Eastfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330664" start="55601" end="55609" title="Eastgate, Peterborough" label="Eastgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443414" start="55612" end="55619" title="Fengate, Peterborough" label="Fengate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458857" start="55622" end="55629" title="Fletton, Peterborough" label="Fletton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619469" start="55632" end="55641" title="Gunthorpe, Peterborough" label="Gunthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646140" start="55644" end="55656" title="Hampton, Peterborough" label="The Hamptons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762555" start="55659" end="55669" title="Longthorpe, Peterborough" label="Longthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859469" start="55672" end="55681" title="Millfield, Peterborough" label="Millfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999662" start="55684" end="55693" title="Netherton, Peterborough" label="Netherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016586" start="55696" end="55702" title="Newark, Peterborough" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007121" start="55705" end="55716" title="New England, Peterborough" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105082" start="55719" end="55729" title="Orton, Peterborough" label="The Ortons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139346" start="55732" end="55740" title="Parnwell, Peterborough" label="Parnwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265622" start="55743" end="55749" title="Paston, Peterborough" label="Paston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296543" start="55752" end="55764" title="Ravensthorpe, Peterborough" label="Ravensthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598847" start="55767" end="55777" title="Stanground, Peterborough" label="Stanground"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966703" start="55780" end="55786" title="Walton, Peterborough" label="Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983588" start="55789" end="55799" title="Werrington, Peterborough" label="Werrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986688" start="55802" end="55811" title="West Town, Peterborough" label="West Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989848" start="55814" end="55822" title="Westwood, Peterborough" label="Westwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033478" start="55825" end="55833" title="Woodston, Peterborough" label="Woodston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="55853" end="55867" title="Civil parishes" label="Civil parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790414" start="56038" end="56047" title="Ailsworth, Cambridgeshire" label="Ailsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123861" start="56050" end="56057" title="Bainton, Cambridgeshire" label="Bainton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355527" start="56060" end="56067" title="Barnack, Cambridgeshire" label="Barnack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189486" start="56070" end="56081" title="Borough Fen, Cambridgeshire" label="Borough Fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311667" start="56084" end="56090" title="Castor, Cambridgeshire" label="Castor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363841" start="56093" end="56105" title="Deeping Gate, Cambridgeshire" label="Deeping Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402065" start="56108" end="56113" title="Etton, Cambridgeshire" label="Etton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840716" start="56116" end="56119" title="Eye, Cambridgeshire" label="Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422621" start="56122" end="56131" title="Eye Green, Cambridgeshire" label="Eye Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363659" start="56134" end="56141" title="Glinton, Cambridgeshire" label="Glinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686792" start="56144" end="56152" title="Helpston, Cambridgeshire" label="Helpston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883267" start="56155" end="56162" title="Marholm, Cambridgeshire" label="Marholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107206" start="56165" end="56170" title="Maxey, Cambridgeshire" label="Maxey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371496" start="56173" end="56183" title="Newborough, Cambridgeshire" label="Newborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999892" start="56186" end="56198" title="Northborough, Cambridgeshire" label="Northborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157890" start="56201" end="56208" title="Peakirk, Cambridgeshire" label="Peakirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185281" start="56211" end="56220" title="Southorpe, Cambridgeshire" label="Southorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594204" start="56223" end="56248" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Without, Cambridgeshire" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Without"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968104" start="56251" end="56257" title="Sutton, Peterborough" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729964" start="56260" end="56267" title="Thorney, Cambridgeshire" label="Thorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918336" start="56270" end="56280" title="Thornhaugh, Cambridgeshire" label="Thornhaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328100" start="56283" end="56289" title="Ufford, Cambridgeshire" label="Ufford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331156" start="56292" end="56297" title="Upton, Peterborough" label="Upton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487258" start="56300" end="56308" title="Wansford, Cambridgeshire" label="Wansford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990514" start="56311" end="56320" title="Wittering, Cambridgeshire" label="Wittering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070153" start="56323" end="56331" title="Wothorpe, Cambridgeshire" label="Wothorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="56378" end="56383" title="Wards of the United Kingdom" label="wards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="56491" end="56507" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327701" start="56722" end="56734" title="East Anglian English" label="East Anglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328985" start="56736" end="56748" title="East Midlands English" label="East Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q378038" start="56760" end="56775" title="Estuary English" label="Estuary English"/>
<link wikidata="Q201884" start="56827" end="56835" title="isogloss" label="isogloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187298" start="56882" end="56888" title="Phonological history of English short A" label="flat A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541588" start="56954" end="56978" title="Yod-dropping" label="&amp;quot;Yod&amp;quot;-dropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312722" start="57144" end="57151" title="English English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437088" start="57236" end="57262" title="L-vocalization" label="&amp;quot;L&amp;quot;-vocalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160720" start="57264" end="57280" title="T glottalization" label="T glottalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708686" start="57285" end="57308" title="Th-fronting" label="&amp;quot;Th&amp;quot;-fronting"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="57358" end="57371" title="South East of England" label="south-eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="57402" end="57415" title="Town twinning" label="Town twinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="57983" end="58000" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="58023" end="58038" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Queen Katherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17856" start="58048" end="58056" title="Ballarat" label="Ballarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="58077" end="58084" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q13367" start="58102" end="58107" title="Forlì" label="Forlì"/>
<link wikidata="Q3902" start="58124" end="58131" title="Viersen" label="Viersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157144" start="58150" end="58159" title="Vinnytsia" label="Vinnytsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="58177" end="58184" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q13367" start="58189" end="58194" title="Forlì" label="Forlì"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="58283" end="58289" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q399083" start="58298" end="58305" title="Kwe Kwe" label="Kwe Kwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q45779" start="58317" end="58321" title="Pécs" label="Pécs"/>
<link wikidata="Q297274" start="58340" end="58353" title="Peterborough (disambiguation)" label="Peterboroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249" start="58423" end="58436" title="Viersen (district)" label="Kreis Viersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="58476" end="58482" title="Fossil" label="Fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q139011" start="58489" end="58502" title="Hybodontiformes" label="hybodontiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q21368957" start="58514" end="58526" title="Planohybodus" label="Planohybodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q764255" start="58551" end="58560" title="Callovian" label="Callovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="58569" end="58577" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="58611" end="58623" title="type species" label="type species"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="58814" end="58833" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172877" start="58872" end="58884" title="Peter Boizot" label="Peter Boizot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040133" start="58893" end="58907" title="Wyndham Thomas" label="Wyndham Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q639998" start="58948" end="58959" title="Louis Smith (gymnast)" label="Louis Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q47127537" start="58977" end="58986" title="James Fox (rower)" label="James Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819814" start="59033" end="59045" title="Tommy Robson" label="Tommy Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754901" start="59086" end="59099" title="RAF Wittering" label="RAF Wittering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747823" start="59149" end="59169" title="Royal Logistic Corps" label="Royal Logistic Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="59170" end="59182" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="(Volunteers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698217" start="59228" end="59246" title="Air Training Corps" label="Air Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="59297" end="59315" title="The Salvation Army" label="The Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621811" start="59355" end="59375" title="Royal British Legion" label="Royal British Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524517" start="59485" end="59497" title="John Banham" label="Banham, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218766" start="61634" end="61650" title="John Allen Giles" label="John Allen Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145336" start="61978" end="62003" title="Colin Matthew" label="Matthew, Henry Colin Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963963" start="62008" end="62030" title="Brian Harrison (historian)" label="Harrison, Brian Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="62327" end="62332" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23907" wikidata="Q257458" url="?curid=23907" title="PRC (disambiguation)">
<text>P.R.C. is the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

PRC may also refer to:
==Organizations==
===Political===
* Communist Refoundation Party, (&quot;Partito della Rifondazione Comunista&quot;), Italy
* Regionalist Party of Cantabria
* Popular Resistance Committees, Palestinian militant organizations
* People&#x27;s Redemption Council, Liberian early 1980s military regime
* Pasadena Republican Club
* People&#x27;s Republic of the Congo, former country in Africa (until 1992)
* Republic of the Congo, successor of the People&#x27;s Republic of the Congo, ongoing UNDP code

===Other organizations===
* Pew Research Center
*Philippine Red Cross
* Postal Regulatory Commission, an independent regulatory agency in the US
* Presbyterian Reformed Church (Australia)
* Producers Releasing Corporation, Hollywood film studio 1939–1947
* Professional Regulation Commission, Philippines
* Protestant Reformed Churches in America

==Science and technology==
===Biology===
* Phase response curve, graph of biological responses to light or other time cues
* Photosynthetic reaction centre, the molecular unit responsible for absorbing light in photosynthesis
* Progesterone receptor C, one of the isoforms of the progesterone receptor

===Computing and telecommunication===
* PRC (Palm OS), computer code database file format, also used in e-books as Mobipocket MOBI and Kindle AZW
* PRC (file format), a way to store 3D data in a PDF file
* Primary reference clock, for synchronization in telecommunications

===LCD display===
* Panel Response Correction (PRC)

===Other uses in science and technology===
* Passive radiative cooling, a solar radiation management strategy to reverse global warming.
* Practical reserve capacity, for traffic at a traffic signal junction
* Prestressed reinforced concrete, a prestressed concrete
* Precast reinforced concrete

==Other uses==
* Ernest A. Love Field (IATA airport code), an airport near Prescott, Arizona, US
* Premier&#x27;s Reading Challenge, a reading challenge for school students in parts of Australia
* Pregnancy Resource Center, a nonprofit organization offering pregnant women resources and counseling for alternatives to abortion
* Premier Coach, parent of Vermont Translines, American bus company
* &quot;PRC&quot; (song), by Peso Pluma and Natanael Cano, 2023

==See also==
* Peach PRC, an Australian singer, songwriter, and internet personality
* Polycomb repressive complex 2 or PRC2, a protein
* AN/PRC, for &quot;Army/Navy, Portable, Radio, Communication&quot;, e.g. AN/PRC-77 Portable Transceiver</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q257458" start="0" end="6" title="PRC (disambiguation)" label="P.R.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="14" end="45" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q257458" start="48" end="51" title="PRC (disambiguation)" label="PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q780997" start="107" end="135" title="Communist Refoundation Party" label="Communist Refoundation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366462" start="197" end="227" title="Regionalist Party of Cantabria" label="Regionalist Party of Cantabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q628461" start="230" end="259" title="Popular Resistance Committees" label="Popular Resistance Committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165738" start="298" end="330" title="People&amp;#x27;s Redemption Council" label="People&amp;#x27;s Redemption Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q47088046" start="371" end="395" title="Pasadena Republican Club" label="Pasadena Republican Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152126" start="398" end="433" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of the Congo" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="475" end="496" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="599" end="618" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q14472988" start="620" end="640" title="Philippine Red Cross" label="Philippine Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233991" start="643" end="671" title="Postal Regulatory Commission" label="Postal Regulatory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240801" start="718" end="758" title="Presbyterian Reformed Church (Australia)" label="Presbyterian Reformed Church (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406645" start="761" end="792" title="Producers Releasing Corporation" label="Producers Releasing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248019" start="828" end="862" title="Professional Regulation Commission" label="Professional Regulation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985256" start="878" end="917" title="Protestant Reformed Churches in America" label="Protestant Reformed Churches in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180960" start="962" end="982" title="Phase response curve" label="Phase response curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q418676" start="1044" end="1074" title="Photosynthetic reaction centre" label="Photosynthetic reaction centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208854" start="1147" end="1170" title="Progesterone receptor C" label="Progesterone receptor C"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120269" start="1262" end="1275" title="PRC (Palm OS)" label="PRC (Palm OS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359832" start="1370" end="1387" title="PRC (file format)" label="PRC (file format)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1457" end="1494" title="synchronization in telecommunications#Primary reference clock (PRC)" label="synchronization in telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q115533486" start="1594" end="1619" title="Passive radiative cooling" label="Passive radiative cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="1670" end="1684" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251846" start="1688" end="1714" title="Degree of saturation (traffic)" label="Practical reserve capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q465444" start="1794" end="1814" title="prestressed concrete" label="prestressed concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q831541" start="1817" end="1844" title="Precast concrete" label="Precast reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392664" start="1863" end="1883" title="Ernest A. Love Field" label="Ernest A. Love Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q192824" start="1885" end="1902" title="IATA airport code" label="IATA airport code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240264" start="1945" end="1977" title="Premier&amp;#x27;s Reading Challenge" label="Premier&amp;#x27;s Reading Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185985" start="2043" end="2068" title="Pregnancy resource center" label="Pregnancy Resource Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865819" start="2200" end="2218" title="Vermont Translines" label="Vermont Translines"/>
<link wikidata="Q117978252" start="2243" end="2265" title="PRC (song)" label="&amp;quot;PRC&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105687525" start="2321" end="2330" title="Peach PRC" label="Peach PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125871" start="2426" end="2430" title="PRC2" label="PRC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q497331" start="2516" end="2546" title="AN/PRC-77 Portable Transceiver" label="AN/PRC-77 Portable Transceiver"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23914" wikidata="Q193567" url="?curid=23914" title="Polyphemus">
<text>Polyphemus (; , ; ) is the one-eyed giant son of Poseidon and Thoosa in Greek mythology, one of the Cyclopes described in Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot;. His name means &quot;abounding in songs and legends&quot;, &quot;many-voiced&quot; or &quot;very famous&quot;. Polyphemus first appeared as a savage man-eating giant in the ninth book of the &quot;Odyssey&quot;. The satyr play of Euripides is dependent on this episode apart from one detail; Polyphemus is made a pederast in the play. Later Classical writers presented him in their poems as heterosexual and linked his name with the nymph Galatea. Often he was portrayed as unsuccessful in these, and as unaware of his disproportionate size and musical failings. In the work of even later authors, however, he is presented as both a successful lover and skilled musician. From the Renaissance on, art and literature reflect all of these interpretations of the giant.

==Odysseus and Polyphemus==
===Ancient sources===
In Homer&#x27;s epic, Odysseus lands on the island of the Cyclopes during his journey home from the Trojan War and, together with some of his men, enters a cave filled with provisions. When the giant Polyphemus returns home with his flocks, he blocks the entrance with a great stone and, scorning the usual custom of hospitality, eats two of the men. Next morning, the giant kills and eats two more and leaves the cave to graze his sheep.

After the giant returns in the evening and eats two more of the men, Odysseus offers Polyphemus some strong and undiluted wine given to him earlier on his journey. Drunk and unwary, the giant asks Odysseus his name, promising him a guest-gift if he answers. Odysseus tells him &quot;Οὖτις&quot;, which means &quot;nobody&quot; and Polyphemus promises to eat this &quot;Nobody&quot; last of all. With that, he falls into a drunken sleep. Odysseus had meanwhile hardened a wooden stake in the fire and drives it into Polyphemus&#x27; eye. When Polyphemus shouts for help from his fellow giants, saying that &quot;Nobody&quot; has hurt him, they think Polyphemus is being afflicted by divine power and recommend prayer as the answer.

In the morning, the blind Cyclops lets the sheep out to graze, feeling their backs to ensure that the men are not escaping. However, Odysseus and his men have tied themselves to the undersides of the animals and so get away. As he sails off with his men, Odysseus boastfully reveals his real name, an act of hubris that was to cause problems for him later. Polyphemus prays to his father, Poseidon, for revenge and casts huge rocks towards the ship, which Odysseus barely escapes.

The story reappears in later Classical literature. In &quot;Cyclops&quot;, the 5th-century BC play by Euripides, a chorus of satyrs offers comic relief from the grisly story of how Polyphemus is punished for his impious behaviour in not respecting the rites of hospitality. In this play, Polyphemus claims to be a pederast, revealing to Odysseus that he takes more pleasure in boys than in women, and tries to take the satyr Silenus, whom he kept together with his sons as slaves on Mount Etna in Sicily, calling him &quot;my Ganymede&quot;. The scene is infused with low comedy, specifically from the chorus, and Polyphemus is made to look silly: he is drunk when he explains his sexual desire, Silenus is too old to play the part of the young lover, and he himself will be subjected to penetration—with the wooden spike.

In his Latin epic, Virgil describes how Aeneas observes blind Polyphemus as he leads his flocks down to the sea. They have encountered Achaemenides, who re-tells the story of how Odysseus and his men escaped, leaving him behind. The giant is described as descending to the shore, using a &quot;lopped pine tree&quot; as a walking staff. Once Polyphemus reaches the sea, he washes his oozing, bloody eye socket and groans painfully. Achaemenides is taken aboard Aeneas&#x27; vessel and they cast off with Polyphemus in chase. His great roar of frustration brings the rest of the Cyclopes down to the shore as Aeneas draws away in fear.

===Artistic representations===

During the seventh century, the potters gave preference to scenes from both epics, &quot;The Odyssey&quot; and &quot;the Iliad&quot;, almost half being that of the blinding of the Cyclops and the ruse by which Odysseus and his men escape. One such episode, on a vase featuring the hero carried beneath a sheep, was used on a 27 drachma Greek postage stamp in 1983. This was a steep drop (to the point of being &quot;insignificant&quot;) from the volume of pan-Hellenic pottery discovered from the fifth and sixth centuries, which largely depicted ancient Greek mythology: scenes from the Trojan War or deeds from Heracles or Perseus.

The blinding was depicted in life-size sculpture, including a giant Polyphemus, in the Sperlonga sculptures probably made for the Emperor Tiberius. This may be an interpretation of an existing composition, and was apparently repeated in variations in later Imperial palaces by Claudius, Nero and at Hadrian&#x27;s Villa.
Of the European painters of the subject, the Flemish Jacob Jordaens depicted Odysseus escaping from the cave of Polyphemus in 1635 (see gallery below) and others chose the dramatic scene of the giant casting boulders at the escaping ship. In Guido Reni&#x27;s painting of 1639/40 (see above), the furious giant is tugging a boulder from the cliff as Odysseus and his men row out to the ship far below. Polyphemus is portrayed, as it often happens, with two empty eye sockets and his damaged eye located in the middle on his forehead. This convention goes back to Greek statuary and painting, and is reproduced in Johann Heinrich Wilhelm Tischbein&#x27;s 1802 head and shoulders portrait of the giant (see below).

Arnold Böcklin pictures the giant as standing on rocks onshore and swinging one of them back as the men row desperately over a surging wave (see below), while Polyphemus is standing at the top of a cliff in Jean-Léon Gérôme&#x27;s painting of 1902. He stands poised, having already thrown one stone, which barely misses the ship. The reason for his rage is depicted in J. M. W. Turner&#x27;s painting, &quot;Ulysses Deriding Polyphemus&quot; (1829). Here the ship sails forward as the sun breaks free of clouds low on the horizon. The giant himself is an indistinct shape barely distinguished from the woods and smoky atmosphere high above.

===Possible origins===
Folktales similar to that of Homer&#x27;s Polyphemus are a widespread phenomenon throughout the ancient world. In 1857, Wilhelm Grimm collected versions in Serbian, Romanian, Estonian, Finnish, Russian, German, and others; versions in Basque, Sámi, Lithuanian, Gascon, Syriac, and Celtic are also known. More than two hundred different versions have been identified, from around twenty five nations, covering a geographic region extending from Iceland, Ireland, England, Portugal and Africa to Arabia, Turkey, Russia, and Korea. The consensus of current modern scholarship is that these &quot;Polyphemus legends&quot; preserve traditions predating Homer.

An example of such a story is one from Georgia, in the Caucasus, which describes several brothers held prisoner by a giant one-eyed shepherd called &quot;One-eye&quot;. After all but two of the brothers are roasted on a spit and eaten, the remaining two take the spit, heat it red hot, and stab it into the giant&#x27;s eye. As One-eye let his flock out of their pen, he felt each sheep as it passed between his legs, but the two brothers were able to escape by covering themselves with a sheepskin.

==Polyphemus and Galatea==

===Ancient sources===
====Philoxenus of Cythera====
Writing more than three centuries after the Odyssey is thought to have been composed, Philoxenus of Cythera took up the myth of Polyphemus in his poem &quot;Cyclops&quot; or &quot;Galatea&quot;. The poem was written to be performed as a dithyramb, of which only fragments have survived, and was perhaps the first to provide a female love interest for the Cyclops. The object of Polyphemus&#x27; romantic desire is a sea nymph named Galatea. In the poem, Polyphemus is not a cave dwelling, monstrous brute, as in the &quot;Odyssey&quot;, but instead he is rather like Odysseus himself in his vision of the world: He has weaknesses, he is adept at literary criticism, and he understands people.

The date of composition for the &quot;Cyclops&quot; is not precisely known, but it must be prior to 388 BC, when Aristophanes parodied it in his comedy &quot;Plutus&quot; (&quot;Wealth&quot;); and probably after 406 BC, when Dionysius I became tyrant of Syracuse. Philoxenus lived in that city and was the court poet of Dionysius I. According to ancient commentators, either because of his frankness regarding Dionysius&#x27; poetry, or because of a conflict with the tyrant over a female aulos player named Galatea, Philoxenus was imprisoned in the quarries and had there composed his &quot;Cyclops&quot; in the manner of a &quot;Roman à clef&quot;, where the poem&#x27;s characters, Polyphemus, Odysseus and Galatea, were meant to represent Dionysius, Philoxenus, and the aulos-player. Philoxenus had his Polyphemus perform on the cithara, a professional lyre requiring great skill. The Cyclops playing such a sophisticated and fashionable instrument would have been quite a surprising juxtaposition for Philoxenus&#x27; audience.

Philoxenus&#x27; &quot;Cyclops&quot; is also referred to in Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;Poetics&quot; in a section that discusses representations of people in tragedy and comedy, citing as comedic examples the &quot;Cyclops&quot; of both Timotheus and Philoxenus.

====Aristophanes====

The text of Aristophanes&#x27; last extant play &quot;Plutus&quot; (&quot;Wealth&quot;) has survived with almost all of its choral odes missing. What remains shows Aristophanes (as he does to some extent in all his plays) parodying a contemporary literary work — in this case Philoxenus&#x27; &quot;Cyclops&quot;. While making fun of literary aspects of Philoxenus&#x27; dithyramb, Aristophanes is at the same time commenting on musical developments occurring in the fourth century BC, developing themes that run through the whole play. It also contains lines and phrases taken directly from the &quot;Cyclops&quot;.

The slave Cario, tells the chorus that his master has brought home with him the god Wealth, and because of this they will all now be rich. The chorus wants to dance for joy, so Cario takes the lead by parodying Philoxenus&#x27; &quot;Cyclops&quot;. As a solo performer leading a chorus that sings and dances, Cario recreates the form of a dithyramb. He first casts himself in the role of Polyphemus while assigning to the chorus the roles of sheep and goats, at the same time imitating the sound of a lyre: &quot;And now I wish — threttanello! — to imitate the Cyclops and, swinging my feet to and fro like this, to lead you in the dance. But come on, children, shout and shout again the songs of bleating sheep and smelly goats.&quot; The chorus, however, does not want to play sheep and goats, they would rather be Odysseus and his men, and they threaten to blind Cario (as had Odysseus the drunken Cyclops) with a wooden stake.

====Hellenistic pastoral poets====
The romantic element, originated by Philoxenus, was revived by later Hellenistic poets, including Theocritus, Callimachus, Hermesianax, and Bion of Smyrna.

Theocritus is credited with creating the genre of pastoral poetry. His works are titled &quot;Idylls&quot; and of these Idyll XI tells the story of the Cyclops&#x27; love for Galatea. Though the character of Polyphemus derives from Homer, there are notable differences. Where Homer&#x27;s Cyclops was beastly and wicked, Theocritus&#x27; is absurd, lovesick and comic. Polyphemus loves the sea nymph Galatea, but she rejects him because of his ugliness. However, in a borrowing from Philoxenus&#x27; poem, Polyphemus has discovered that music will heal lovesickness, and so he plays the panpipes and sings of his woes, for &quot;I am skilled in piping as no other Cyclops here&quot;. His longing is to overcome the antithetic elements that divide them, he of earth and she of water:


The love of the mismatched pair was later taken up by other pastoral poets. The same trope of music being the cure for love was introduced by Callimachus in his Epigram 47: &quot;How excellent was the charm that Polyphemus discovered for the lover. By Earth, the Cyclops was no fool!&quot; A fragment of a lost idyll by Bion also portrays Polyphemus declaring his undying love for Galatea. Referring back to this, an elegy on Bion&#x27;s death that was once attributed to Moschus takes the theme further in a piece of hyperbole. Where Polyphemus had failed, the poet declares, Bion&#x27;s greater artistry had won Galatea&#x27;s heart, drawing her from the sea to tend his herds. This reflected the situation in Idyll VI of Theocritus. There two herdsmen engage in a musical competition, one of them playing the part of Polyphemus, who asserts that since he has adopted the ruse of ignoring Galatea, she has now become the one who pursues him.

====Latin poets====
The successful outcome of Polyphemus&#x27; love was also alluded to in the course of a 1st-century BC love elegy on the power of music by the Latin poet Propertius. Listed among the examples he mentions is that &quot;Even Galatea, it&#x27;s true, below wild Etna, wheeled her brine-wet horses, Polyphemus, to your songs.&quot; The division of contrary elements between the land-based monster and the sea nymph, lamented in Theocritus&#x27; Idyll 11, is brought into harmony by this means.

While Ovid&#x27;s treatment of the story that he introduced into the &quot;Metamorphoses&quot; is reliant on the idylls of Theocritus, it is complicated by the introduction of Acis, who has now become the focus of Galatea&#x27;s love.
There is also a reversion to the Homeric vision of the hulking monster, whose attempt to play the tender shepherd singing love songs is made a source of humour by Galatea:

In his own character, too, Polyphemus mentions the transgression of heavenly laws that once characterised his actions and is now overcome by Galatea: &quot;I, who scorn Jove and his heaven and his piercing lightning bolt, submit to you alone.&quot;

Galatea listens to the love song of Polyphemus while she and Acis lie hidden by a rock. In his song, Polyphemus scolds her for not loving him in return, offers her rustic gifts and points out what he considers his best feature — the single eye that is, he boasts, the size of a great shield. But when Polyphemus discovers the hiding place of the lovers, he becomes enraged with jealousy. Galatea, terrified, dives into the ocean, while the Cyclops wrenches off a piece of the mountain and crushes Acis with it. But on her return, Galatea changes her dead lover into the spirit of the Sicilian river Acis.

====First-century AD art====
That the story sometimes had a more successful outcome for Polyphemus is also attested in the arts. In one of the murals rescued from the site of Pompeii, Polyphemus is pictured seated on a rock with a cithara (rather than a syrinx) by his side, holding out a hand to receive a love letter from Galatea, which is carried by a winged Cupid riding on a dolphin.

In another fresco, also dating from the 1st century AD, the two stand locked in a naked embrace (see below). From their union came the ancestors of various wild and war-like races. According to some accounts, the Celts (Galati in Latin, Γάλλοi in Greek) were descended from their son Galatos, while Appian credited them with three children, Celtus, Illyrius and Galas, from whom descend the Celts, the Illyrians and the Gauls respectively.

====Lucian====
There are indications that Polyphemus&#x27; courtship also had a more successful outcome in one of the dialogues of Lucian of Samosata. There Doris, one of Galatea&#x27;s sisters, spitefully congratulates her on her love conquest and she defends Polyphemus. From the conversation, one understands that Doris is chiefly jealous that her sister has a lover. Galatea admits that she does not love Polyphemus but is pleased to have been chosen by him in preference to all her companions.

====Nonnus====
That their conjunction was fruitful is also implied in a later Greek epic from the turn of the 5th century AD. In the course of his &quot;Dionysiaca&quot;, Nonnus gives an account of the wedding of Poseidon and Beroe, at which the Nereid &quot;Galatea twangled a marriage dance and restlessly twirled in capering step, and she sang the marriage verses, for she had learnt well how to sing, being taught by Polyphemos with a shepherd&#x27;s syrinx.&quot;

===Later European interpretations===
====Literature and music====
During Renaissance and Baroque times Ovid&#x27;s story emerged again as a popular theme. In Spain Luis de Góngora y Argote wrote the much admired narrative poem, &quot;Fábula de Polifemo y Galatea&quot;, published in 1627. It is particularly noted for its depiction of landscape and for the sensual description of the love of Acis and Galatea. It was written in homage to an earlier and rather shorter narrative with the same title by Luis Carillo y Sotomayor (1611). The story was also given operatic treatment in the very popular zarzuela of Antoni Lliteres Carrió (1708). The atmosphere here is lighter and enlivened by the inclusion of the clowns Momo and Tisbe.

In France the story was condensed to the fourteen lines of Tristan L&#x27;Hermite&#x27;s sonnet &quot;Polyphème en furie&quot; (1641). In it the giant expresses his fury upon viewing the loving couple, ultimately throwing the huge rock that kills Acis and even injures Galatea. Later in the century, Jean-Baptiste Lully composed his opera &quot;Acis et Galatée&quot; (1686) on the theme.
In Italy Giovanni Bononcini composed the one-act opera &quot;Polifemo&quot; (1703). Shortly afterwards George Frideric Handel worked in that country and composed the cantata &quot;Aci, Galatea e Polifemo&quot; (1708), laying as much emphasis on the part of Polifemo as on the lovers. Written in Italian, Polifemo&#x27;s deep bass solo &quot;Fra l&#x27;ombre e gl&#x27;orrori&quot; (From horrid shades) establishes his character from the start. After Handel&#x27;s move to England, he gave the story a new treatment in his pastoral opera &quot;Acis and Galatea&quot; with an English libretto provided by John Gay. Initially composed in 1718, the work went through many revisions and was later to be given updated orchestrations by both Mozart and Mendelssohn. As a pastoral work it is suffused with Theocritan atmosphere but largely centres on the two lovers. When Polyphemus declares his love in the lyric &quot;O ruddier than the cherry&quot;, the effect is almost comic. Handel&#x27;s rival for a while on the London scene, Nicola Porpora, also made the story the subject of his opera &quot;Polifemo&quot; (1735).

Later in the century Joseph Haydn composed &quot;Acide e Galatea&quot; (1763) as his first opera while in Vienna. Designed for an imperial wedding, it was given a happy ending centred on the transformation scene after the murder of Acis as the pair declare their undying love. Johann Gottlieb Naumann was to turn the story into a comic opera, &quot;Aci e Galatea&quot;, with the subtitle &quot;i ciclopi amanti&quot; (the amorous cyclops). The work was first performed in Dresden in 1801 and its plot was made more complicated by giving Polifemo a companion, Orgonte. There were also two other lovers, Dorinda and Lisia, with Orgonte Lisia&#x27;s rival for Dorinda&#x27;s love.

After John Gay&#x27;s libretto in Britain, it was not until the 19th century that the subject was given further poetical treatment. In 1819 appeared &quot;The Death of Acis&quot; by Bryan Procter, writing under the name of Barry Cornwall. A blank verse narrative with lyric episodes, it celebrates the musicianship of Polyphemus, which draws the lovers to expose themselves from their hiding place in a cave and thus brings about the death of Acis. At the other end of the century, there was Alfred Austin&#x27;s dramatic poem &quot;Polyphemus&quot;, which is set after the murder and transformation of the herdsman. The giant is tortured by hearing the happy voices of Galatea and Acis as they pursue their love duet. Shortly afterwards Albert Samain wrote the 2-act verse drama &quot;Polyphème&quot; with the additional character of Lycas, Galatea&#x27;s younger brother. In this the giant is humanised; sparing the lovers when he discovers them, he blinds himself and wades to his death in the sea. The play was first performed posthumously in 1904 with incidental music by Raymond Bonheur. On this the French composer Jean Cras based his operatic &#x27;lyric tragedy&#x27; &quot;Polyphème&quot;, composed in 1914 and first performed in 1922. Cras took Samain&#x27;s text almost unchanged, subdividing the play&#x27;s two acts into four and cutting a few lines from Polyphemus&#x27; final speech.

There have also been two Spanish musical items that reference Polyphemus&#x27; name. Reginald Smith Brindle&#x27;s four fragments for guitar, &quot;El Polifemo de Oro&quot; (1956), takes its title from Federico García Lorca&#x27;s poem, &quot;The riddle of the guitar&quot;. That speaks of six dancing maidens (the guitar strings) entranced by &#x27;a golden Polyphemus&#x27; (the one-eyed sound-hole). The Spanish composer Andres Valero Castells takes the inspiration for his &quot;Polifemo i Galatea&quot; from Gongora&#x27;s work. Originally written for brass band in 2001, he rescored it for orchestra in 2006.

====Painting and sculpture====
Paintings that include Polyphemus in the story of Acis and Galatea can be grouped according to their themes. Most notably the story takes place within a pastoral landscape in which the figures are almost incidental. This is particularly so in Nicolas Poussin&#x27;s 1649 &quot;Landscape with Polyphemus&quot; (see gallery below) in which the lovers play a minor part in the foreground. To the right, Polyphemus merges with a distant mountain top on which he plays his pipes. In an earlier painting by Poussin from 1630 (now housed at the Dublin National Gallery) the couple are among several embracing figures in the foreground, shielded from view of Polyphemus, who is playing his flute higher up the slope. Another variation on the theme was painted by Pietro Dandini during this period.
An earlier fresco by Giulio Romano from 1528 seats Polyphemus against a rocky foreground with a lyre in his raised right hand. The lovers can just be viewed through a gap in the rock that gives onto the sea at the lower right. Corneille Van Clève (1681) represents a seated Polyphemus in his sculpture, except that in his version it is pipes that the giant holds in his lowered hand. Otherwise he has a massive club held across his body and turns to the left to look over his shoulder.

Other paintings take up the Theocritan theme of the pair divided by the elements with which they are identified, land and water. There are a series of paintings, often titled &quot;The Triumph of Galatea&quot;, in which the nymph is carried through the sea by her Nereid sisters, while a minor figure of Polyphemus serenades her from the land. Typical examples of this were painted by François Perrier, Giovanni Lanfranco and Jean-Baptiste van Loo.

A whole series of paintings by Gustave Moreau make the same point in a variety of subtle ways. The giant spies on Galatea through the wall of a sea grotto or emerges from a cliff to adore her sleeping figure (see below). Again, Polyphemus merges with the cliff where he meditates in the same way that Galatea merges with her element within the grotto in the painting at Musée d&#x27;Orsay. The visionary interpretation of the story also finds its echo in Odilon Redon&#x27;s 1913 painting &quot;The Cyclops&quot; in which the giant towers over the slope on which Galatea sleeps.

French sculptors have also been responsible for some memorable versions. Auguste Ottin&#x27;s separate figures are brought together in an 1866 fountain in the Luxembourg Garden. Above is crouched the figure of Polyphemus in weathered bronze, peering down at the white marble group of Acis and Galatea embracing below (see above). A little later Auguste Rodin made a series of statues, centred on Polyphemus. Originally modelled in clay around 1888 and later cast in bronze, they may have been inspired by Ottin&#x27;s work.

A final theme is the rage that succeeds the moment of discovery. That is portrayed in earlier paintings of Polyphemus casting a rock at the fleeing lovers, such as those by Annibale Carracci, Lucas Auger and Carle van Loo. Jean-François de Troy&#x27;s 18th-century version combines discovery with aftermath as the giant perched above the lovers turns to wrench up a rock.

==Artistic depictions of Polyphemus==
===Polyphemus and Odysseus===
===Polyphemus as lover===
==Other uses==
Polyphemus is mentioned in the &quot;Apprentice&quot; chapter of Albert Pike&#x27;s &quot;Morals and Dogma&quot; (1871), as, within Scottish Rite Freemasonry, Polyphemus is regarded as a symbol for a civilization that harms itself using ill directed blind force.

The Polyphemus moth is so named because of the large eyespots in the middle of the hind wings.

A species of burrowing tortoise, &quot;Gopherus polyphemus&quot;, is named after Polyphemus because of their both using subterranean retreats.

In folkloristics, the episode of the blinding of Polyphemus is also known as &quot;Polyphemsage&quot; and classified in the Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index as ATU 1137, &quot;The Ogre Blinded (Polyphemus)&quot;.

==See also==
* Telemus
* Cyclopean Isles

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
===General references===
* Aristotle, &quot;Poetics&quot; in &quot;Aristotle in 23 Volumes&quot;, Vol. 23, translated by W.H. Fyfe. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1932. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hackman, O. &quot;Die Polyphemsage in der Volksüberlieferung&quot;. Herlsingfors: Frenckellska tryckeri-aktiebolaget, 1904. Retrieved 14 March 2022.
==Further reading==
* 
* Conrad, JoAnn. &quot;Polyphem (AaTh 1135–1137)&quot;. In: &quot;Enzyklopädie des Märchens Online&quot;. Edited by Rolf Wilhelm Brednich, Heidrun Alzheimer, Hermann Bausinger, Wolfgang Brückner, Daniel Drascek, Helge Gerndt, Ines Köhler-Zülch, Klaus Roth and Hans-Jörg Uther. Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2016 [2002]. (in German)
* d&#x27;Huy, Julien. &quot;Le conte-type de Polyphème: essai de reconstitution phylogénétique&quot;. In: &quot;Mythologie française&quot;, SMF, 2012, pp. 47–59. ffhalshs-00734458f
* d&#x27;Huy, Julien (2015). &quot;Polyphemus, a Palaeolithic Tale?&quot; In: &quot;The Retrospective Methods Network Newsletter&quot;. Winter 2014–2015, 9: 43–64.
* d&#x27;Huy, Julien (2017). &quot;Polyphème en Amérique&quot;. In: &quot;Mythologie française&quot; 269: 9–11.
* d&#x27;Huy, Julien (2019). &quot;Du nouveau sur Polyphème&quot;. In: &quot;Mythologie française&quot;, 277: 15-18.
* Montgomery, J. E. &quot;Al-Sindibād and Polyphemus. Reflections on the Genesis of an Archetype&quot;. In: &quot;Myths, historical archetypes and symbolic figures in Arabic literature: towards a new hermeneutic approach&quot;. Proceedings of the International Symposium in Beirut, June 25–30, 1996. Edited by Angelika Neuwirth, Birgit Embaló, Sebastian Günther, Maher Jarrar. Stuttgart [u.a.]: Steiner [in Komm.], 1999. pp. 437–466.
* Mundy, C. S. &quot;Polyphemus and Tepegöz&quot;. In: &quot;Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies&quot;, University of London 18, no. 2 (1956): 279–302. http://www.jstor.org/stable/609984.
* 
==External links==

* Polyphemus and Galatea depicted in statues with a golden harpsichord by Michele Todini, Rome, 1675 at The Metropolitan Museum of Art

Specific artworks discussed above
* Polyphemus standing at the top of a cliff, Jean-Léon Gérôme, 1902, at Wikipaintings
* &quot;Odysseus Deriding Polyphemus&quot;, J.M.W. Turner, 1829, at Wikipaintings
* Galatea Acis e Polifemo, Pietro Dandini, c. 1630, at Art Value 
* fresco, Giulio Romano, 1528, at Webalice 
* Polyphemus with a massive club, Corneille Van Clève, 1681, at Web Gallery of Art
* &quot;The Triumph of Galatea&quot;, Francois Perrier, at Web Gallery of Art
* &quot;The Triumph of Galatea&quot;, Giovanni Lanfranco, Art Clon
* The giant spies on Galatea, Gustave Moreau, at Muian
* Polyphemus meditates, at French Government culture site
* statue of Polyphemus, Auguste Rodin, 1888, at French Government culture site
* A wrathful Polyphemus, Annibale Carracci, at Web Gallery of Art
* A wrathful Polyphemus, Lucas Auger, at French Government culture site
* A wrathful Polyphemus, Carle van Loo, at First Art Gallery
* A wrathful Polyphemus, Jean-Francois de Troy, 18th-century, at Tribes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193567" start="0" end="10" title="Polyphemus" label="Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="49" end="57" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q843514" start="62" end="68" title="Thoosa" label="Thoosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="72" end="87" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="100" end="108" title="Cyclopes" label="Cyclopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="122" end="127" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="141" end="148" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050848" start="372" end="382" title="satyr play" label="satyr play"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="386" end="395" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294184" start="469" end="477" title="Pederasty in ancient Greece" label="pederast"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628788" start="595" end="602" title="Acis and Galatea" label="Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="837" end="848" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="996" end="1004" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="1074" end="1084" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306262" start="1275" end="1287" title="Xenia (Greek)" label="usual custom"/>
<link wikidata="Q815825" start="1291" end="1302" title="hospitality" label="hospitality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306262" start="1646" end="1656" title="xenia (Greek)" label="guest-gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112088" start="1697" end="1702" title="Outis" label="Οὖτις"/>
<link wikidata="Q735766" start="2454" end="2460" title="hubris" label="hubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="2535" end="2543" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206121" start="2688" end="2695" title="Cyclops (play)" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="2730" end="2739" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294184" start="2942" end="2950" title="Pederasty in ancient Greece" label="pederast"/>
<link wikidata="Q163709" start="3047" end="3052" title="satyr" label="satyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q464091" start="3053" end="3060" title="Silenus" label="Silenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="3111" end="3121" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="3125" end="3131" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q131588" start="3154" end="3162" title="Ganymede (mythology)" label="Ganymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="3471" end="3477" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="3492" end="3498" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q930198" start="3587" end="3599" title="Achaemenides" label="Achaemenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="4708" end="4718" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="4733" end="4741" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="4745" end="4752" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276089" start="4842" end="4862" title="Sperlonga sculptures" label="Sperlonga sculptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="4893" end="4901" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="5032" end="5040" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="5042" end="5046" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q272777" start="5054" end="5074" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q270658" start="5129" end="5143" title="Jacob Jordaens" label="Jacob Jordaens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5220" end="5225" title="#Artistic depictions of Polyphemus" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q109061" start="5318" end="5328" title="Guido Reni" label="Guido Reni"/>
<link wikidata="Q213973" start="5689" end="5722" title="Johann Heinrich Wilhelm Tischbein" label="Johann Heinrich Wilhelm Tischbein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5781" end="5786" title="#Artistic depictions of Polyphemus" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q123071" start="5790" end="5804" title="Arnold Böcklin" label="Arnold Böcklin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5935" end="5940" title="#Artistic depictions of Polyphemus" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q212499" start="5997" end="6013" title="Jean-Léon Gérôme" label="Jean-Léon Gérôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="6159" end="6174" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003071" start="6198" end="6225" title="Ulysses Deriding Polyphemus" label="Ulysses Deriding Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714" start="6575" end="6588" title="Wilhelm Grimm" label="Wilhelm Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="6611" end="6618" title="Serbian (language)" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="6620" end="6628" title="Romanian (language)" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="6630" end="6638" title="Estonian (language)" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="6640" end="6647" title="Finnish (language)" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="6649" end="6656" title="Russian (language)" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="6658" end="6664" title="German (language)" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="6690" end="6696" title="Basque (language)" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="6698" end="6702" title="Sámi people" label="Sámi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="6704" end="6714" title="Lithuanian (language)" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35735" start="6716" end="6722" title="Gascon (language)" label="Gascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="6724" end="6730" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="6736" end="6742" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="7150" end="7157" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="7166" end="7174" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="7736" end="7743" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q138664" start="7778" end="7799" title="Philoxenus of Cythera" label="Philoxenus of Cythera"/>
<link wikidata="Q262533" start="7929" end="7938" title="dithyramb" label="dithyramb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757460" start="8124" end="8131" title="Galatea (mythology)" label="Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="8499" end="8511" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196456" start="8544" end="8550" title="Plutus (play)" label="Plutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332750" start="8611" end="8622" title="Dionysius I of Syracuse" label="Dionysius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="8640" end="8648" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q324299" start="8875" end="8880" title="aulos" label="aulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q512207" start="9017" end="9029" title="Roman à clef" label="Roman à clef"/>
<link wikidata="Q12634515" start="9219" end="9226" title="cithara" label="cithara"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="9243" end="9247" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="9480" end="9489" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q264714" start="9503" end="9510" title="Poetics (Aristotle)" label="Poetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q669691" start="9653" end="9662" title="Timotheus of Miletus" label="Timotheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="11385" end="11395" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="11397" end="11408" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613558" start="11410" end="11421" title="Hermesianax (poet)" label="Hermesianax"/>
<link wikidata="Q463364" start="11427" end="11441" title="Bion of Smyrna" label="Bion of Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="11444" end="11454" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q390001" start="11494" end="11509" title="pastoral poetry" label="pastoral poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989908" start="11564" end="11572" title="Idyll XI" label="Idyll XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="12031" end="12039" title="panpipes" label="panpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q957548" start="12701" end="12708" title="Moschus" label="Moschus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181036" start="12747" end="12756" title="hyperbole" label="hyperbole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5989905" start="12941" end="12949" title="Idyll VI" label="Idyll VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q8827" start="13347" end="13357" title="Propertius" label="Propertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="13690" end="13694" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="13759" end="13772" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="15123" end="15130" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q12634515" start="15179" end="15186" title="cithara" label="cithara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011" start="15310" end="15315" title="Cupid" label="Cupid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15439" end="15444" title="#Artistic depictions of Polyphemus" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="15551" end="15556" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q190368" start="15637" end="15643" title="Appian" label="Appian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477143" start="15679" end="15685" title="Celtus" label="Celtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258941" start="15687" end="15695" title="Illyrius" label="Illyrius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132258" start="15700" end="15705" title="Galas" label="Galas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="15729" end="15734" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="15740" end="15749" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="15758" end="15763" title="Gauls" label="Gauls"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="15910" end="15916" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q634519" start="16432" end="16442" title="Dionysiaca" label="Dionysiaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="16450" end="16456" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="16492" end="16500" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54230" start="16525" end="16531" title="Nereid" label="Nereid"/>
<link wikidata="Q218802" start="16734" end="16740" title="syrinx (instrument)" label="syrinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="16822" end="16833" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="16838" end="16845" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q219744" start="16913" end="16937" title="Luis de Góngora y Argote" label="Luis de Góngora y Argote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063775" start="16993" end="17001" title="Polifemo" label="Polifemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q148163" start="17347" end="17355" title="zarzuela" label="zarzuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q606020" start="17359" end="17381" title="Antoni Lliteres Carrió" label="Antoni Lliteres Carrió"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844154" start="17542" end="17564" title="Tristan L&amp;#x27;Hermite" label="Tristan L&amp;#x27;Hermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192" start="17783" end="17802" title="Jean-Baptiste Lully" label="Jean-Baptiste Lully"/>
<link wikidata="Q341496" start="17828" end="17843" title="Acis et Galatée" label="Acis et Galatée"/>
<link wikidata="Q315241" start="17880" end="17898" title="Giovanni Bononcini" label="Giovanni Bononcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="17974" end="17996" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626977" start="18051" end="18074" title="Aci, Galatea e Polifemo" label="Aci, Galatea e Polifemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q390001" start="18393" end="18401" title="pastoral" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q341482" start="18414" end="18430" title="Acis and Galatea (Handel)" label="Acis and Galatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q321660" start="18474" end="18482" title="John Gay" label="John Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="18606" end="18612" title="Mozart" label="Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="18617" end="18628" title="Mendelssohn" label="Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q312788" start="18897" end="18911" title="Nicola Porpora" label="Nicola Porpora"/>
<link wikidata="Q85793832" start="18964" end="18972" title="Polifemo (opera)" label="Polifemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="19009" end="19021" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q213927" start="19265" end="19288" title="Johann Gottlieb Naumann" label="Johann Gottlieb Naumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980322" start="19849" end="19862" title="Bryan Procter" label="Bryan Procter"/>
<link wikidata="Q575043" start="20159" end="20172" title="Alfred Austin" label="Alfred Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q982041" start="20405" end="20418" title="Albert Samain" label="Albert Samain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685459" start="20789" end="20798" title="Jean Cras" label="Jean Cras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226763" start="20850" end="20859" title="Polyphème" label="Polyphème"/>
<link wikidata="Q4424894" start="21153" end="21175" title="Reginald Smith Brindle" label="Reginald Smith Brindle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41408" start="21270" end="21291" title="Federico García Lorca" label="Federico García Lorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="21958" end="21973" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22037" end="22042" title="#Artistic depictions of Polyphemus" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018379" start="22253" end="22276" title="Dublin National Gallery" label="Dublin National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382675" start="22470" end="22484" title="Pietro Dandini" label="Pietro Dandini"/>
<link wikidata="Q215305" start="22526" end="22539" title="Giulio Romano (painter)" label="Giulio Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997461" start="22732" end="22751" title="Corneille Van Clève" label="Corneille Van Clève"/>
<link wikidata="Q82566" start="23377" end="23393" title="François Perrier (painter)" label="François Perrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q447730" start="23395" end="23413" title="Giovanni Lanfranco" label="Giovanni Lanfranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q542541" start="23418" end="23439" title="Jean-Baptiste van Loo" label="Jean-Baptiste van Loo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203828" start="23473" end="23487" title="Gustave Moreau" label="Gustave Moreau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23655" end="23660" title="#Artistic depictions of Polyphemus" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q154349" start="23897" end="23909" title="Odilon Redon" label="Odilon Redon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793426" start="23937" end="23948" title="The Cyclops (Redon)" label="The Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q766841" start="24095" end="24108" title="Auguste Ottin" label="Auguste Ottin"/>
<link wikidata="Q309458" start="24181" end="24198" title="Luxembourg Garden" label="Luxembourg Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q30755" start="24367" end="24380" title="Auguste Rodin" label="Auguste Rodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824" start="24720" end="24737" title="Annibale Carracci" label="Annibale Carracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q686597" start="24755" end="24768" title="Carle van Loo" label="Carle van Loo"/>
<link wikidata="Q707729" start="24770" end="24791" title="Jean-François de Troy" label="Jean-François de Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q366639" start="25094" end="25105" title="Albert Pike" label="Albert Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758845" start="25297" end="25312" title="Antheraea polyphemus" label="Polyphemus moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q914338" start="25428" end="25447" title="Gopherus polyphemus" label="Gopherus polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="25536" end="25549" title="folkloristics" label="folkloristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q301545" start="25657" end="25683" title="Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index" label="Aarne-Thompson-Uther Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297463" start="25756" end="25763" title="Telemus" label="Telemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q245578" start="25766" end="25781" title="Cyclopean Isles" label="Cyclopean Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="25938" end="25947" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q835023" start="25955" end="25962" title="Poetics" label="Poetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="28025" end="28055" title="The Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="The Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23915" wikidata="Q5146" url="?curid=23915" title="Portuguese language">
<text>Portuguese ( or ) is a Western Romance language of the Indo-European language family originating from the Iberian Peninsula of Europe. It is the official language of Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal and São Tomé and Príncipe, and has co-official language status in East Timor, Equatorial Guinea and Macau. Portuguese-speaking people or nations are known as Lusophone (). As the result of expansion during colonial times, a cultural presence of Portuguese speakers is also found around the world. Portuguese is part of the Ibero-Romance group that evolved from several dialects of Vulgar Latin in the medieval Kingdom of Galicia and the County of Portugal, and has kept some Celtic phonology.

With approximately 236 million native speakers and 27 million second language speakers, Portuguese has approximately 263.8 million total speakers. It is usually listed as the fifth-most spoken native language, the third-most spoken European language in the world in terms of native speakers and the second-most spoken Romance language in the world, surpassed only by Spanish. Being the second most widely spoken language in South America and the most-spoken language in the Southern Hemisphere, it is also the second-most spoken language, after Spanish, in Latin America, one of the 10 most spoken languages in Africa, and an official language of the European Union, Mercosul, the Organization of American States, the Economic Community of West African States, the African Union, and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, an international organization made up of all of the world&#x27;s officially Lusophone nations. In 1997, a comprehensive academic study ranked Portuguese as one of the 10 most influential languages in the world.

== History ==

When the Romans arrived in the Iberian Peninsula in 216 BC, they brought with them the Latin language, from which all Romance languages are descended. The language was spread by Roman soldiers, settlers, and merchants, who built Roman cities mostly near the settlements of previous Celtic civilizations established long before the Roman arrivals. For that reason, the language has kept a relevant substratum of much older, Atlantic European Megalithic Culture and Celtic culture, part of the Hispano-Celtic group of ancient languages. In Latin, the Portuguese language is known as &quot;lusitana&quot; or &quot;(latina) lusitanica&quot;, after the Lusitanians, a pre-Celtic tribe that lived in the territory of present-day Portugal and Spain that adopted the Latin language as Roman settlers moved in. This is also the origin of the &quot;luso-&quot; prefix, seen in terms like &quot;Lusophone&quot;.

Between AD 409 and AD 711, as the Roman Empire collapsed in Western Europe, the Iberian Peninsula was conquered by Germanic peoples of the Migration Period. The occupiers, mainly Suebi, Visigoths and Buri who originally spoke Germanic languages, quickly adopted late Roman culture and the Vulgar Latin dialects of the peninsula and over the next 300 years totally integrated into the local populations. Some Germanic words from that period are part of the Portuguese lexicon, together with place names, surnames, and first names. With the Umayyad conquest beginning in 711, Arabic became the administrative and common language in the conquered regions, but most of the remaining Christian population continued to speak a form of Romance called Mozarabic which introduced a few hundred words from Arabic, Persian, Turkish, and Berber. Like other Neo-Latin and European languages, Portuguese has adopted a significant number of loanwords from Greek, mainly in technical and scientific terminology. These borrowings occurred via Latin, and later during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.

Portuguese evolved from the medieval language spoken in the northwestern medieval Kingdom of Galicia, which the County of Portugal once formed part of. This variety has been retrospectively named Galician-Portuguese, Old Portuguese, or Old Galician by linguists. It is in Latin administrative documents of the 9th century that written Galician-Portuguese words and phrases are first recorded. This phase is known as Proto-Portuguese, which lasted from the 9th century until the 12th-century independence of the County of Portugal from the Kingdom of León, which had by then assumed reign over Galicia.

In the first part of the Galician-Portuguese period (from the 12th to the 14th century), the language was increasingly used for documents and other written forms. For some time, it was the language of preference for lyric poetry in Christian Hispania, much as Occitan was the language of the poetry of the troubadours in France. The Occitan digraphs &quot;lh&quot; and &quot;nh&quot;, used in its classical orthography, were adopted by the orthography of Portuguese, presumably by Gerald of Braga, a monk from Moissac, who became bishop of Braga in Portugal in 1047, playing a major role in modernizing written Portuguese using classical Occitan norms. Portugal became an independent kingdom in 1139, under King Afonso I of Portugal. In 1290, King Denis of Portugal created the first Portuguese university in Lisbon (the &quot;Estudos Gerais&quot;, which later moved to Coimbra) and decreed for Portuguese, then simply called the &quot;common language&quot;, to be known as the Portuguese language and used officially.

In the second period of Old Portuguese, in the 15th and 16th centuries, with the Portuguese discoveries, the language was taken to many regions of Africa, Asia, and the Americas. By the mid-16th century, Portuguese had become a &quot;lingua franca&quot; in Asia and Africa, used not only for colonial administration and trade but also for communication between local officials and Europeans of all nationalities. The Portuguese expanded across South America, across Africa to the Pacific Ocean, taking their language with them.

Its spread was helped by mixed marriages between Portuguese and local people and by its association with Roman Catholic missionary efforts, which led to the formation of creole languages such as that called Kristang in many parts of Asia (from the word &quot;cristão&quot;, &quot;Christian&quot;). The language continued to be popular in parts of Asia until the 19th century. Some Portuguese-speaking Christian communities in India, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, and Indonesia preserved their language even after they were isolated from Portugal.

The end of the Old Portuguese period was marked by the publication of the &quot;Cancioneiro Geral&quot; by Garcia de Resende, in 1516. The early times of Modern Portuguese, which spans the period from the 16th century to the present day, were characterized by an increase in the number of learned words borrowed from Classical Latin and Classical Greek because of the Renaissance (learned words borrowed from Latin also came from Renaissance Latin, the form of Latin during that time), which greatly enriched the lexicon. Most literate Portuguese speakers were also literate in Latin; and thus they easily adopted Latin words into their writing, and eventually speech, in Portuguese.

Spanish author Miguel de Cervantes once called Portuguese &quot;the sweet and gracious language&quot;, while the Brazilian poet Olavo Bilac described it as (&quot;the last flower of Latium, naïve and beautiful&quot;). Portuguese is also termed &quot;the language of Camões&quot;, after Luís Vaz de Camões, one of the greatest literary figures in the Portuguese language and author of the Portuguese epic poem &quot;The Lusiads&quot;.

In March 2006, the Museum of the Portuguese Language, an interactive museum about the Portuguese language, was founded in São Paulo, Brazil, the city with the greatest number of Portuguese language speakers in the world. The museum is the first of its kind in the world. In 2015 the museum was partially destroyed in a fire, but restored and reopened in 2020.

== Geographic distribution ==

Portuguese is spoken by approximately 200 million people in South America, 30 million in Africa, 15 million in Europe, 5 million in North America and 0.33 million in Asia and Oceania. It is the native language of the vast majority of the people in Portugal, Brazil and São Tomé and Príncipe (95%). Around 75% of the population of urban Angola speaks Portuguese natively, with approximately 85% fluent; these rates are lower in the countryside. Just over 50% (and rapidly increasing) of the population of Mozambique are native speakers of Portuguese, and 70% are fluent, according to the 2007 census. Portuguese is also spoken natively by 30% of the population in Guinea-Bissau, and a Portuguese-based creole is understood by all. Almost 50% of the East Timorese are fluent in Portuguese. No data is available for Cape Verde, but almost all the population is bilingual, and the monolingual population speaks the Portuguese-based Cape Verdean Creole. Portuguese is mentioned in the Constitution of South Africa as one of the languages spoken by communities within the country for which the Pan South African Language Board was charged with promoting and ensuring respect.

There are also significant Portuguese-speaking immigrant communities in many territories including Andorra (17.1%), Bermuda, Canada (400,275 people in the 2006 census), France (1,625,000 people), Japan (400,000 people), Jersey, Luxembourg (about 25% of the population as of 2021), Namibia (about 4–5% of the population, mainly refugees from Angola in the north of the country), Paraguay (10.7% or 636,000 people), Switzerland (550,000 in 2019, learning + mother tongue), Venezuela (554,000), and the United States (0.35% of the population or 1,228,126 speakers according to the 2007 American Community Survey).

In some parts of former Portuguese India, namely Goa and Daman and Diu, the language is still spoken by about 10,000 people. In 2014, an estimated 1,500 students were learning Portuguese in Goa. Approximately 2% of the people of Macau, China are fluent speakers of Portuguese. Additionally, the language is being very actively studied in the Chinese school system right up to the doctorate level. The Kristang people in Malaysia speak Kristang, a Portuguese-Malay creole; however, the Portuguese language itself is not widely spoken in the country.

=== Official status ===

The Community of Portuguese Language Countries
(in Portuguese &quot;Comunidade dos Países de Língua Portuguesa&quot;, with the Portuguese acronym CPLP) consists of the nine independent countries that have Portuguese as an official language: Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, East Timor, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal and São Tomé and Príncipe.

Equatorial Guinea made a formal application for full membership to the CPLP in June 2010, a status given only to states with Portuguese as an official language. Portuguese became its third official language (besides Spanish and French) in 2011, and in July 2014, the country was accepted as a member of the CPLP.

Portuguese is also one of the official languages of the Special Administrative Region of the People&#x27;s Republic of China of Macau (alongside Chinese) and of several international organizations, including Mercosul, the Organization of Ibero-American States, the Union of South American Nations, the Organization of American States, the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States, the Southern African Development Community and the European Union.

=== Lusophone countries ===
According to &quot;The World Factbook&quot;″s country population estimates for 2018, the population of each of the ten jurisdictions is as follows (by descending order):

The combined population of the entire Lusophone area was estimated at 300 million in January 2022. This number does not include the Lusophone diaspora, estimated at 10 million people (including 4.5 million Portuguese, 3 million Brazilians), although there are no official accurate figures for diasporic Portuguese speakers because a significant portion of these citizens are naturalized citizens born outside of Lusophone territory or are children of immigrants, and may have only a basic command of the language. Additionally, a large part of the diaspora is a part of the already-counted population of the Portuguese-speaking countries and territories, such as the high number of Brazilian and PALOP emigrant citizens in Portugal or the high number of Portuguese emigrant citizens in the PALOP and Brazil.

The Portuguese language therefore serves more than 250 million people daily, who have direct or indirect legal, juridical and social contact with it, varying from the only language used in any contact, to only education, contact with local or international administration, commerce and services or the simple sight of road signs, public information and advertising in Portuguese.

=== Portuguese as a foreign language ===
Portuguese is a mandatory subject in the school curriculum in Uruguay. Other countries where Portuguese is commonly taught in schools or where it has been introduced as an option include Venezuela, Zambia, the Republic of the Congo, Senegal, Namibia, Eswatini, South Africa, Ivory Coast, and Mauritius. In 2017, a project was launched to introduce Portuguese as a school subject in Zimbabwe. Also, according to Portugal&#x27;s Minister of Foreign Affairs, the language will be part of the school curriculum of a total of 32 countries by 2020. In such countries, Portuguese is spoken either as a native language by vast majorities due to their Portuguese colonial past or as a &quot;lingua franca&quot; in bordering and multilingual regions, such as on the Brazilian borders of Uruguay and Paraguay and in regions of Angola and Namibia. In many other countries, Portuguese is spoken by majorities as a second language. There remain communities of thousands of Portuguese (or Creole) first language speakers in Goa, Sri Lanka, Kuala Lumpur, Daman and Diu, and other areas due to Portuguese colonization. In East Timor, the number of Portuguese speakers is quickly increasing as Portuguese and Brazilian teachers are making great strides in teaching Portuguese in the schools all over the island. Additionally, there are many large Portuguese-speaking immigrant communities all over the world.

=== Future ===

According to estimates by UNESCO, Portuguese is the fastest-growing European language after English and the language has, according to the newspaper &quot;The Portugal News&quot; publishing data given from UNESCO, the highest potential for growth as an international language in southern Africa and South America. Portuguese is a globalized language spoken officially on five continents, and as a second language by millions worldwide.

Since 1991, when Brazil signed into the economic community of Mercosul with other South American nations, namely Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay, Portuguese is either mandatory, or taught, in the schools of those South American countries.

Although early in the 21st century, after Macau was returned to China and immigration of Brazilians of Japanese descent to Japan slowed down, the use of Portuguese was in decline in Asia, it is once again becoming a language of opportunity there, mostly because of increased diplomatic and financial ties with economically powerful Portuguese-speaking countries in the world.

===Current status and importance===
Portuguese, being a language spread on all continents, has official status in several international organizations. It is one of twenty official languages of the European Union, an official language of NATO, the Organization of American States (alongside Spanish, French and English), and one of eighteen official languages of the European Space Agency.

Portuguese is a working language in nonprofit organisations such as the Red Cross (alongside English, German, Spanish, French, Arabic and Russian), Amnesty International (alongside 32 other languages of which English is the most used, followed by Spanish, French, German, and Italian), and Médecins sans Frontières (used alongside English, Spanish, French and Arabic), in addition to being the official legal language in the African Court on Human and Peoples&#x27; Rights, also in Community of Portuguese Language Countries, an international organization formed essentially by lusophone countries.

== Dialects, accents and varieties ==

Modern Standard European Portuguese ( or ) is based on the Portuguese spoken in the area including and surrounding the cities of Coimbra and Lisbon, in central Portugal. Standard European Portuguese is also the preferred standard by the Portuguese-speaking African countries. As such, and despite the fact that its speakers are dispersed around the world, Portuguese has only two dialects used for learning: the European and the Brazilian. Some aspects and sounds found in many dialects of Brazil are exclusive to South America, and cannot be found in Europe. The same occur with the Santomean, Mozambican, Bissau-Guinean, Angolan and Cape Verdean dialects, being exclusive to Africa. See Portuguese in Africa.

Audio samples of some dialects and accents of Portuguese are available below. There are some differences between the areas but these are the best approximations possible. IPA transcriptions refer to the names in local pronunciation.

=== Portugal ===
# &quot;Micaelense (Açores)&quot; (São Miguel) – Azores.
# &quot;Alentejano&quot; – Alentejo (Alentejan Portuguese), with the Oliventine subdialect.
# &quot;Algarvio&quot; – Algarve (there is a particular dialect in a small part of western Algarve).
# &quot;Minhoto&quot; – Districts of Braga and Viana do Castelo (hinterland).
# &quot;Beirão&quot;; &quot;Alto-Alentejano&quot; – Central Portugal (hinterland).
# &quot;Beirão&quot; – Central Portugal.
# &quot;Estremenho&quot; – Regions of Coimbra and Lisbon (this is a disputed denomination, as Coimbra and is not part of &quot;Estremadura&quot;, and the Lisbon dialect has some peculiar features that are not only not shared with that of Coimbra, but also significantly distinct and recognizable to most native speakers from elsewhere in Portugal).
# &quot;Madeirense&quot; (Madeiran) – Madeira.
# &quot;Portuense&quot; – Regions of the district of Porto and parts of Aveiro.
# &quot;Transmontano&quot; – Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro.

Audio samples of some dialects and accents of Portuguese are available below. There are some differences between the areas but these are the best approximations possible. IPA transcriptions refer to the names in local pronunciation.

=== Brazil ===
# &quot;Caipira&quot; – Spoken in the states of São Paulo (most markedly on the countryside and rural areas); southern Minas Gerais, northern Paraná and southeastern Mato Grosso do Sul. Depending on the vision of what constitutes &quot;caipira&quot;, Triângulo Mineiro, border areas of Goiás and the remaining parts of Mato Grosso do Sul are included, and the frontier of &quot;caipira&quot; in Minas Gerais is expanded further northerly, though not reaching metropolitan Belo Horizonte. It is often said that &quot;caipira&quot; appeared by decreolization of the língua brasílica and the related língua geral paulista, then spoken in almost all of what is now São Paulo, a former lingua franca in most of the contemporary Centro-Sul of Brazil before the 18th century, brought by the &quot;bandeirantes&quot;, interior pioneers of Colonial Brazil, closely related to its northern counterpart Nheengatu, and that is why the dialect shows many general differences from other variants of the language. It has striking remarkable differences in comparison to other Brazilian dialects in phonology, prosody and grammar, often stigmatized as being strongly associated with a substandard variant, now mostly rural.
# &quot;Cearense&quot; or &quot;Costa norte&quot; – is a dialect spoken more sharply in the states of Ceará and Piauí. The variant of Ceará includes fairly distinctive traits it shares with the one spoken in Piauí, though, such as distinctive regional phonology and vocabulary (for example, a debuccalization process stronger than that of Portuguese, a different system of the vowel harmony that spans Brazil from &quot;fluminense&quot; and &quot;mineiro&quot; to &quot;amazofonia&quot; but is especially prevalent in &quot;nordestino&quot;, a very coherent coda sibilant palatalization as those of Portugal and Rio de Janeiro but allowed in fewer environments than in other accents of &quot;nordestino&quot;, a greater presence of dental stop palatalization to palato-alveolar in comparison to other accents of &quot;nordestino&quot;, among others, as well as a great number of archaic Portuguese words).
# &quot;Baiano&quot; – Found in Bahia and border regions with Goiás and Tocantins. Similar to &quot;nordestino&quot;, it has a very characteristic syllable-timed rhythm and the greatest tendency to pronounce unstressed vowels as open-mid and .
# &quot;Fluminense&quot; – A broad dialect with many variants spoken in the states of Rio de Janeiro, Espírito Santo and neighboring eastern regions of Minas Gerais. &quot;Fluminense&quot; formed in these previously &quot;caipira&quot;-speaking areas due to the gradual influence of European migrants, causing many people to distance their speech from their original dialect and incorporate new terms. &quot;Fluminense&quot; is sometimes referred to as &quot;carioca&quot;, however &quot;carioca&quot; is a more specific term referring to the accent of the Greater Rio de Janeiro area by speakers with a &quot;fluminense&quot; dialect.
# &quot;Gaúcho&quot; – in Rio Grande do Sul, similar to &quot;sulista&quot;. There are many distinct accents in Rio Grande do Sul, mainly due to the heavy influx of European immigrants of diverse origins who have settled in colonies throughout the state, and to the proximity to Spanish-speaking nations. The word &quot;gaúcho&quot; itself is a Spanish loanword into Portuguese, of obscure Indigenous Amerindian origins.
# &quot;Mineiro&quot; – Minas Gerais (but not prevalent in the Triângulo Mineiro). As with the &quot;fluminense&quot; area, its associated region was formerly a sparsely populated land where &quot;caipira&quot; was spoken, but the discovery of gold and gems made it the most prosperous Brazilian region, attracting Portuguese colonists, commoners from other parts of Brazil, and their African slaves. The south-southwestern, southeastern, and northern areas of the state each have fairly distinctive speech, actually approximating to &quot;caipira&quot;, &quot;fluminense&quot; (popularly and often pejoratively called &quot;carioca do brejo&quot;, &quot;marsh carioca&quot;), and &quot;baiano&quot; respectively. Belo Horizonte and the area surrounding it have a distinctive accent.
# &quot;Nordestino&quot; – more marked in the Sertão (7), where, in the 19th and 20th centuries and especially in the area including and surrounding the &quot;sertão&quot; (the dry land after Agreste) of Pernambuco and southern Ceará, it could sound less comprehensible to speakers of other Portuguese dialects than Galician or Rioplatense Spanish, and nowadays less distinctive from other variants in the metropolitan cities along the coasts. It can be divided in two regional variants, one that includes the northern Maranhão and southern of Piauí, and other that goes from Ceará to Alagoas.
# &quot;Nortista&quot; or &quot;amazofonia&quot; – Most of Amazon Basin states, i.e. Northern Brazil. Before the 20th century, most people from the &quot;nordestino&quot; area fleeing the droughts and their associated poverty settled here, so it has some similarities with the Portuguese dialect there spoken. The speech in and around the cities of Belém and Manaus has a more European flavor in phonology, prosody and grammar.
# &quot;Paulistano&quot; – Variants spoken around Greater São Paulo in its maximum definition and more easterly areas of São Paulo state, as well as perhaps &quot;educated speech&quot; from anywhere in the state of São Paulo (where it coexists with &quot;caipira&quot;). &quot;Caipira&quot; is the hinterland sociolect of much of the Central-Southern half of Brazil, nowadays conservative only in the rural areas and associated with them, that has a historically low prestige in cities as Rio de Janeiro, Curitiba, Belo Horizonte, and until some years ago, in São Paulo itself. Sociolinguistics, or what by times is described as &quot;linguistic prejudice&quot;, often correlated with classism, is a polemic topic in the entirety of the country since the times of Adoniran Barbosa. Also, the &quot;Paulistano&quot; accent was heavily influenced by the presence of immigrants in the city of São Paulo, especially the Italians.
# &quot;Sertanejo&quot; – Center-Western states, and also much of Tocantins and Rondônia. It is closer to &quot;mineiro&quot;, &quot;caipira&quot;, &quot;nordestino&quot; or &quot;nortista&quot; depending on the location.
# &quot;Sulista&quot; – The variants spoken in the areas between the northern regions of Rio Grande do Sul and southern regions of São Paulo state, encompassing most of southern Brazil. The city of Curitiba does have a fairly distinct accent as well, and a relative majority of speakers around and in Florianópolis also speak this variant (many speak &quot;florianopolitano&quot; or &quot;manezinho da ilha&quot; instead, related to the European Portuguese dialects spoken in Azores and Madeira). Speech of northern Paraná is closer to that of inland São Paulo.
# &quot;Florianopolitano&quot; – Variants heavily influenced by European Portuguese spoken in Florianópolis city (due to a heavy immigration movement from Portugal, mainly its insular regions) and much of its metropolitan area, Grande Florianópolis, said to be a continuum between those whose speech most resemble &quot;sulista&quot; dialects and those whose speech most resemble &quot;fluminense&quot; and European ones, called &quot;manezinho da ilha&quot;.
# &quot;Carioca&quot; – Not a dialect, but sociolects of the &quot;fluminense&quot; variant spoken in an area roughly corresponding to Greater Rio de Janeiro. It appeared after locals came in contact with the Portuguese aristocracy amidst the Portuguese royal family fled in the early 19th century. There is actually a continuum between Vernacular countryside accents and the &quot;carioca&quot; sociolect, and the educated speech (in Portuguese &quot;norma culta&quot;, which most closely resembles other Brazilian Portuguese standards but with marked recent Portuguese influences, the nearest ones among the country&#x27;s dialects along &quot;florianopolitano&quot;), so that not all people native to the state of Rio de Janeiro speak the said sociolect, but most &quot;carioca&quot; speakers will use the standard variant not influenced by it that is rather uniform around Brazil depending on context (emphasis or formality, for example).
# &quot;Brasiliense&quot; – used in Brasília and its metropolitan area. It is not considered a dialect, but more of a regional variant – often deemed to be closer to &quot;fluminense&quot; than the dialect commonly spoken in most of Goiás, &quot;sertanejo&quot;.
# &quot;Arco do desflorestamento&quot; or &quot;serra amazônica&quot; – Known in its region as the &quot;accent of the migrants&quot;, it has similarities with &quot;caipira&quot;, &quot;sertanejo&quot; and often &quot;sulista&quot; that make it differing from &quot;amazofonia&quot; (in the opposite group of Brazilian dialects, in which it is placed along &quot;nordestino&quot;, &quot;baiano&quot;, &quot;mineiro&quot; and &quot;fluminense&quot;). It is the most recent dialect, which appeared by the settlement of families from various other Brazilian regions attracted by the cheap land offer in recently deforested areas.
# &quot;Recifense&quot; – used in Recife and its metropolitan area.
# &quot;Amazônico Ocidental&quot; — used in the extreme Western Amazon region, namely: Southwestern Amazonas, including the region of Boca do Acre and throughout the State of Acre, which share important historical-cultural aspects, such as, once belonging to Peru-Bolivian Confederation, the First Amazon rubber cycle and Acre Time Zone, sociologically, is considered a homogenous region. Differing from the traditional Northern dialect, in which the phonetic realization of the &quot;s&quot; always has the sound of &quot;ch&quot;, in the Brazilian Western Amazon region, there will only be the sound of &quot;ch&quot; whose words the &quot;s&quot; are in the middle of the word, as examples; &quot;costa&quot;, &quot;festa&quot; or &quot;destino&quot;, as well as the one observed in dialect of the north coast. Within the Brazilian countryside, it is one of the few areas where the phonetic realization of &quot;r&quot; resembles those observed in the Carioca dialect (open), other examples where this phenomenon is observed: Brasília dialect and Belo Horizonte dialect.

, a pronoun meaning &quot;you&quot;, is used for educated, formal, and colloquial respectful speech in most Portuguese-speaking regions. In a few Brazilian states such as Rio Grande do Sul, Pará, among others, is virtually absent from the spoken language. Riograndense and European Portuguese normally distinguishes formal from informal speech by verbal conjugation. Informal speech employs followed by second person verbs, formal language retains the formal , followed by the third person conjugation.

Conjugation of verbs in has three different forms in Brazil (verb &quot;to see&quot;: , in the traditional second person; , in the third person; and , in the innovative second person), the conjugation used in the Brazilian states of Pará, Santa Catarina and Maranhão being generally traditional second person, the kind that is used in other Portuguese-speaking countries and learned in Brazilian schools.

The predominance of Southeastern-based media products has established as the pronoun of choice for the second person singular in both writing and multimedia communications. However, in the city of Rio de Janeiro, the country&#x27;s main cultural center, the usage of has been expanding ever since the end of the 20th century, being most frequent among youngsters, and a number of studies have also shown an increase in its use in a number of other Brazilian dialects.

=== Other countries and dependencies ===
*  – &quot;Angolano&quot; (Angolan Portuguese)
*  – &quot;Cabo-verdiano&quot; (Cape Verdean Portuguese)
*  – &quot;Timorense&quot; (East Timorese Portuguese)
*  – &quot;Damaense&quot; (Damanese Portuguese) and &quot;Goês&quot; (Goan Portuguese)
*  – &quot;Guineense&quot; (Guinean Portuguese)
*  – &quot;Macaense&quot; (Macanese Portuguese)
*  – &quot;Moçambicano&quot; (Mozambican Portuguese)
*  – &quot;Santomense&quot; (São Tomean Portuguese)
*  – &quot;Dialetos Portugueses do Uruguai (DPU)&quot;

Differences between dialects are mostly of accent and vocabulary, but between the Brazilian dialects and other dialects, especially in their most colloquial forms, there can also be some grammatical differences. The Portuguese-based creoles spoken in various parts of Africa, Asia, and the Americas are independent languages.

=== Characterization and peculiarities ===
Portuguese, like Catalan, preserves the stressed vowels of Vulgar Latin which became diphthongs in most other Romance languages; cf. Port., Cat., Sard. &quot;&quot;; Fr. &#x27;, Sp. &#x27;, It. &#x27;, Ro. &#x27;, from Lat. &#x27; (&quot;stone&quot;); or Port. &#x27;, Cat. &#x27;, Sard. &#x27;; Sp. &#x27;, It. &#x27;, Fr. &#x27;, Ro. &#x27;, from Lat. &#x27; (&quot;fire&quot;). Another characteristic of early Portuguese was the loss of intervocalic &quot;l&quot; and &quot;n&quot;, sometimes followed by the merger of the two surrounding vowels, or by the insertion of an epenthetic vowel between them: cf. Lat. &#x27; (&quot;to exit&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;to have&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;jail&quot;), Port. &#x27;, &#x27;, &quot;&quot;.

When the elided consonant was &quot;n&quot;, it often nasalized the preceding vowel: cf. Lat. &#x27; (&quot;hand&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;frog&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;good&quot;), Old Portuguese &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27; (Portuguese: &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27;). This process was the source of most of the language&#x27;s distinctive nasal diphthongs. In particular, the Latin endings &quot;-anem&quot;, &#x27; and &#x27; became &#x27; in most cases, cf. Lat. &#x27; (&quot;dog&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;brother&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;reason&quot;) with Modern Port. &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27;, and their plurals &quot;-anes&quot;, &quot;-anos&quot;, &quot;-ones&quot; normally became &quot;-ães&quot;, &quot;-ãos&quot;, &quot;-ões&quot;, cf. &quot;cães&quot;, &quot;irmãos&quot;, &quot;razões&quot;. This also occurs in the minority Swiss Romansh language in many equivalent words such as &quot;maun&quot; (&quot;hand&quot;), &quot;bun&quot; (&quot;good&quot;), or &quot;chaun&quot; (&quot;dog&quot;).

The Portuguese language is the only Romance language that preserves the clitic case mesoclisis: cf. (I&#x27;ll give thee), (I&#x27;ll love you), (I&#x27;ll contact them). Like Galician, it also retains the Latin synthetic pluperfect tense: (I had been), (I had lived), (you had lived). Romanian also has this tense, but uses the -s- form.

== Vocabulary ==


Most of the lexicon of Portuguese is derived, directly or through other Romance languages, from Latin. Nevertheless, because of its original Lusitanian and Celtic Gallaecian heritage, and the later participation of Portugal in the Age of Discovery, it has a relevant number of words from the ancient Hispano-Celtic group and adopted loanwords from other languages around the world.

A number of Portuguese words can still be traced to the pre-Roman inhabitants of Portugal, which included the Gallaeci, Lusitanians, Celtici and Cynetes. Most of these words derived from the Hispano-Celtic Gallaecian language of northwestern Iberia, and are very often shared with Galician since both languages have the same origin in the medieval language of Galician-Portuguese. A few of these words existed in Latin as loanwords from other Celtic sources, often Gaulish. Altogether these are over 3,000 words, verbs, toponymic names of towns, rivers, surnames, tools, lexicon linked to rural life and natural world.

In the 5th century, the Iberian Peninsula (the Roman Hispania) was conquered by the Germanic, Suebi and Visigoths. As they adopted the Roman civilization and language, however, these people contributed with some 500 
Germanic words to the lexicon. Many of these words are related to:
* warfare, such as &#x27;spur&#x27;, (&#x27;stake&#x27;), and (&#x27;war&#x27;), from Gothic &quot;*spaúra&quot;, &quot;*stakka&quot;, and &quot;*wirro&quot; respectively; 
* natural world, such as (&#x27;swine&#x27;) from &quot;*sweina&quot;, (&#x27;hawk&#x27;) from &quot;*gabilans&quot;, (&#x27;wave&#x27;) from &quot;*vigan&quot;;
* human emotions, such as or (&#x27;pride&#x27;, &#x27;proud&#x27;) from Old Germanic &quot;*urguol&quot;, and
* verbs like (&#x27;to craft, record, graft&#x27;) from &quot;*graba&quot; or (&#x27;to squeeze, quash, grind&#x27;) from Suebian &quot;*magōn&quot; or (&#x27;to shred&#x27;) from &quot;*harpō&quot;.

The Germanic languages influence also exists in toponymic surnames and patronymic surnames borne by Visigoth sovereigns and their descendants, and it dwells on placenames such as Ermesinde, Esposende and Resende where &quot;sinde&quot; and &quot;sende&quot; are derived from the Germanic &quot;sinths&quot; (&#x27;military expedition&#x27;) and in the case of Resende, the prefix &quot;re&quot; comes from Germanic &quot;reths&quot; (&#x27;council&#x27;). Other examples of Portuguese names, surnames and town names of Germanic toponymic origin include Henrique, Henriques, Vermoim, Mandim, Calquim, Baguim, Gemunde, Guetim, Sermonde and many more, are quite common mainly in the old Suebi and later Visigothic dominated regions, covering today&#x27;s Northern half of Portugal and Galicia.

Between the 9th and early 13th centuries, Portuguese acquired some 400 to 600 words from Arabic by influence of Moorish Iberia. They are often recognizable by the initial Arabic article &quot;a(l)-&quot;, and include common words such as (&#x27;village&#x27;) from الضيعة &quot;aḍ-ḍayʿa&quot;, (&#x27;lettuce&#x27;) from الخسة &quot;al-khassa&quot;, (&#x27;warehouse&#x27;) from المخزن &quot;al-makhzan&quot;, and (&#x27;olive oil&#x27;) from الزيت &quot;az-zayt&quot;.

Starting in the 15th century, the Portuguese maritime explorations led to the introduction of many loanwords from Asian languages. For instance, (&#x27;cutlass&#x27;) from Japanese &quot;katana&quot;, (&#x27;tea&#x27;) from Chinese &quot;chá&quot;, and &quot;canja&quot; (&#x27;chicken-soup, piece of cake&#x27;) from Malay.

From the 16th to the 19th centuries, because of the role of Portugal as intermediary in the Atlantic slave trade, and the establishment of large Portuguese colonies in Angola, Mozambique, and Brazil, Portuguese acquired several words of African and Amerind origin, especially names for most of the animals and plants found in those territories. While those terms are mostly used in the former colonies, many became current in European Portuguese as well. From Kimbundu, for example, came &quot;kifumate&quot; &gt; (&#x27;head caress&#x27;) (Brazil), &quot;kusula&quot; &gt; (&#x27;youngest child&#x27;) (Brazil), (&#x27;tropical wasp&#x27;) (Brazil), and &quot;kubungula&quot; &gt; (&#x27;to dance like a wizard&#x27;) (Angola). From South America came (&#x27;potato&#x27;), from Taino; and , from Tupi–Guarani &quot;naná&quot; and Tupi &quot;ibá cati&quot;, respectively (two species of pineapple), and (&#x27;popcorn&#x27;) from Tupi and (&#x27;toucan&#x27;) from Guarani &quot;tucan&quot;.

Finally, it has received a steady influx of loanwords from other European languages, especially French and English. These are by far the most important languages when referring to loanwords. There are many examples such as: / (&#x27;bracket&#x27;/&#x27;crochet&#x27;), (&#x27;jacket&#x27;), (&#x27;lipstick&#x27;), and / (&#x27;steak&#x27;/&#x27;slice&#x27;), (&#x27;street&#x27;), respectively, from French , , , , ; and (&#x27;steak&#x27;), , , /, , from English &quot;beef&quot;, &quot;football&quot;, &quot;revolver&quot;, &quot;stock&quot;, &quot;folklore.&quot;

Examples from other European languages: (&#x27;pasta&#x27;), (&#x27;pilot&#x27;), (&#x27;carriage&#x27;), and (&#x27;barrack&#x27;), from Italian , , , and ; (&#x27;hair lock&#x27;), (&#x27;wet-cured ham&#x27;) (in Portugal, in contrast with &quot;presunto&quot; &#x27;dry-cured ham&#x27; from Latin &quot;prae-exsuctus&quot; &#x27;dehydrated&#x27;) or (&#x27;canned ham&#x27;) (in Brazil, in contrast with non-canned, wet-cured (&quot;presunto cozido&quot;) and dry-cured (&quot;presunto cru&quot;)), or &quot;castelhano&quot; (&#x27;Castilian&#x27;), from Spanish &quot;melena&quot; (&#x27;mane&#x27;), &quot;fiambre&quot; and &quot;castellano.&quot;

== Classification and related languages ==

Portuguese belongs to the West Iberian branch of the Romance languages, and it has special ties with the following members of this group:
* Galician, Fala and &quot;portunhol do pampa&quot; (the way &quot;riverense&quot; and its sibling dialects are referred to in Portuguese), its closest relatives.
* Mirandese, Leonese, Asturian, Extremaduran and Cantabrian (Astur-Leonese languages). Mirandese is the only recognised regional language spoken in Portugal (beside Portuguese, the only official language in Portugal).
* Spanish and &quot;calão&quot; (the way &quot;caló&quot;, language of the Iberian Romani, is referred to in Portuguese).

Portuguese and other Romance languages (namely French and Italian) share considerable similarities in both vocabulary and grammar. Portuguese speakers will usually need some formal study before attaining strong comprehension in those Romance languages, and vice versa. However, Portuguese and Galician are fully mutually intelligible, and Spanish is considerably intelligible for lusophones, owing to their genealogical proximity and shared genealogical history as West Iberian (Ibero-Romance languages), historical contact between speakers and mutual influence, shared areal features as well as modern lexical, structural, and grammatical similarity (89%) between them.

Portuñol/Portunhol, a form of code-switching, has a more lively use and is more readily mentioned in popular culture in South America. Said code-switching is not to be confused with the Portuñol spoken on the borders of Brazil with Uruguay () and Paraguay (), and of Portugal with Spain (), that are Portuguese dialects spoken natively by thousands of people, which have been heavily influenced by Spanish.

Portuguese and Spanish are the only Ibero-Romance languages, and perhaps the only Romance languages with such thriving inter-language forms, in which visible and lively bilingual contact dialects and code-switching have formed, in which functional bilingual communication is achieved through attempting an approximation to the target foreign language (known as &#x27;Portuñol&#x27;) without a learned acquisition process, but nevertheless facilitates communication. There is an emerging literature focused on such phenomena (including informal attempts of standardization of the linguistic continua and their usage).

=== Galician-Portuguese in Spain ===

The closest relative of Portuguese is Galician, which is spoken in the autonomous community and historical nationality of Galicia (Spain). The two were part of a common dialect continuum during the Middle Ages, known today as Galician-Portuguese, but they have diverged especially in pronunciation and vocabulary due to the political separation of Portugal from Galicia. There is, however, still a linguistic continuity consisting of the variant of Galician referred to as &quot;galego-português baixo-limiao&quot;, which is spoken in several Galician and Portuguese villages within the transboundary biosphere reserve of Gerês-Xurés. It is &quot;considered a rarity, a living vestige of the medieval language that ranged from Cantabria to Mondego [...]&quot;.
As reported by UNESCO, due to the pressure of Spanish on the standard official version of Galician and centuries-old Castilianization, the Galician language was on the verge of disappearing.

According to the UNESCO philologist Tapani Salminen, the proximity to Portuguese protects Galician. The core vocabulary and grammar of Galician are noticeably closer to Portuguese than to those of Spanish. Within the EU, Galician, while not being a European Parliament official language, can be used and is in fact used by some European Parliament constituents due to its similarity with Portuguese. Galician like Portuguese, uses the future subjunctive, the personal infinitive, and the synthetic pluperfect. Mutual intelligibility estimated at 85% is excellent between Galicians and Portuguese. Despite political efforts in Spain to define them as separate languages, many linguists consider Galician and Portuguese to be co-dialects of the same language with regional variations.

Another member of the Galician-Portuguese group, most commonly thought of as a Galician dialect, is spoken in the Eonavian region in a western strip in Asturias and the westernmost parts of the provinces of León and Zamora, along the frontier with Galicia, between the Eo and Navia rivers (or more exactly Eo and Frexulfe rivers). It is called &quot;eonaviego&quot; or &quot;gallego-asturiano&quot; by its speakers.

The Fala language, known by its speakers as &quot;xalimés&quot;, &quot;mañegu&quot;, &quot;a fala de Xálima&quot; and &quot;chapurráu&quot; and in Portuguese as &quot;a fala de Xálima&quot;, &quot;a fala da Estremadura&quot;, &quot;o galego da Estremadura&quot;, &quot;valego&quot; or &quot;galaico-estremenho&quot;, is another descendant of Galician-Portuguese, spoken by a small number of people in the Spanish towns of Valverde del Fresno (&quot;Valverdi du Fresnu&quot;), Eljas (&quot;As Ellas&quot;) and San Martín de Trevejo (&quot;Sa Martín de Trevellu&quot;) in the autonomous community of Extremadura, near the border with Portugal.

There are a number of other places in Spain in which the native language of the common people is a descendant of the Galician-Portuguese group, such as La Alamedilla, Cedillo (&quot;Cedilho&quot;), Herrera de Alcántara (&quot;Ferreira d&#x27;Alcântara&quot;) and Olivenza (&quot;Olivença&quot;), but in these municipalities, what is spoken is actually Portuguese, not disputed as such in the mainstream.

The diversity of dialects of the Portuguese language is known since the time of medieval Portuguese-Galician language when it coexisted with the Lusitanian-Mozarabic dialect, spoken in the south of Portugal. The dialectal diversity becomes more evident in the work of Fernão d&#x27;Oliveira, in the &quot;Grammatica da Lingoagem Portuguesa&quot;, (1536), where he remarks that the people of Portuguese regions of Beira, Alentejo, Estremadura, and Entre Douro e Minho, all speak differently from each other. Also Contador d&#x27;Argote (1725) distinguishes three main varieties of dialects: the local dialects, the dialects of time, and of profession (work jargon). Of local dialects he highlights five main dialects: the dialect of Estremadura, of Entre-Douro e Minho, of Beira, of Algarve and of Trás-os-Montes. He also makes reference to the overseas dialects, the rustic dialects, the poetic dialect and that of prose.

In the kingdom of Portugal, &quot;Ladinho&quot; (or &quot;Lingoagem Ladinha&quot;) was the name given to the pure Portuguese romance language, without any mixture of Aravia or Gerigonça Judenga. While the term &quot;língua vulgar&quot; was used to name the language before D. Dinis decided to call it &quot;Portuguese language&quot;, the erudite version used and known as Galician-Portuguese (the language of the Portuguese court) and all other Portuguese dialects were spoken at the same time. In a historical perspective the Portuguese language was never just one dialect. Just like today there is a standard Portuguese (actually two) among the several dialects of Portuguese, in the past there was Galician-Portuguese as the &quot;standard&quot;, coexisting with other dialects.

=== Influence on other languages ===


Portuguese has provided loanwords to many languages, such as Indonesian, Manado Malay, Malayalam, Sri Lankan Tamil and Sinhala, Malay, Bengali, English, Hindi, Swahili, Afrikaans, Konkani, Marathi, Punjabi, Tetum, Xitsonga, Japanese, Lanc-Patuá, Esan, Bandari (spoken in Iran) and Sranan Tongo (spoken in Suriname). It left a strong influence on the &quot;língua brasílica&quot;, a Tupi–Guarani language, which was the most widely spoken in Brazil until the 18th century, and on the language spoken around Sikka in Flores Island, Indonesia. In nearby Larantuka, Portuguese is used for prayers in Holy Week rituals.
The Japanese–Portuguese dictionary &quot;Nippo Jisho&quot; (1603) was the first dictionary of Japanese in a European language, a product of Jesuit missionary activity in Japan. Building on the work of earlier Portuguese missionaries, the &quot;Dictionarium Anamiticum, Lusitanum et Latinum&quot; (Annamite–Portuguese–Latin dictionary) of Alexandre de Rhodes (1651) introduced the modern orthography of Vietnamese, which is based on the orthography of 17th-century Portuguese. The Romanization of Chinese was also influenced by the Portuguese language (among others), particularly regarding Chinese surnames; one example is &quot;Mei&quot;. During 1583–88 Italian Jesuits Michele Ruggieri and Matteo Ricci created a Portuguese–Chinese dictionary – the first ever European–Chinese dictionary.

For instance, as Portuguese merchants were presumably the first to introduce the sweet orange in Europe, in several modern Indo-European languages the fruit has been named after them. Some examples are Albanian &quot;&quot;, Bosnian (archaic) &quot;portokal&quot;, &quot;prtokal&quot;, Bulgarian (&quot;portokal&quot;), Greek (&quot;portokáli&quot;), Macedonian &quot;&quot;, Persian (&quot;porteghal&quot;), and Romanian &quot;&quot;. Related names can be found in other languages, such as Arabic (&quot;burtuqāl&quot;), Georgian (&quot;p&#x27;ort&#x27;oxali&quot;), Turkish &quot;&quot; and Amharic &quot;birtukan&quot;. Also, in southern Italian dialects (e.g. Neapolitan), an orange is &quot;portogallo&quot; or &quot;purtuallo&quot;, literally &quot;(the) Portuguese (one)&quot;, in contrast to standard Italian &quot;arancia&quot;.

=== Derived languages ===
Beginning in the 16th century, the extensive contacts between Portuguese travelers and settlers, African and Asian slaves, and local populations led to the appearance of many pidgins with varying amounts of Portuguese influence.

As each of these pidgins became the mother tongue of succeeding generations, they evolved into fully fledged creole languages, which remained in use in many parts of Asia, Africa and South America until the 18th century.

Some Portuguese-based or Portuguese-influenced creoles are still spoken today, namely Cape Verdean Creole and Papiamento. Portuguese-based creoles are spoken by over three million people worldwide, especially people of partial Portuguese ancestry.

== Phonology ==


Portuguese phonology is similar to those of languages such as Franco-Provençal and Catalan, whereas that of Spanish is similar to those of Sardinian and the Southern Italian dialects. Some would describe the phonology of Portuguese as a blend of Spanish, Gallo-Romance (e.g. French) and the languages of northern Italy (especially Genoese).

Portuguese can have as many as 9 oral vowels, as many as 2 semivowels, and as many as 21 consonants; some varieties of the language have fewer phonemes. There are also five nasal vowels, which some linguists regard as allophones of oral vowels. Galician-Portuguese developed in the region of the former Roman province of Gallaecia, from the Vulgar Latin (common Latin) that had been introduced by Roman soldiers, colonists and magistrates during the time of the Roman Empire. Although the process may have been slower than in other regions, after a period of bilingualism, the centuries of contact with Vulgar Latin completely extinguished the native languages, and a variety of Latin with a few Gallaecian features evolved.

Gallaecian and Lusitanian influences were absorbed into the local dialect of Vulgar Latin; this can be detected in some Galician-Portuguese words, as well as in placenames of Celtic and Iberian origin.

An early form of Galician-Portuguese was already spoken in the Kingdom of the Suebi, and by the year 800 Galician-Portuguese had already become the vernacular of northwestern Iberia. The first known phonetic changes in Vulgar Latin, which began the evolution to Galician-Portuguese, took place during the rule of the Germanic groups, the Suebi (411–585) and Visigoths (585–711). The Galician-Portuguese &quot;inflected infinitive&quot; (or &quot;personal infinitive&quot;) and the nasal vowels may have evolved under the influence of local Celtic (as in Old French). The nasal vowels would thus be a phonologic characteristic of the Vulgar Latin spoken in Roman Gallaecia, but they are not attested in writing until after the 6th and 7th centuries.

=== Vowels ===

Like Catalan and German, Portuguese uses vowel quality to contrast stressed syllables with unstressed syllables. Unstressed isolated vowels tend to be raised and sometimes centralized.

=== Consonants ===
Phonetic notes
* Semivowels contrast with unstressed high vowels in verbal conjugation, as in &quot;(eu) rio&quot; and &quot;(ele) riu&quot; . Phonologists discuss whether their nature is vowel or consonant.
* In most of Brazil and Angola, the consonant hereafter denoted as is realized as a nasal palatal approximant , which nasalizes the vowel that precedes it: .
* proposes that Portuguese possesses labio-velar stops and as additional phonemes rather than sequences of a velar stop and .
* The consonant hereafter denoted as has a variety of realizations depending on dialect. In Europe, it is typically a uvular trill ; however, a pronunciation as a voiced uvular fricative may be becoming dominant in urban areas. There is also a realization as a voiceless uvular fricative , and the original pronunciation as an alveolar trill also remains very common in various dialects. A common realization of the word-initial in the Lisbon accent is a voiced uvular fricative trill . In Brazil, can be velar, uvular, or glottal and may be voiceless unless between voiced sounds. It is usually pronounced as a voiceless velar fricative , a voiceless glottal fricative or voiceless uvular fricative . See also .
* and are normally , as in English. However, a number of dialects in northern Portugal pronounce and as apico-alveolar sibilants (sounding somewhat like a soft or ), as in the Romance languages of northern Iberia. Some very few northeastern Portugal dialects still maintain the medieval distinction between apical and laminal sibilants (written &quot;s/ss&quot; and &quot;c/ç/z&quot;, respectively).
* As a phoneme, occurs only in loanwords, names, and interjections, with a dialectal tendency for speakers to substitute in in most dialects outside of Brazil (as well as some conservative Brazilian dialects, to a variable extent.) However, is an allophone of before in a majority of Brazilian dialects. Similarly, is an allophone of in the same contexts.
* In northern and central Portugal, the voiced stops (, , and ) are usually lenited to fricatives , , and , respectively, except at the beginning of words or after nasal vowels. At the end of a phrase, due to final-obstruent devoicing, they may even be devoiced to , , and (for example, &quot;verde&quot; at the end of a sentence may be pronounced ).
* In Brazil, many speakers further shift to in closed syllables, especially outside the southern region.
* Phonetically, Portuguese (and French) are quite different from the other major Romance languages. It has been suggested that this stems from the ancient link to Celtic languages such as Welsh or Breton, with which it also shares a substantial number of cognates: there are 37 sounds in Portuguese, including vowels, consonants and diphthongs, most of which exist in today&#x27;s Celtic languages.

== Orthography ==
=== Portuguese Language Orthographic Agreement of 1990 ===
== Grammar ==
A notable aspect of the grammar of Portuguese is the verb. Morphologically, more verbal inflections from classical Latin have been preserved by Portuguese than by any other major Romance language. Portuguese and Spanish share very similar grammar, vocabulary and sentence structure. Portuguese also has some grammatical innovations not found in other Romance languages (except Galician and Fala):
* The present perfect has an iterative sense unique to the Galician-Portuguese language group. It denotes an action or a series of actions that began in the past but expected to occur again in the future. For instance, the sentence &quot;Tenho tentado falar contigo&quot; would be translated to &quot;I have been trying to talk to you&quot;, not &quot;I have tried to talk to you.&quot; On the other hand, the correct translation of &quot;Have you heard the latest news?&quot; is not &quot;*Tens ouvido as últimas?&quot; but &quot;Ouviste as últimas?&quot; since no repetition is implied.
* Portuguese makes use of the future subjunctive mood, which developed from medieval West Iberian Romance. In modern Spanish and Galician, it has almost entirely fallen into disuse. The future subjunctive appears in dependent clauses that denote a condition that must be fulfilled in the future so that the independent clause will occur. English normally employs the present tense under the same circumstances:

:&quot;Se eu &quot;for&quot; eleito presidente, mudarei a lei.&quot;
:If &quot;I am&quot; elected president, I will change the law.

:&quot;Quando &quot;fores&quot; mais velho, vais entender.&quot;
:When &quot;you grow&quot; older, you will understand.
* The personal infinitive can inflect according to its subject in person and number. It often shows who is expected to perform a certain action. &quot;É melhor voltares&quot; &quot;It is better [for you] to go back&quot;, &quot;É melhor voltarmos&quot; &quot;It is better [for us] to go back.&quot; Perhaps for that reason, infinitive clauses replace subjunctive clauses more often in Portuguese than in other Romance languages.

== Sample text ==
Article 1 of the &quot;Universal Declaration of Human Rights&quot; in Portuguese:

Article 1 of the &quot;Universal Declaration of Human Rights&quot; in English:
:&quot;All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.&quot;

== See also ==

* Portuguese literature
* Portuguese Africans
* Angolan literature
* Brazilian literature
* Gallaecian language
*Indo-Portuguese
* Galician Reintegrationism
* International Portuguese Language Institute
* List of countries and territories where Portuguese is an official language
* List of international organizations which have Portuguese as an official language
* List of Portuguese-language poets
* Lusitanian language
* Mozambican Portuguese
* Portuguese language in Asia
* Portuguese Language Orthographic Agreement of 1990
* Portuguese poetry

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* &quot;História da Lingua Portuguesa&quot; – Instituto Camões website 
* &quot;A Língua Portuguesa&quot; in Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil
* &quot;Carta de dotação e fundação da Igreja de S. Miguel de Lardosa, a.D. 882 (o mais antigo documento latino-português original conhecido)&quot; 
; Literature

* &quot;Poesia e Prosa Medievais&quot;, by Maria Ema Tarracha Ferreira, Ulisseia 1998, 3rd ed., .
* &quot;Bases Temáticas – Língua, Literatura e Cultura Portuguesa&quot; in Instituto Camões 
* &quot;Portuguese literature&quot; in The Catholic Encyclopedia 
; Phonology, orthography and grammar
* Bergström, Magnus &amp; Reis, Neves &quot;Prontuário Ortográfico&quot; Editorial Notícias, 2004.
* 
* 
* 
* A pronúncia do português europeu – European Portuguese Pronunciation - Instituto Camões website
* Dialects of Portuguese – Instituto Camões website
* Audio samples of the dialects of Portugal – Instituto Camões website
* Audio samples of the dialects from outside Europe – Instituto Camões website
* Portuguese Grammar – Learn101.org
; Reference dictionaries

* Antônio Houaiss (2000), &quot;Dicionário Houaiss da Língua Portuguesa&quot; (228,500 entries).
* Aurélio Buarque de Holanda Ferreira, &quot;Novo Dicionário da Língua Portuguesa&quot; (1809 pp.)
* English–Portuguese–Chinese Dictionary (Freeware for Windows/Linux/Mac)
; Linguistic studies

* Cook, Manuela. Portuguese Pronouns and Other Forms of Address, from the Past into the Future – Structural, Semantic and Pragmatic Reflections, Ellipsis, vol. 11, APSA, www.portuguese-apsa.com/ellipsis, 2013
* Cook, Manuela. On the Portuguese Forms of Address: From &quot;Vossa Mercê&quot; to &quot;Você&quot;, Portuguese Studies Review 3.2, Durham: University of New Hampshire, 1995
* Lindley Cintra, Luís F. &quot;Nova Proposta de Classificação dos Dialectos Galego- Portugueses&quot; (PDF) Boletim de Filologia, Lisboa, Centro de Estudos Filológicos, 1971.
== External links ==
* &quot;Automatic Transcription of Phonemic and Phonetic Portuguese&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="0" end="10" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714388" start="23" end="47" title="Western Romance language" label="Western Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="55" end="84" title="Indo-European language family" label="Indo-European language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="106" end="123" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="127" end="133" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="166" end="172" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="174" end="180" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="182" end="192" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="194" end="207" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="209" end="219" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="221" end="229" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039" start="234" end="255" title="São Tomé and Príncipe" label="São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="296" end="306" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="308" end="325" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="330" end="335" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q59436982" start="388" end="397" title="Lusophone" label="Lusophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q749533" start="553" end="572" title="Iberian Romance languages" label="Ibero-Romance group"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="611" end="623" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q303421" start="640" end="658" title="Kingdom of Galicia" label="Kingdom of Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139807" start="667" end="685" title="County of Portugal" label="County of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094789" start="705" end="711" title="Gallaecian language" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="786" end="801" title="second language" label="second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319" start="899" end="932" title="List of languages by number of native speakers" label="fifth-most spoken native language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="1042" end="1058" title="Romance languages" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1091" end="1098" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1148" end="1161" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="1198" end="1217" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="1281" end="1294" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1335" end="1341" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1375" end="1389" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4264" start="1391" end="1399" title="Mercosul" label="Mercosul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1405" end="1436" title="Organization of American States#Official languages" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="1442" end="1483" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="1489" end="1502" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="1512" end="1554" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Language Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q59436982" start="1632" end="1641" title="Lusophone" label="Lusophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1792" end="1798" title="Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="1814" end="1831" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1870" end="1884" title="Latin language" label="Latin language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2065" end="2071" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859861" start="2206" end="2221" title="Atlantic Europe" label="Atlantic Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="2224" end="2242" title="Megalithic Culture" label="Megalithic Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2247" end="2261" title="Celts" label="Celtic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204136" start="2275" end="2295" title="Hispano-Celtic languages" label="Hispano-Celtic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q837549" start="2431" end="2442" title="Lusitanians" label="Lusitanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q59436982" start="2667" end="2676" title="Lusophone" label="Lusophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2719" end="2731" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="2745" end="2759" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="2800" end="2816" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="2824" end="2840" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="2864" end="2869" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="2871" end="2880" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530400" start="2885" end="2889" title="Buri tribe" label="Buri"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="2911" end="2929" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="2974" end="2986" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="3224" end="3240" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="Umayyad conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="3259" end="3265" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q671082" start="3354" end="3384" title="Mozarabs" label="remaining Christian population"/>
<link wikidata="Q749533" start="3414" end="3421" title="Ibero-Romance" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q317044" start="3429" end="3438" title="Mozarabic language" label="Mozarabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="3611" end="3619" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="3626" end="3631" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q303421" start="3855" end="3873" title="Kingdom of Galicia" label="Kingdom of Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139807" start="3885" end="3903" title="County of Portugal" label="County of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072111" start="3969" end="3988" title="Galician-Portuguese" label="Galician-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139807" start="4284" end="4302" title="County of Portugal" label="County of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q175276" start="4312" end="4327" title="Kingdom of León" label="Kingdom of León"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="4366" end="4373" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072111" start="4401" end="4420" title="Galician-Portuguese" label="Galician-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="4592" end="4604" title="lyric poetry" label="lyric poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="4618" end="4626" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="4636" end="4643" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4668" end="4693" title="Occitan literature#Poetry of the troubadours" label="poetry of the troubadours"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4816" end="4841" title="Portuguese alphabet#Basic digraphs" label="orthography of Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581925" start="4857" end="4872" title="Gerald of Braga" label="Gerald of Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q383089" start="4886" end="4893" title="Moissac" label="Moissac"/>
<link wikidata="Q83247" start="4916" end="4921" title="Braga" label="Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q587697" start="5088" end="5108" title="Afonso I of Portugal" label="Afonso I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="5124" end="5141" title="Denis of Portugal" label="Denis of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q368643" start="5246" end="5253" title="University of Coimbra" label="Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="5477" end="5499" title="Age of Discovery" label="Portuguese discoveries"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="5565" end="5573" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="5630" end="5643" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6030" end="6044" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="6045" end="6055" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="6095" end="6110" title="creole language" label="creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669169" start="6132" end="6140" title="Kristang language" label="Kristang"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6351" end="6356" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="6358" end="6367" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="6369" end="6377" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="6383" end="6392" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q373581" start="6571" end="6588" title="Garcia de Resende" label="Garcia de Resende"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="6781" end="6796" title="Classical Latin" label="Classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="6801" end="6816" title="Ancient Greek" label="Classical Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="6832" end="6843" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q499083" start="6894" end="6911" title="Renaissance Latin" label="Renaissance Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682" start="7164" end="7183" title="Miguel de Cervantes" label="Miguel de Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q982354" start="7277" end="7288" title="Olavo Bilac" label="Olavo Bilac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="7331" end="7337" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q590" start="7435" end="7453" title="Luís Vaz de Camões" label="Luís Vaz de Camões"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="7548" end="7557" title="epic poem" label="epic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q781898" start="7564" end="7575" title="The Lusiads" label="The Lusiads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422478" start="7603" end="7636" title="Museum of the Portuguese Language" label="Museum of the Portuguese Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="7706" end="7715" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="8480" end="8490" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q35963" start="8904" end="8923" title="Cape Verdean Creole" label="Cape Verdean Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q60567" start="8956" end="8984" title="Constitution of South Africa" label="Constitution of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q967935" start="9064" end="9096" title="Pan South African Language Board" label="Pan South African Language Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="9246" end="9253" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="9263" end="9270" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="9272" end="9278" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="9316" end="9322" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="9343" end="9348" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="9367" end="9373" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="9375" end="9385" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="9428" end="9435" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="9525" end="9533" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="9561" end="9572" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="9618" end="9627" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="9730" end="9755" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="9783" end="9799" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="9808" end="9811" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q66710" start="9816" end="9829" title="Daman and Diu" label="Daman and Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502583" start="10160" end="10175" title="Kristang people" label="Kristang people"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="10179" end="10187" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669169" start="10194" end="10202" title="Kristang language" label="Kristang"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="10338" end="10380" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Language Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="10556" end="10573" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="10575" end="10581" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="10583" end="10589" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="10591" end="10601" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="10603" end="10613" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="10615" end="10632" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="10634" end="10647" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="10649" end="10659" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="10661" end="10669" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039" start="10674" end="10695" title="São Tomé and Príncipe" label="São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="10698" end="10715" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="10914" end="10921" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="10926" end="10932" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="11157" end="11164" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4264" start="11220" end="11228" title="Mercosul" label="Mercosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q421023" start="11234" end="11271" title="Organization of Ibero-American States" label="Organization of Ibero-American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4230" start="11277" end="11308" title="Union of South American Nations" label="Union of South American Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="11314" end="11345" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="11351" end="11364" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="11370" end="11411" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q816706" start="11417" end="11455" title="Southern African Development Community" label="Southern African Development Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="11464" end="11478" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="11528" end="11546" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q59436982" start="11718" end="11727" title="Lusophone" label="Lusophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="11822" end="11830" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360686" start="12376" end="12381" title="Portuguese-speaking African countries" label="PALOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="12973" end="12980" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="13098" end="13107" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="13109" end="13115" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q971" start="13121" end="13142" title="Republic of the Congo" label="Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="13144" end="13151" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="13153" end="13160" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="13162" end="13170" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="13172" end="13184" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="13186" end="13197" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="13203" end="13212" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="13293" end="13301" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="13593" end="13606" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="13885" end="13891" title="Creole language" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171" start="13920" end="13923" title="Goa" label="Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="13925" end="13934" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="13936" end="13948" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q66710" start="13950" end="13963" title="Daman and Diu" label="Daman and Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="13988" end="14011" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="14345" end="14351" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="14387" end="14404" title="European language" label="European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="14411" end="14418" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="14598" end="14613" title="southern Africa" label="southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="14618" end="14631" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4264" start="14818" end="14826" title="Mercosul" label="Mercosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="14869" end="14878" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="14880" end="14887" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="14892" end="14900" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="15038" end="15043" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="15060" end="15065" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144461" start="15099" end="15115" title="Japanese Brazilian" label="Japanese descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="15119" end="15124" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="15178" end="15182" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="15570" end="15584" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="15620" end="15651" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="15739" end="15760" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="15835" end="15844" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="15911" end="15932" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q49330" start="16053" end="16077" title="Médecins sans Frontières" label="Médecins sans Frontières"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036440" start="16188" end="16235" title="African Court on Human and Peoples&amp;#x27; Rights" label="African Court on Human and Peoples&amp;#x27; Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="16245" end="16287" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Language Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q59436982" start="16341" end="16360" title="Lusophone" label="lusophone countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q922399" start="16418" end="16437" title="European Portuguese" label="European Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q45412" start="16531" end="16538" title="Coimbra" label="Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="16543" end="16549" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797021" start="17091" end="17111" title="Portuguese in Africa" label="Portuguese in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="17414" end="17420" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q20963720" start="17449" end="17457" title="Alentejo" label="Alentejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083261" start="17459" end="17479" title="Alentejan Portuguese" label="Alentejan Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716165" start="17491" end="17501" title="Oliventine Portuguese" label="Oliventine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831" start="17539" end="17546" title="Algarve" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q83247" start="17652" end="17657" title="Braga" label="Braga"/>
<link wikidata="Q45412" start="17855" end="17862" title="Coimbra" label="Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="17867" end="17873" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="18204" end="18211" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="18266" end="18271" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q485581" start="18285" end="18291" title="Aveiro, Portugal" label="Aveiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q369458" start="18322" end="18349" title="Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro" label="Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10265994" start="18609" end="18616" title="Caipira dialect" label="Caipira"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="18649" end="18658" title="São Paulo (state)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="18720" end="18732" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499" start="18743" end="18749" title="Paraná (state)" label="Paraná"/>
<link wikidata="Q43319" start="18767" end="18785" title="Mato Grosso do Sul" label="Mato Grosso do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734221" start="18852" end="18869" title="Triângulo Mineiro" label="Triângulo Mineiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41587" start="18887" end="18892" title="Goiás" label="Goiás"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="19073" end="19087" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024082" start="19143" end="19157" title="decreolization" label="decreolization"/>
<link wikidata="Q56944" start="19165" end="19181" title="Old Tupi" label="língua brasílica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669239" start="19198" end="19219" title="língua geral paulista" label="língua geral paulista"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="19282" end="19295" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062769" start="19324" end="19334" title="Centro-Sul" label="Centro-Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q806283" start="19391" end="19402" title="bandeirante" label="bandeirante"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088324" start="19432" end="19447" title="Colonial Brazil" label="Colonial Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q34333" start="19493" end="19502" title="Nheengatu language" label="Nheengatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="19722" end="19733" title="Social stigma" label="stigmatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="19770" end="19789" title="Prestige (sociolinguistics)" label="substandard variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10265997" start="19811" end="19858" title="North coast Portuguese" label="&amp;quot;Cearense&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;Costa norte&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="20747" end="20752" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41587" start="20777" end="20782" title="Goiás" label="Goiás"/>
<link wikidata="Q43695" start="20787" end="20796" title="Tocantins" label="Tocantins"/>
<link wikidata="Q968561" start="20862" end="20883" title="Stress timing" label="syllable-timed rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="21045" end="21059" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q43233" start="21061" end="21075" title="Espírito Santo" label="Espírito Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="21111" end="21123" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720540" start="21516" end="21538" title="Greater Rio de Janeiro" label="Greater Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10266001" start="21603" end="21609" title="Gaúcho dialect" label="Gaúcho"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="21621" end="21638" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q514022" start="21874" end="21898" title="Hispanosphere" label="Spanish-speaking nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="21948" end="21956" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="21985" end="22006" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="Indigenous Amerindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706614" start="22024" end="22031" title="Mineiro" label="Mineiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="22040" end="22052" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734221" start="22079" end="22096" title="Triângulo Mineiro" label="Triângulo Mineiro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22243" end="22318" title="Minas Gerais#History" label="the discovery of gold and gems made it the most prosperous Brazilian region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978895" start="22441" end="22453" title="Zona da Mata (Minas Gerais)" label="southeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="22730" end="22744" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331065" start="22846" end="22852" title="Sertão" label="Sertão"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827134" start="22992" end="22999" title="Agreste" label="Agreste"/>
<link wikidata="Q509780" start="23128" end="23147" title="Rioplatense Spanish" label="Rioplatense Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073843" start="23226" end="23242" title="Zona da Mata" label="along the coasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q42362" start="23319" end="23327" title="Maranhão" label="Maranhão"/>
<link wikidata="Q42722" start="23344" end="23349" title="Piauí" label="Piauí"/>
<link wikidata="Q40123" start="23376" end="23381" title="Ceará" label="Ceará"/>
<link wikidata="Q40885" start="23385" end="23392" title="Alagoas" label="Alagoas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14986561" start="23426" end="23436" title="amazofonia" label="amazofonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="23453" end="23465" title="Amazon Basin" label="Amazon Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q478465" start="23479" end="23494" title="North Region, Brazil" label="Northern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829733" start="23743" end="23748" title="Belém" label="Belém"/>
<link wikidata="Q40236" start="23753" end="23759" title="Manaus" label="Manaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10266007" start="23830" end="23840" title="Paulistano dialect" label="Paulistano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415666" start="23872" end="23889" title="Greater São Paulo" label="Greater São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="24024" end="24046" title="São Paulo (state)" label="the state of São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062769" start="24156" end="24177" title="Centro-Sul" label="Central-Southern half"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="24285" end="24297" title="prestige (sociolinguistics)" label="low prestige"/>
<link wikidata="Q160845" start="24400" end="24416" title="Sociolinguistics" label="Sociolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q976277" start="24457" end="24477" title="linguistic discrimination" label="linguistic prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414964" start="24507" end="24515" title="Class discrimination" label="classism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24586" end="24602" title="Adoniran Barbosa#Musical production" label="Adoniran Barbosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q980175" start="24774" end="24795" title="Center-West Region, Brazil" label="Center-Western states"/>
<link wikidata="Q43695" start="24814" end="24823" title="Tocantins" label="Tocantins"/>
<link wikidata="Q43235" start="24828" end="24836" title="Rondônia" label="Rondônia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="25059" end="25076" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060042" start="25139" end="25154" title="South Region, Brazil" label="southern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4361" start="25168" end="25176" title="Curitiba" label="Curitiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q132997" start="25271" end="25284" title="Florianópolis" label="Florianópolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="25446" end="25452" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="25457" end="25464" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296487" start="25540" end="25556" title="Florianopolitan dialect" label="Florianopolitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q132997" start="25626" end="25639" title="Florianópolis" label="Florianópolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914565" start="25708" end="25723" title="Autonomous regions of Portugal" label="insular regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359719" start="25760" end="25780" title="Grande Florianópolis" label="Grande Florianópolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030717" start="26000" end="26007" title="Carioca" label="Carioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q207101" start="26035" end="26044" title="sociolect" label="sociolect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720540" start="26127" end="26149" title="Greater Rio de Janeiro" label="Greater Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670007" start="26235" end="26263" title="Transfer of the Portuguese Court to Brazil" label="Portuguese royal family fled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="26971" end="26979" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27246" end="27261" title=":pt:Dialeto da serra amazônica" label="serra amazônica"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="27808" end="27818" title="Deforestation" label="deforested"/>
<link wikidata="Q48344" start="27860" end="27866" title="Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740925" start="27950" end="27964" title="Amazônia Legal" label="Western Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40040" start="27994" end="28002" title="Amazonas (Brazilian state)" label="Amazonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793334" start="28028" end="28040" title="Boca do Acre" label="Boca do Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q40780" start="28069" end="28073" title="Acre (state)" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q899706" start="28153" end="28180" title="Peru-Bolivian Confederation" label="Peru-Bolivian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737205" start="28192" end="28211" title="Amazon rubber cycle" label="Amazon rubber cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187183" start="28216" end="28230" title="Time in Brazil" label="Acre Time Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10265997" start="28680" end="28706" title="North coast Portuguese" label="dialect of the north coast"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28719" end="28740" title=":pt:Interior do Brasil" label="Brazilian countryside"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706614" start="28944" end="28966" title="Mineiro" label="Belo Horizonte dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="29140" end="29157" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994901" start="30416" end="30434" title="Angolan Portuguese" label="Angolan Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035141" start="30468" end="30491" title="Cape Verdean Portuguese" label="Cape Verdean Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373396" start="30521" end="30545" title="East Timorese Portuguese" label="East Timorese Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q10352067" start="30617" end="30632" title="Goan Portuguese" label="Goan Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616512" start="30662" end="30680" title="Guinean Portuguese" label="Guinean Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9290867" start="30709" end="30728" title="Macanese Portuguese" label="Macanese Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373398" start="30760" end="30781" title="Mozambican Portuguese" label="Mozambican Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7665714" start="30812" end="30833" title="São Tomean Portuguese" label="São Tomean Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265815" start="30840" end="30889" title="Riverense Portuñol language" label="&amp;quot;Dialetos Portugueses do Uruguai (DPU)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001535" start="30934" end="30940" title="Accent (dialect)" label="accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="30945" end="30955" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507109" start="31107" end="31131" title="Portuguese creole" label="Portuguese-based creoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="31278" end="31285" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="31320" end="31332" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31701" end="31713" title=":wiktionary:intervocalic" label="intervocalic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878035" start="31837" end="31853" title="epenthesis" label="epenthetic vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q650250" start="32010" end="32016" title="elision" label="elided"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606582" start="32055" end="32064" title="nasalization" label="nasalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="32820" end="32827" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="33020" end="33036" title="Romance language" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q213458" start="33068" end="33078" title="mesoclisis" label="mesoclisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="33160" end="33168" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q623742" start="33206" end="33216" title="pluperfect" label="pluperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="33270" end="33278" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q837549" start="33484" end="33494" title="Lusitanians" label="Lusitanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007723" start="33506" end="33514" title="Gallaeci" label="Gallaeci"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="33574" end="33590" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204136" start="33643" end="33663" title="Hispano-Celtic languages" label="Hispano-Celtic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="33676" end="33684" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q530799" start="33782" end="33815" title="Pre-Roman peoples of the Iberian Peninsula" label="pre-Roman inhabitants of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007723" start="33836" end="33844" title="Gallaeci" label="Gallaeci"/>
<link wikidata="Q837549" start="33846" end="33857" title="Lusitanians" label="Lusitanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11916395" start="33859" end="33866" title="Celtici" label="Celtici"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672030" start="33871" end="33878" title="Cynetes" label="Cynetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094789" start="33932" end="33951" title="Gallaecian language" label="Gallaecian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="34007" end="34015" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="34169" end="34175" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29977" start="34191" end="34198" title="Gaulish" label="Gaulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="34399" end="34407" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="34430" end="34438" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="34440" end="34445" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="34450" end="34459" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="34481" end="34486" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="34563" end="34571" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="34716" end="34722" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="35281" end="35299" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143070" start="35325" end="35342" title="toponymic surname" label="toponymic surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455398" start="35348" end="35366" title="patronymic surname" label="patronymic surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020811" start="35456" end="35465" title="Ermesinde" label="Ermesinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q552011" start="35467" end="35476" title="Esposende" label="Esposende"/>
<link wikidata="Q863692" start="35481" end="35488" title="Resende, Portugal" label="Resende"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="35805" end="35814" title="toponymic" label="toponymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16870705" start="35840" end="35849" title="Henriques (surname)" label="Henriques"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="35961" end="35966" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="35977" end="35987" title="Visigothic" label="Visigothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="36059" end="36066" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="36158" end="36164" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="36181" end="36195" title="al-Andalus" label="Moorish Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004293" start="36240" end="36272" title="Definite article in Arabic" label="Arabic article &amp;quot;a(l)-&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344629" start="36692" end="36699" title="cutlass" label="cutlass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="36712" end="36720" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q172736" start="36727" end="36733" title="katana" label="katana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="36764" end="36771" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36778" end="36781" title="Tea#Etymology" label="chá"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032499" start="36799" end="36804" title="Canja de galinha" label="canja"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="36858" end="36863" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="36958" end="36978" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="37115" end="37122" title="indigenous peoples of Brazil" label="Amerind"/>
<link wikidata="Q35891" start="37326" end="37334" title="Kimbundu language" label="Kimbundu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="37626" end="37632" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232952" start="37646" end="37651" title="Taíno language" label="Taino"/>
<link wikidata="Q148610" start="37664" end="37676" title="Tupi–Guarani languages" label="Tupi–Guarani"/>
<link wikidata="Q56944" start="37698" end="37702" title="Tupi language" label="Tupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="37754" end="37763" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q165112" start="37777" end="37784" title="popcorn" label="popcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325045" start="37813" end="37819" title="toucan" label="toucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="37832" end="37839" title="Guarani language" label="Guarani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="37967" end="37974" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377152" start="39153" end="39165" title="West Iberian languages" label="West Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="39180" end="39196" title="Romance language" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="39267" end="39275" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q300402" start="39277" end="39281" title="Fala language" label="Fala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265815" start="39286" end="39316" title="Riverense Portuñol language" label="&amp;quot;portunhol do pampa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q13330" start="39430" end="39439" title="Mirandese language" label="Mirandese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34108" start="39441" end="39448" title="Leonese language" label="Leonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q29507" start="39450" end="39458" title="Asturian language" label="Asturian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30007" start="39460" end="39472" title="Extremaduran language" label="Extremaduran"/>
<link wikidata="Q917021" start="39477" end="39487" title="Cantabrian dialect" label="Cantabrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35390" start="39489" end="39512" title="Astur-Leonese languages" label="Astur-Leonese languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="39648" end="39655" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35466" start="39660" end="39677" title="Caló language" label="&amp;quot;calão&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="39729" end="39735" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="39816" end="39822" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="39827" end="39834" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377152" start="40234" end="40246" title="West Iberian languages" label="West Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q749533" start="40248" end="40271" title="Ibero-Romance languages" label="Ibero-Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q640624" start="40339" end="40353" title="areal features" label="areal features"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057284" start="40441" end="40449" title="Portuñol" label="Portuñol"/>
<link wikidata="Q255615" start="40471" end="40485" title="code-switching" label="code-switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="41636" end="41641" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072111" start="41731" end="41750" title="Galician-Portuguese" label="Galician-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139807" start="41853" end="41861" title="County of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q303421" start="41867" end="41874" title="Kingdom of Galicia" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473702" start="42127" end="42132" title="Peneda-Gerês National Park" label="Gerês"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393409" start="42133" end="42138" title="Baixa Limia – Serra do Xurés" label="Xurés"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946" start="42232" end="42241" title="Cantabria" label="Cantabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15656" start="42245" end="42252" title="Mondego River" label="Mondego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620690" start="42383" end="42399" title="Hispanization" label="Castilianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="42707" end="42726" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="43152" end="43160" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192173" start="43356" end="43364" title="Galician-Asturian" label="Eonavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="43394" end="43402" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q71140" start="43449" end="43453" title="Province of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q71113" start="43458" end="43464" title="Province of Zamora" label="Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q14529" start="43511" end="43513" title="Eo (river)" label="Eo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14526" start="43518" end="43523" title="Navia (river)" label="Navia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441219" start="44081" end="44100" title="Valverde del Fresno" label="Valverde del Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613259" start="44135" end="44140" title="Eljas" label="Eljas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628492" start="44168" end="44189" title="San Martín de Trevejo" label="San Martín de Trevejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="44257" end="44268" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777808" start="44454" end="44467" title="La Alamedilla" label="La Alamedilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646364" start="44469" end="44476" title="Cedillo" label="Cedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658574" start="44500" end="44520" title="Herrera de Alcántara" label="Herrera de Alcántara"/>
<link wikidata="Q488052" start="44565" end="44573" title="Olivenza" label="Olivenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445183" start="44975" end="44997" title="Fernão de Oliveira" label="Fernão d&amp;#x27;Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="46476" end="46484" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="46513" end="46523" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068112" start="46525" end="46537" title="Manado Malay" label="Manado Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="46539" end="46548" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815623" start="46550" end="46566" title="Sri Lanka Tamils (native)" label="Sri Lankan Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267" start="46571" end="46578" title="Sinhala language" label="Sinhala"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="46580" end="46585" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="46587" end="46594" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="46596" end="46603" title="English (language)" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="46605" end="46610" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="46612" end="46619" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="46621" end="46630" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34239" start="46632" end="46639" title="Konkani language" label="Konkani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571" start="46641" end="46648" title="Marathi language" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="46650" end="46657" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34125" start="46659" end="46664" title="Tetum language" label="Tetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34327" start="46666" end="46674" title="Tsonga language" label="Xitsonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="46676" end="46684" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523999" start="46686" end="46696" title="Lanc-Patuá creole" label="Lanc-Patuá"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46698" end="46702" title="Esan people#Language" label="Esan"/>
<link wikidata="Q154814" start="46704" end="46711" title="Bandar Abbas" label="Bandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33989" start="46733" end="46745" title="Sranan Tongo" label="Sranan Tongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q56944" start="46808" end="46824" title="Old Tupi" label="língua brasílica"/>
<link wikidata="Q148610" start="46834" end="46855" title="Tupi–Guarani language" label="Tupi–Guarani language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14150" start="46958" end="46963" title="Sikka Regency" label="Sikka"/>
<link wikidata="Q148440" start="46967" end="46973" title="Flores" label="Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="46982" end="46991" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805875" start="47003" end="47012" title="Larantuka" label="Larantuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="47048" end="47057" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q723637" start="47108" end="47119" title="Nippo Jisho" label="Nippo Jisho"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="47207" end="47213" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806577" start="47311" end="47356" title="Dictionarium Anamiticum, Lusitanum et Latinum" label="Dictionarium Anamiticum, Lusitanum et Latinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q336653" start="47405" end="47424" title="Alexandre de Rhodes" label="Alexandre de Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q622712" start="47454" end="47479" title="Vietnamese alphabet" label="orthography of Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="47547" end="47559" title="Romanization" label="Romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="47563" end="47570" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q834455" start="47657" end="47673" title="List of common Chinese surnames" label="Chinese surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314211" start="47738" end="47754" title="Michele Ruggieri" label="Michele Ruggieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q233340" start="47759" end="47771" title="Matteo Ricci" label="Matteo Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="47876" end="47896" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese merchants"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="47940" end="47952" title="sweet orange" label="sweet orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="47982" end="48005" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="48210" end="48220" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="48381" end="48389" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="48452" end="48459" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="48500" end="48516" title="Italian language" label="Italian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="48523" end="48533" title="Neapolitan language" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48555" end="48565" title=":wikt:portogallo" label="portogallo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48581" end="48590" title=":wikt:it:purtuallo" label="purtuallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="48659" end="48675" title="standard Italian" label="standard Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="48899" end="48905" title="pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="49063" end="49078" title="creole language" label="creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35963" start="49262" end="49281" title="Cape Verdean Creole" label="Cape Verdean Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q33856" start="49286" end="49296" title="Papiamento" label="Papiamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="49403" end="49413" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087" start="49505" end="49521" title="Franco-Provençal language" label="Franco-Provençal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888318" start="49526" end="49533" title="Catalan phonology" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q780518" start="49543" end="49558" title="Spanish phonology" label="that of Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="49582" end="49591" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="49600" end="49625" title="Neapolitan language" label="Southern Italian dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="49689" end="49696" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q500394" start="49698" end="49711" title="Gallo-Romance languages" label="Gallo-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="49718" end="49724" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q516074" start="49734" end="49761" title="Gallo-Italic languages" label="languages of northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479433" start="49774" end="49781" title="Genoese dialect" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="49928" end="49935" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="49958" end="49969" title="nasal vowel" label="nasal vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="50003" end="50012" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q369692" start="50106" end="50115" title="Gallaecia" label="Gallaecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="50126" end="50138" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="50247" end="50259" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094789" start="50511" end="50521" title="Gallaecian language" label="Gallaecian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35960" start="50526" end="50536" title="Lusitanian language" label="Lusitanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="50686" end="50692" title="Celtic language" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190992" start="50697" end="50704" title="Iberians" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048918" start="50777" end="50797" title="Kingdom of the Suebi" label="Kingdom of the Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="50862" end="50872" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q35395" start="50913" end="50921" title="phonetic" label="phonetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="51052" end="51057" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="51072" end="51081" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="51195" end="51207" title="nasal vowels" label="nasal vowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="51254" end="51260" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="51268" end="51278" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q369692" start="51376" end="51385" title="Gallaecia" label="Gallaecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="51485" end="51492" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="51497" end="51503" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="51631" end="51637" title="vowel height" label="raised"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966576" start="51977" end="52002" title="nasal palatal approximant" label="nasal palatal approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606582" start="52011" end="52020" title="Nasalization" label="nasalizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q864677" start="52295" end="52307" title="uvular trill" label="uvular trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054276" start="52340" end="52363" title="voiced uvular fricative" label="voiced uvular fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q849796" start="52438" end="52464" title="voiceless uvular fricative" label="voiceless uvular fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q113159186" start="52504" end="52518" title="alveolar trill" label="alveolar trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19408" start="52682" end="52687" title="velar consonant" label="velar"/>
<link wikidata="Q623772" start="52689" end="52695" title="uvular consonant" label="uvular"/>
<link wikidata="Q234538" start="52700" end="52707" title="glottal consonant" label="glottal"/>
<link wikidata="Q271603" start="52789" end="52814" title="voiceless velar fricative" label="voiceless velar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q373478" start="52819" end="52846" title="voiceless glottal fricative" label="voiceless glottal fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q849796" start="52850" end="52876" title="voiceless uvular fricative" label="voiceless uvular fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q618621" start="52994" end="53008" title="apico-alveolar" label="apico-alveolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51600" start="53216" end="53224" title="sibilant" label="sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="53537" end="53546" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31427" start="53733" end="53742" title="fricative" label="fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q779384" start="53855" end="53880" title="final-obstruent devoicing" label="final-obstruent devoicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="54134" end="54140" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="54290" end="54295" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="54299" end="54305" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="54772" end="54788" title="Romance language" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240211" start="54996" end="55011" title="present perfect" label="present perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q473746" start="55616" end="55632" title="subjunctive mood" label="subjunctive mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377152" start="55664" end="55684" title="West Iberian languages" label="West Iberian Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q179230" start="56259" end="56269" title="infinitive" label="infinitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="56274" end="56281" title="inflection" label="inflect"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="56310" end="56316" title="Grammatical person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="56321" end="56327" title="Grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="56715" end="56752" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q548144" start="57057" end="57078" title="Portuguese literature" label="Portuguese literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087991" start="57081" end="57100" title="Portuguese Africans" label="Portuguese Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645590" start="57103" end="57121" title="Angolan literature" label="Angolan literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q849186" start="57124" end="57144" title="Brazilian literature" label="Brazilian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094789" start="57147" end="57166" title="Gallaecian language" label="Gallaecian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025550" start="57168" end="57183" title="Indo-Portuguese" label="Indo-Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151220" start="57186" end="57211" title="Reintegrationism" label="Galician Reintegrationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463460" start="57214" end="57257" title="International Portuguese Language Institute" label="International Portuguese Language Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q124528082" start="57260" end="57334" title="List of countries and territories where Portuguese is an official language" label="List of countries and territories where Portuguese is an official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624298" start="57337" end="57418" title="List of international organizations which have Portuguese as an official language" label="List of international organizations which have Portuguese as an official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244917" start="57421" end="57454" title="List of Portuguese-language poets" label="List of Portuguese-language poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q35960" start="57457" end="57476" title="Lusitanian language" label="Lusitanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373398" start="57479" end="57500" title="Mozambican Portuguese" label="Mozambican Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232727" start="57503" end="57530" title="Portuguese language in Asia" label="Portuguese language in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113432" start="57533" end="57583" title="Portuguese Language Orthographic Agreement of 1990" label="Portuguese Language Orthographic Agreement of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232787" start="57586" end="57603" title="Portuguese poetry" label="Portuguese poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q548144" start="58180" end="58201" title="Portuguese literature" label="Portuguese literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337113" start="58747" end="58762" title="Antônio Houaiss" label="Antônio Houaiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797792" start="58777" end="58816" title="Dicionário Houaiss da Língua Portuguesa" label="Dicionário Houaiss da Língua Portuguesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477747" start="58844" end="58879" title="Aurélio Buarque de Holanda Ferreira" label="Aurélio Buarque de Holanda Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274077" start="58887" end="58923" title="Novo Dicionário da Língua Portuguesa" label="Novo Dicionário da Língua Portuguesa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23916" wikidata="Q720581" url="?curid=23916" title="Paul Reubens">
<text>Paul Reubens (; ; August 27, 1952 – July 30, 2023) was an American actor and comedian, widely known for creating and portraying the character Pee-wee Herman.

Reubens joined the Los Angeles troupe the Groundlings in the 1970s and started his career as an improvisational comedian and stage actor. Reubens developed his Pee-wee character at the Groundlings. After a failed audition for &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, Reubens debuted a stage show starring Pee-wee, &quot;The Pee-wee Herman Show&quot;, in 1981. Pee-wee became an instant cult figure and, for the next decade, Reubens was completely committed to his character, doing all of his public appearances and interviews as Pee-wee. He produced and wrote a feature film, &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot; (1985), directed by Tim Burton, which was a financial and critical success. Its sequel, &quot;Big Top Pee-wee&quot; (1988), was less successful. Between 1986 and 1990, Reubens starred as Pee-wee in the CBS Saturday-morning children&#x27;s program &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot;.

Reubens was arrested for indecent exposure in an adult theater in Sarasota, Florida, in 1991. The arrest set off a chain reaction of national media attention, though he received support from people in the entertainment industry. The arrest postponed Reubens&#x27;s involvement in major projects until 1999, when he appeared in several big-budget projects including &quot;Mystery Men&quot; (1999) and &quot;Blow&quot; (2001). Reubens subsequently started giving interviews as himself rather than as Pee-wee.

Reubens acted in numerous shows such as &quot;Murphy Brown&quot;, &quot;30 Rock&quot;, &quot;Portlandia&quot;, and &quot;The Blacklist&quot;. He revived &quot;The Pee-wee Herman Show&quot;, which he performed in Los Angeles and on Broadway, in 2010. He co-wrote and starred in the Netflix original film &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Holiday&quot;, reprising his role as Pee-wee Herman, in 2016.

Reubens&#x27;s Pee-wee character maintained an enduring popularity with both children and adults. &quot;Playhouse&quot; garnered 15 Emmy Awards during its initial run, and was aired again on late-night television in the 2000s, during which &quot;TV Guide&quot; dubbed it among the top ten cult classic television programs. Reubens died in July 2023 from cancer.

== Early life and education ==

Reubens was born Paul Rubenfeld in Peekskill, New York, on August 27, 1952, and grew up in a Jewish family in Sarasota, Florida, where his parents, Judy (née Rosen) and Milton Rubenfeld, owned a lamp store. His mother was a teacher. His father was an automobile salesperson who had flown for Britain&#x27;s Royal Air Force and for the U.S. Army Air Forces in World War II, and later became one of the founding pilots of the Israeli Air Force during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. An Orthodox Jew, he was one of five Jewish pilots to fly against Arab forces in smuggled fighter planes.

Reubens&#x27;s two younger siblings are Luke (born 1958), who is a dog trainer, and Abby (born 1953), who is an attorney and a board member of the American Civil Liberties Union of Tennessee.

Reubens spent much of his childhood in Oneonta, New York. As a child, he frequented the Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, whose winter headquarters were in Sarasota. The circus atmosphere sparked Reubens&#x27;s interest in entertainment and influenced his later work. He also loved to watch reruns of &quot;I Love Lucy&quot;, which made him want to make people laugh. At age five, Reubens asked his father to build him a stage where he and his siblings would act out plays.

Reubens attended Sarasota High School, where he was named president of the National Thespian Society. He was accepted into Northwestern University&#x27;s summer program for gifted high-school students, joined the local Asolo Theater, Players of Sarasota Theater, and appeared in several plays.

After high school graduation, he attended Plymouth State University for one semester, before attending Boston University, after which he began auditioning for acting schools. He was turned down by several schools, including the Juilliard School and twice by Carnegie Mellon University, before being accepted to the California Institute of the Arts, where he graduated with a BFA in Theatre in 1973. While in California, his early jobs included working in restaurant kitchens and as a Fuller Brush salesman.

==Career==

=== 1977–1979: Comedy beginnings ===
In the 1970s, Reubens began performing at local comedy clubs and, starting in 1977, made 14 guest appearances on &quot;The Gong Show&quot;, four of which as part of a boy–girl act he had developed with Charlotte McGinnis, called &quot;The Hilarious Betty and Eddie&quot;. He soon joined the Los Angeles–based improvisational comedy team the Groundlings. He remained a troupe member for six years, working with Bob McClurg, Edie McClurg, John Paragon, Susan Barnes, and Phil Hartman. Hartman and Reubens became friends, and they often wrote and worked together on material. In 1980, Reubens had a small part as a waiter in &quot;The Blues Brothers&quot;.

The character of &quot;Pee-wee Herman&quot; originated during a 1978 improvisation exercise with the Groundlings, where Reubens came up with the idea of a man who wanted to be a comic but was so inept at telling jokes that it was obvious to the audience that he would never make it. Fellow Groundling Phil Hartman afterwards helped Reubens develop the character while another Groundling, John Paragon, helped write the show. Despite being compared to other famous characters, such as Hergé&#x27;s Tintin and Collodi&#x27;s Pinocchio, Reubens said that there was no specific source for &quot;Pee-wee&quot; other than a collection of ideas. Pee-wee&#x27;s voice originated in 1970 when Reubens appeared in a production of &quot;Life with Father&quot;, where he was cast as one of the most obnoxious characters in the play. For this role, Reubens adopted a cartoon-like way of speaking, which became Pee-wee&#x27;s voice.

Pee-wee&#x27;s first name came from a one-inch Pee Wee brand harmonica Reubens had as a child, and the surname Herman was the last name of an energetic boy Reubens knew from his youth. The original small, gray suit Pee-wee wore had been handmade for Groundlings Director and Founder Gary Austin, who passed it on to Reubens. The origin of the red tie is less clear, as Reubens claimed that &quot;someone&quot; handed him the &quot;little kid bow tie&quot; before a performance.

=== 1981–1984: &quot;The Pee-wee Herman Show&quot; ===

Reubens auditioned for the &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; 1980–1981 season on the same day as comedian Gilbert Gottfried. Reubens told &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; hiring both was not an option because they were &quot;the same type of performer&quot;, and he knew immediately Gottfried would get the job. He also told the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; he believed that &quot;the fix was in&quot; because Gottfried was friends with one of the producers. Reubens was so angry and bitter that he decided he would borrow money and start his own show in Los Angeles using the character he had been developing during the previous few years, &quot;Pee-wee Herman&quot;.

With the help of other Groundlings like John Paragon, Phil Hartman, and Lynne Marie Stewart, Pee-wee acquired a small group of followers, and Reubens took his show to the Roxy Theatre where &quot;The Pee-wee Herman Show&quot; ran for five sellout months. He performed midnight shows for adults and weekly matinees for children, later entering the mainstream when HBO aired &quot;The Pee-wee Herman Show&quot; in 1981 as part of their series &quot;On Location&quot;. Reubens also appeared as Pee-wee in the 1980 film &quot;Cheech &amp; Chong&#x27;s Next Movie&quot;. He again appeared in 1981&#x27;s &quot;Cheech &amp; Chong&#x27;s Nice Dreams&quot;; the end credits of the film billed him as &quot;Hamburger Dude&quot;. Reubens&#x27;s act had mainly positive reactions and quickly acquired a group of fans, despite being described as &quot;bizarre&quot;, and Reubens being described as &quot;the weirdest comedian around&quot;. Pee-wee was both &quot;corny&quot; and &quot;hip&quot;, &quot;retrograde&quot; and &quot;avant-garde&quot;.

When Pee-wee&#x27;s fame started growing, Reubens started to move away from the spotlight, keeping his name under wraps and making all his public appearance and interviews in character while billing Pee-wee as playing himself; Reubens was trying to &quot;get the public to think that that was a real person&quot;. Later on he would even prefer his parents be known only as Honey Herman and Herman Herman. In the early and mid-1980s, Reubens made several guest appearances on &quot;Late Night with David Letterman&quot; as Pee-wee Herman which gave Pee-wee an even bigger following. During the mid-1980s, Reubens traveled the United States with a whole new &quot;The Pee-wee Herman Show&quot;, playing at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis, Caroline&#x27;s in New York City and, in 1984, in front of a full Carnegie Hall.

=== 1985: &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot; ===

The success of &quot;The Pee-wee Herman Show&quot; prompted Warner Bros. to hire Reubens to write a script for a full-length Pee-wee Herman film. Reubens&#x27;s original idea was to do a remake of &quot;Pollyanna&quot;, which Reubens claimed was his favorite film. Halfway through writing the script, Reubens noticed everyone at Warner Bros. had a bike with them, which inspired Reubens to start on a new script with Phil Hartman. When Reubens and the producers of &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot; saw Tim Burton&#x27;s work on &quot;Vincent&quot; (1982) and &quot;Frankenweenie&quot; (1984), they chose Burton to be the film&#x27;s director. The film tells the story of Pee-wee Herman embarking on nationwide adventure in search of his stolen bicycle. The film went on to gross $40,940,662 domestically, recouping almost six times its $7 million budget. At the time of release in 1985, the film received mixed reviews, but &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot; developed into a cult film.

=== 1986–1991: &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot; ===
After seeing the success of &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot;, the CBS network approached Reubens with an ill-received cartoon series proposal. In 1986, CBS agreed to sign Reubens to act, produce, and direct his live-action children&#x27;s program, &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot;, with a budget of $325,000 per episode, the same price as a prime-time sitcom, and no creative interference from CBS; although CBS did request a few minor changes throughout the years. After casting actors like Laurence Fishburne and S. Epatha Merkerson, production began in New York City. The opening credits of the show were sung by Cyndi Lauper (under the pseudonym Ellen Shaw).
&quot;Playhouse&quot; was designed as an educational yet entertaining and artistic show for children and, despite being greatly influenced by 1950s shows Reubens watched as a child like &quot;The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show&quot;, &quot;The Mickey Mouse Club&quot;, &quot;Captain Kangaroo&quot;, and &quot;Howdy Doody&quot;, it quickly acquired a dual audience of kids and grownups. Reubens, always trying to make Pee-wee a positive role model, created a consciously moral show, one that would teach children the Golden Rule. Reubens believed that children liked &quot;Playhouse&quot; because it was fast-paced, colorful and &quot;never talked down to them&quot;; while parents liked &quot;Playhouse&quot; because it reminded them of the past.

In 1986, Reubens (billed as Paul Mall) was the voice of the ship&#x27;s computer in &quot;Flight of the Navigator&quot;. In 1987, Reubens provided the voice for the pilot droid RX-24 a.k.a. Captain &quot;Rex&quot; in Star Tours, a &quot;Star Wars&quot;-themed motion simulator attraction at Disneyland and Disney-MGM Studios at Walt Disney World, and Disneyland Paris. He also reprised the role of Pee-wee Herman in cameo appearances in the film &quot;Back to the Beach&quot; and TV show &quot;Sesame Street&quot;, the latter of which made a cameo in &quot;Playhouse&quot;.

Right after the success of &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot;, Reubens began working with Paramount Pictures on a sequel entitled &quot;Big Top Pee-wee&quot;. Reubens and George McGrath&#x27;s script was directed by &quot;Grease&quot; director Randal Kleiser. The film was not as successful as its predecessor, receiving mild reviews and doing just over one third as well in the box office, earning only $15 million.&quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot; aired from September 13, 1986, until November 10, 1990. Reubens had originally agreed to do two more seasons after the third, and when CBS asked Reubens about the possibility of a sixth season he declined, wanting to take a sabbatical. Reubens had been suffering from burnout from playing Pee-wee full-time and had been warning that Pee-wee was temporary and that he had other ideas he would like to work on. The parties agreed to end the show after five seasons, which included 45 episodes and a Christmas Special. &quot;Playhouse&quot; garnered 22 Emmy Awards.

=== 1992–2002: Public retreat and comeback ===
After his 1991 arrest (see below), Reubens kept a low profile, dedicating himself to writing and collecting a variety of things, &quot;everything from fake food, to lamps&quot;, although he did do some dubbing and took small parts in films such as 1992&#x27;s &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot; and Tim Burton&#x27;s &quot;Batman Returns&quot; (Reubens portrayed the Penguin&#x27;s father) and 1996&#x27;s &quot;Matilda&quot; and &quot;Dunston Checks In&quot;. In 1993, he voiced the character Lock in another one of Burton&#x27;s productions, &quot;The Nightmare Before Christmas&quot;. &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot; had already ended by the time Reubens was arrested. He cited an overworked crew and a decline in the show&#x27;s quality in his decision against making a sixth season. The show&#x27;s popularity and quantity of episodes had allowed for rerun broadcasts, but CBS canceled the reruns on July 29, 1991.

During the mid-1990s, Reubens played a recurring role on the TV series &quot;Murphy Brown&quot;. The role earned him positive reviews and his only non-Pee-wee Emmy nomination, for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series. He appeared six times on the show between 1995 and 1997. Afterward, Reubens began working on an NBC pilot entitled &quot;Meet the Muckles&quot;, a show that would be based on &quot;You Can&#x27;t Take It with You&quot;. The project got stuck in development hell and was later dropped when Reubens&#x27;s ideas grew too elaborate and expensive, although Philip Rosenthal blamed NBC&#x27;s negative response on Reubens being on a &quot;blacklist&quot;.

By 1999, Reubens had given several interviews as himself and made public appearances while promoting the film &quot;Mystery Men&quot;, the first being on &quot;The Tonight Show with Jay Leno&quot; that year. He also starred in Dwight Yoakam&#x27;s Western &quot;South of Heaven, West of Hell&quot;, portraying a rapist and killer. In 2001, Reubens had his first extended television role since &quot;Playhouse&quot;, as the host of the short-lived ABC game show &quot;You Don&#x27;t Know Jack&quot;, based on the video game series of the same name. It was cancelled after six episodes due to low ratings.

Reubens played a flamboyant hairdresser turned drug dealer in Ted Demme&#x27;s 2001 drama &quot;Blow&quot;, which starred Penélope Cruz and Johnny Depp. His performance was praised and he began receiving scripts for potential film projects.

=== 2004–2008: Cameos and guest appearances ===
Reubens made cameos and guest appearances in numerous projects. He played Rick of the citizen&#x27;s patrol on the popular Comedy Central series &quot;Reno 911!&quot;, which gained him a small role in the 2007 film &quot;Reno 911!: Miami&quot;. In 2006, he appeared in the second music video of the Raconteurs&#x27; song &quot;Steady, As She Goes&quot;. The video has the band engaging in a comical soapbox car race, with Reubens playing the bad guy who sabotages the race.

In 2007, Reubens attended his own tribute at the SF Sketchfest, where he talked about his career with Ben Fong-Torres. He also signed with NBC to make a pilot on a show called &quot;Area 57&quot;, a sitcom about a passive-aggressive alien, but it was not picked up for the 2007–2008 season. Reubens did, however, appear on the hit NBC series &quot;30 Rock&quot; as an inbred Austrian prince, a character Tina Fey created for him. He also made three guest appearances on FX&#x27;s series &quot;Dirt&quot; playing a washed-up, alcoholic reporter named Chuck Lafoon. This time he was recommended for the role by &quot;Dirt&quot; star and close friend Courteney Cox. Cox&#x27;s husband, David Arquette, then cast Reubens for his directorial debut, the 2007 film &quot;The Tripper&quot;.

In June 2007, Reubens appeared as Pee-wee Herman at the Spike TV&#x27;s Guys Choice Awards for the first time since 1992.

Reubens also had small parts dubbing or making cameos in a series of Cartoon Network projects such as the 2006 television film &quot;Re-Animated&quot;, the animated cartoon series &quot;Chowder&quot;, &quot;Tom Goes to the Mayor&quot;, and &quot;Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job!&quot;.

In 2008, Reubens was slated to appear as homeopathic antidepressant salesman Alfredo Aldarisio in the third episode of &quot;Pushing Daisies&quot;, but the role was recast with Raúl Esparza. Reubens instead appeared in the role of Oscar Vibenius in the series&#x27; 7th and 9th episodes.

Also, during 2008, Reubens did a PSA for Unscrew America, a website that aims to get people to change regular light bulbs for more energy-efficient ones in the form of CFLs and LED. He also appeared in Todd Solondz&#x27;s &quot;Life During Wartime&quot;.

From 2009 to 2011, Reubens voiced Bat-Mite in &quot;&quot;.

=== 2009–2023: Revival and later work ===
In January 2009, Reubens hinted that negotiations were under way for his stage show to come back, and in August the return of &quot;The Pee-wee Herman Show&quot; was announced. Reubens said he felt Pee-wee calling, &quot;I just got up one day and felt like I&#x27;m gonna come back, that was it.&quot; The show is also a way to &quot;introduce Pee-wee to the new generation that didn&#x27;t know about it&quot;, preparing the way for Reubens&#x27;s main project, the &quot;Playhouse&quot; film. Before this comeback, Reubens&#x27;s present age and shape had been pointed out as a possible issue, since Pee-wee&#x27;s slim figure and clean skin have been one of his trademarks. But after appearing for the first time since 1992 as Pee-wee at Spike TV&#x27;s 2007 Guys Choice Awards, Reubens had remained optimistic and had jokingly said he&#x27;s no longer nervous about being young Pee-wee again thanks to digital retouching.
The show was originally scheduled to begin November 8 and continue until the 29th at the Music Box Theatre in Hollywood. Due to high demand, the show moved to Club Nokia at LA Live and was scheduled to run between January 12 and February 7, 2010. To promote the show, Reubens once again gave interviews in character, appearing as a guest on &quot;The Jay Leno Show&quot;, &quot;The Tonight Show with Conan O&#x27;Brien&quot; (as well as O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s subsequent Legally Prohibited Tour), and &quot;Jimmy Kimmel Live!&quot;, among others. A Twitter account, a Facebook account, and a new website were made for Pee-wee after the show changed venues.

On November 11, 2010, the show relocated to New York City for a limited run at the Stephen Sondheim Theatre, selling over $3 million in advance tickets. An extra performance was taped for the HBO network on January 6, 2011, and debuted March 19.

From 2012 to 2013, Reubens contributed his voice talents to the animated series &quot;&quot; as Pavel. In 2014, Reubens appeared in TV on the Radio&#x27;s music video for &quot;Happy Idiot&quot;.

In February 2015, Netflix acquired the rights to produce a new Pee-wee film entitled &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Holiday&quot; with Reubens and Judd Apatow producing the film, John Lee directing, and Reubens and Paul Rust writing the screenplay. The film released on March 18, 2016, on Netflix to positive reception.

Reubens went on to reprise his role as pilot droid Rex in Star Wars: Galaxy&#x27;s Edge, a &quot;Star Wars&quot;-themed land that opened at Disneyland and Disney&#x27;s Hollywood Studios at Walt Disney World in 2019. Reubens previously portrayed the character in the original Star Tours attraction in 1987 and &quot;Star Wars Rebels&quot; in 2014. In Galaxy&#x27;s Edge, the former Star Tours pilot droid RX-24 – &quot;Rex&quot; – has been reprogrammed into DJ R-3X, the house DJ of a bar and restaurant called Oga&#x27;s Cantina.

Reubens also voiced Ivor in &quot;&quot;, which he claimed to be among his favorite voice acting roles.

== Undeveloped scripts ==
When Reubens started giving interviews again after his 2002 arrest, he talked about the two scripts he had written for future Pee-wee Herman films.

Reubens once called his first script &quot;The Pee-wee Herman Story&quot;, describing it as a black comedy. He also referred to the script as &quot;dark Pee-wee&quot; or &quot;adult Pee-wee&quot;, with the plot involving Pee-wee becoming famous as a singer after making a hit single and moving to Hollywood, where &quot;he does everything wrong and becomes a big jerk&quot;. Reubens further explained the film has many &quot;&quot;Valley of the Dolls&quot; moments&quot;. Reubens thought this script would be the first one to start production, but in 2006 Reubens announced he was to start filming his second script in 2007.

The second film, a family-friendly adventure, is called &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse: The Movie&quot; by Reubens, and follows Pee-wee and his &quot;Playhouse&quot; friends on a road-trip adventure, meaning that they would leave the house for the first time and go out into &quot;Puppetland&quot;. All of the original characters of the show, live-action and puppets are included in Reubens&#x27;s script. The story happens in a fantasy land that would be reminiscent of &quot;H.R. Pufnstuf&quot; and &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot;. In January 2009, Reubens told Gary Panter that the rejected first script of &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot; (which they co-wrote) could have a film deal very soon and that it would be &quot;90 minutes of incredible beauty&quot;. In December 2009, while in character, Reubens said this film is &quot;already done, the script is already fully written; It&#x27;s ready to shoot.&quot; Most of the film will take place in Puppetland and claymation might be used.

Although he did not reveal much about the scripts, he said that one of the two films opens in prison. He also said that using CGI for &quot;updating&quot; the puppets&#x27; looks could be an option, but it all depended on the budget the films would have. Reubens once mentioned the possibility of doing one of the two as an animated film along the lines of &quot;The Polar Express&quot; (2004), which uses performance capture technology, incorporating the movements of live actors into animated characters.

Reubens approached &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Big Adventure&quot; director Tim Burton with one of the scripts and talked to Johnny Depp about the possibility of having him portray Pee-wee, but Burton was too busy, and Depp said he would have to think about it.

In January 2010, Reubens reprised his role as Pee-wee and reused the set of &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot; (albeit slightly modified) for a short sketch on Funny or Die. In the sketch, Pee-wee comes home and shows off a brand-new iPad given to him by Steve Jobs. This leads to a long argument between him and his puppet friends, who point out all of the iPad&#x27;s disadvantages – even Conky himself points out its flaws by stating that &quot;it looks like a giant iPhone&quot;. In the end, Pee-wee uses the iPad as a serving tray to hold glasses of milk and lemonade during a party being held at the Playhouse hours later. All the voices of the puppet characters are dubbed in by different actors than the TV series, except for Globey whose voice is still done by George McGrath.

==Personal life==
Reubens attended the 1988 Academy Awards with &quot;Big Top Pee-wee&quot; co-star Valeria Golino, which stirred rumors that the two were dating. The following year Reubens exchanged vows with Doris Duke&#x27;s adopted daughter, Chandi Heffner, at a mock wedding over which Imelda Marcos presided, in Shangri-La, Doris Duke&#x27;s mansion in Honolulu, Hawaii.

Reubens reportedly dated actress Debi Mazar in 1993 after he started attending film premieres with her. Reubens credited Mazar with ending his depression from his 1991 arrest. According to Mazar, the relationship was never consummated.

In interviews conducted for &quot;Pee-wee as Himself&quot;, a documentary which premiered after Reubens&#x27;s death, Reubens acknowledged that he was gay and discussed his relationship with a painter named Guy whom he credited with inspiring some of Pee-wee Herman&#x27;s mannerisms. After the relationship ended, Reubens visited Guy in the hospital hours before he died of an AIDS-related illness. Reubens chose to focus on his career rather than publicly talk about his sexuality during his lifetime, saying, &quot;I was out of the closet, and then, I went back in the closet. I wasn&#x27;t pursuing the Paul Reubens career; I was pursuing the Pee-wee Herman career. [...] I was secretive about my sexuality even to my friends [out of] self-hatred or self-preservation. I was conflicted about sexuality. But fame was way more complicated.&quot;

Reubens and his co-star Lynne Marie Stewart remained close platonic friends until the end of Reubens&#x27;s life. They were active in the Make-a-Wish Foundation making appearances in character to bring joy to terminally ill children; neither Reubens nor Stewart ever married or had any children of their own.

== Legal issues ==
=== 1991 arrest ===
In July 1991, Reubens was arrested in Sarasota, Florida, for indecent exposure while watching a film at a porno theater. During an unexpected police inspection, a detective detained Reubens, along with three others, as he was preparing to leave. When detectives examined his driver&#x27;s license, Reubens told them &quot;I&#x27;m Pee-wee Herman&quot; and offered to perform a children&#x27;s benefit for the sheriff&#x27;s office &quot;to take care of this&quot;. The next day, after a local reporter recognized Reubens&#x27;s name, Reubens&#x27;s attorney extended the same offer to the &quot;Sarasota Herald-Tribune&quot; in exchange for withholding the story. On the night of the arrest, Reubens traveled to Nashville, where his sister and lawyer lived, and then to New Jersey, where he stayed for the following months at his friend Doris Duke&#x27;s estate.

This was Reubens&#x27;s third arrest in the county. In 1971, Reubens had been arrested in the same county for loitering and prowling near an adult theater, though charges had been dropped. His second arrest occurred in 1983 when Reubens was placed on two years of probation for possession of marijuana, although adjudication was withheld. 

The 1991 arrest was widely covered and Reubens became the subject of late-night talk show ridicule. Disney-MGM Studios suspended a video from its studio tour that had shown Pee-wee explaining how voiceover tracks are produced. Toys &quot;R&quot; Us removed Pee-wee toys from its stores.

Reubens released a statement denying the charges. On November 7, 1991, he pleaded no contest. The plea avoided a charge on Reubens&#x27;s record but obligated him to 75 hours of community service. As part of his service, he created, produced, and financed two antidrug public service announcements.

Despite the negative publicity, many artists who knew Reubens, such as Cyndi Lauper, Annette Funicello, Zsa Zsa Gabor, and Valeria Golino, voiced support. Others who knew Reubens, such as &quot;Pee-wee&#x27;s Playhouse&quot; production designer Gary Panter, S. Epatha Merkerson, and &quot;Big Top Pee-wee&quot; director Randal Kleiser, also spoke in support. Reubens&#x27;s fans organized support rallies after CBS canceled the reruns, picketing in Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco. The television news magazine &quot;A Current Affair&quot; received &quot;tens of thousands&quot; of responses to a Pee-wee telephone survey in which callers supported Reubens by a nine-to-one ratio.

Although Reubens did not offer interviews or appear on talk shows after his arrest, he did appear in character as Pee-wee Herman at the 1991 MTV Video Music Awards on September 5, asking the audience, &quot;Heard any good jokes lately?&quot; He received a standing ovation. Reubens appeared as Pee-wee only once in 1992, when he participated in a &quot;Grand Ole Opry&quot; tribute to Minnie Pearl.

=== 2002–2004: Subsequent charges ===
In November 2002, while filming David LaChapelle&#x27;s video for Elton John&#x27;s &quot;This Train Don&#x27;t Stop There Anymore&quot;, Reubens learned that police were at his home with a search warrant. Police were acting on a tip from a witness in the pornography case against actor Jeffrey Jones, finding among over 70,000 items of kitsch memorabilia, two grainy videotapes, and dozens of photographs that the city attorney&#x27;s office characterized as a collection of &quot;child pornography.&quot; Kelly Bush, Reubens&#x27;s personal representative at the time, said the description of the items was inaccurate and stated the objects were &quot;Rob Lowe&#x27;s sex videotape&quot;, and a few 30- to 100-year-old kitsch collectible images.&quot;

Reubens turned himself in to the Hollywood division of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) and was charged with misdemeanor possession of obscene material improperly depicting a child under the age of 18 in sexual conduct. The district attorney looked at Reubens&#x27;s collection and computer and found no grounds for bringing any felony charges against him, while the city attorney, Rocky Delgadillo, formally charged Reubens on the last day allowed by statute. Reubens was represented by Hollywood criminal defense lawyer Blair Berk.
In December, he pleaded not guilty through Berk. In March 2004, child pornography charges were dropped in exchange for Reubens&#x27;s guilty plea to a lesser misdemeanor obscenity charge. For the next three years, he was required to register his address with the sheriff&#x27;s office, and he could not be in the company of minors without the permission of their parent or legal guardian.

Reubens later stated that he was a collector of erotica, including films, muscle magazines, and a sizable collection of mostly homosexual vintage erotica, such as photographic studies of teen nudes. Reubens said that what the city attorney&#x27;s office viewed as pornography he considered to be innocent art, and whether the memorabilia were pornographic images &quot;depends on what one sees in those images&quot;. Reubens described the nude images as people &quot;one hundred percent not&quot; performing sexual acts.

Being an avid collector, Reubens often purchased bulk lots, and one of his vintage magazine dealers declared that &quot;there&#x27;s no way&quot; he could have known the content of each page in the publications he bought, and he recalled Reubens asking for &quot;physique magazines, vintage [1960s] material, but not things featuring kids&quot;.

During this ongoing legal issue, Reubens spent two years in Sarasota, Florida, caring for his terminally ill father, who died in February 2004 of cancer.

==Reception and legacy==
Reubens had not always thought of his character as one for children prior to the mid-1980s, when he became more selective of what should and should not be associated with Pee-wee. He was a heavy smoker and hired security to make sure that children never saw him with a cigarette while in costume. He refused to endorse candy bars and other unhealthy food; he said in 1999 that he had proposed &quot;Ralston Purina Pee-wee Chow cereal&quot;, but the sugar-free product was not released due to a negative reaction in a blind taste test.

Pee-wee was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame by 1989, and successfully built a Pee-wee franchise, with toys, clothes, and other items generating more than $25 million at its peak in 1988. Reubens also published a book as Pee-wee in 1989 called &quot;Travels with Pee-Wee&quot;. CBS aired reruns of &quot;Playhouse&quot; until July 1991, when Reubens was arrested, pulling from their schedule the last two remaining reruns. Fox Family Channel briefly aired reruns of the &quot;Playhouse&quot; in 1998. In early July 2006, Cartoon Network began running a teaser promo during its Adult Swim lineup. A later press release and many other promos confirmed that the show&#x27;s 45 original episodes would air nightly from Monday to Thursday starting on that date. &quot;Playhouse&quot; attracted 1.5 million viewers nightly. In 2007, &quot;TV Guide&quot; named &quot;Playhouse&quot; one of the top 10 TV cult classics of all time. Several children&#x27;s television personas cite Pee-wee Herman as an inspiration, including Steve Burns of &quot;Blue&#x27;s Clues&quot; and Stephen Hillenburg of &quot;SpongeBob SquarePants&quot;.
In November 2004, all 45 episodes of the &quot;Playhouse&quot;, plus six episodes that had never before been released on home video, were released on DVD split between two box set collections. On July 3, 2013, Shout! Factory announced that they had acquired the rights to the entire series from Reubens, which was released on Blu-ray on October 21, 2014. In addition, the entire series was digitally remastered from the original 35mm film elements and original audio tracks.

Pee-wee&#x27;s tight-fitting Glen plaid suits have made him a &quot;style icon&quot;, with fashion houses and designers like Christopher Bailey, Ennio Capasa, Miuccia Prada, Viktor &amp; Rolf, and Thom Browne creating tightly cut suits with high armholes and short trousers that have been compared to Pee-wee&#x27;s.

Reubens discussed plans for a museum, which would contain many of the &quot;Playhouse&quot; sets and props he owned.

A two-part documentary series on Reubens&#x27;s life, &quot;Pee-wee as Himself&quot;, will premiere on HBO in 2025. Reubens took part in the filming of the documentary prior to his death in 2023.

==Death==
Reubens died on July 30, 2023, at the age of 70, at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. The immediate cause of his death was acute hypoxic respiratory failure. At the time of his death he was diagnosed with both myelogenous leukemia and metastatic lung cancer. He had been diagnosed six years earlier, but had not revealed his diagnosis to the public.

Following his death, a statement written by Reubens was released: 
Reubens was cremated, and his remains were interred at Hollywood Forever Cemetery.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Video games===

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q720581" start="0" end="12" title="Paul Reubens" label="Paul Reubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374172" start="142" end="156" title="Pee-wee Herman" label="Pee-wee Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000351" start="197" end="212" title="the Groundlings" label="the Groundlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140700" start="255" end="279" title="Improvisational theatre" label="improvisational comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="391" end="410" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756461" start="471" end="494" title="The Pee-wee Herman Show" label="The Pee-wee Herman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293972" start="733" end="761" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Adventure" label="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="788" end="798" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364439" start="862" end="877" title="Big Top Pee-wee" label="Big Top Pee-wee"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="970" end="973" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160103" start="1021" end="1045" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse" label="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43426" start="1079" end="1096" title="indecent exposure" label="indecent exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q52815" start="1103" end="1116" title="adult theater" label="adult theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q491540" start="1120" end="1137" title="Sarasota, Florida" label="Sarasota, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084074" start="1425" end="1436" title="Mystery Men" label="Mystery Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q631515" start="1460" end="1464" title="Blow (film)" label="Blow"/>
<link wikidata="Q521718" start="1608" end="1620" title="Murphy Brown" label="Murphy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q189350" start="1634" end="1641" title="30 Rock (TV series)" label="30 Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645442" start="1655" end="1665" title="Portlandia" label="Portlandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13148212" start="1683" end="1696" title="The Blacklist (TV series)" label="The Blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="1843" end="1850" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866175" start="1871" end="1897" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Holiday" label="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="2085" end="2096" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="2199" end="2207" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q876191" start="2383" end="2402" title="Peekskill, New York" label="Peekskill, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="2441" end="2447" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q491540" start="2458" end="2475" title="Sarasota, Florida" label="Sarasota, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q16016262" start="2517" end="2533" title="Milton Rubenfeld" label="Milton Rubenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2655" end="2670" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="2683" end="2703" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="U.S. Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q462211" start="2772" end="2789" title="Israeli Air Force" label="Israeli Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="2801" end="2822" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="2827" end="2839" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q38490" start="2997" end="3008" title="dog trainer" label="dog trainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664491" start="3014" end="3018" title="Abby Rubenfeld" label="Abby"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153408" start="3042" end="3050" title="Attorney at law (United States)" label="attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="3077" end="3107" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019805" start="3162" end="3179" title="Oneonta, New York" label="Oneonta, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642430" start="3211" end="3256" title="Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus" label="Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp;amp; Bailey Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181943" start="3443" end="3454" title="I Love Lucy" label="I Love Lucy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423230" start="3628" end="3648" title="Sarasota High School" label="Sarasota High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="3734" end="3757" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807581" start="3830" end="3843" title="Asolo Repertory Theatre" label="Asolo Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205857" start="3948" end="3973" title="Plymouth State University" label="Plymouth State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="4009" end="4026" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="4134" end="4150" title="Juilliard School" label="Juilliard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="4164" end="4190" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026827" start="4221" end="4253" title="California Institute of the Arts" label="California Institute of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508242" start="4390" end="4402" title="Fuller Brush Company" label="Fuller Brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290131" start="4582" end="4595" title="The Gong Show" label="The Gong Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4754" end="4765" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000351" start="4800" end="4815" title="the Groundlings" label="the Groundlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q262738" start="4886" end="4898" title="Edie McClurg" label="Edie McClurg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809528" start="4900" end="4912" title="John Paragon" label="John Paragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q366834" start="4932" end="4944" title="Phil Hartman" label="Phil Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q109767" start="5091" end="5109" title="The Blues Brothers (film)" label="The Blues Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q366834" start="5419" end="5431" title="Phil Hartman" label="Phil Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809528" start="5506" end="5518" title="John Paragon" label="John Paragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q52985" start="5602" end="5607" title="Hergé" label="Hergé"/>
<link wikidata="Q52986" start="5615" end="5621" title="Tintin (character)" label="Tintin"/>
<link wikidata="Q199588" start="5626" end="5633" title="Carlo Collodi" label="Collodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502703" start="5641" end="5650" title="Pinocchio" label="Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q14396011" start="5844" end="5860" title="Life with Father" label="Life with Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="6099" end="6108" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494311" start="6321" end="6332" title="Gary Austin" label="Gary Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="6606" end="6625" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q221464" start="6677" end="6694" title="Gilbert Gottfried" label="Gilbert Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="6715" end="6735" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="6906" end="6929" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374172" start="7225" end="7239" title="Pee-wee Herman" label="Pee-wee Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304513" start="7320" end="7339" title="Lynne Marie Stewart" label="Lynne Marie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565972" start="7415" end="7431" title="the Roxy Theatre" label="the Roxy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756461" start="7444" end="7467" title="The Pee-wee Herman Show" label="The Pee-wee Herman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="7611" end="7614" title="Home Box Office" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617065" start="7695" end="7706" title="On Location (TV series)" label="On Location"/>
<link wikidata="Q4423293" start="7770" end="7806" title="Cheech &amp;amp; Chong&amp;#x27;s Next Movie" label="Cheech &amp;amp; Chong&amp;#x27;s Next Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066813" start="7853" end="7871" title="Cheech &amp;amp; Chong" label="Cheech &amp;amp; Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024671" start="7879" end="7890" title="Nice Dreams" label="Nice Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806831" start="8766" end="8797" title="Late Night with David Letterman" label="Late Night with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027239" start="8993" end="9008" title="Guthrie Theater" label="Guthrie Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="9012" end="9023" title="Minneapolis, Minnesota" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045272" start="9025" end="9040" title="Caroline&amp;#x27;s" label="Caroline&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="9091" end="9104" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756461" start="9184" end="9207" title="The Pee-wee Herman Show" label="The Pee-wee Herman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="9223" end="9235" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q2477507" start="9366" end="9375" title="Pollyanna (1960 film)" label="Pollyanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="9673" end="9683" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q939385" start="9705" end="9712" title="Vincent (1982 film)" label="Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055962" start="9736" end="9749" title="Frankenweenie (1984 film)" label="Frankenweenie"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="10153" end="10162" title="cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="10295" end="10298" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="10347" end="10361" title="cartoon series" label="cartoon series"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="10440" end="10451" title="live-action" label="live-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160103" start="10483" end="10507" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse" label="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="10574" end="10584" title="prime-time" label="prime-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="10585" end="10591" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q193048" start="10725" end="10743" title="Laurence Fishburne" label="Laurence Fishburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198897" start="10748" end="10767" title="S. Epatha Merkerson" label="S. Epatha Merkerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="10849" end="10861" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318552" start="11088" end="11117" title="The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show" label="The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070749" start="11131" end="11152" title="The Mickey Mouse Club" label="The Mickey Mouse Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q447527" start="11166" end="11182" title="Captain Kangaroo" label="Captain Kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064318" start="11200" end="11211" title="Howdy Doody" label="Howdy Doody"/>
<link wikidata="Q189573" start="11407" end="11418" title="Golden Rule" label="Golden Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193503" start="11729" end="11752" title="Flight of the Navigator" label="Flight of the Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q52383" start="11810" end="11815" title="Droid (Star Wars)" label="droid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251688" start="11856" end="11866" title="Star Tours" label="Star Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="11876" end="11885" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19680204" start="11899" end="11915" title="motion simulator" label="motion simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="11930" end="11940" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345090" start="11945" end="11963" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios" label="Disney-MGM Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="11967" end="11984" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q206521" start="11990" end="12006" title="Disneyland Paris" label="Disneyland Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839480" start="12091" end="12108" title="Back to the Beach" label="Back to the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="12133" end="12146" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="12310" end="12328" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364439" start="12356" end="12371" title="Big Top Pee-wee" label="Big Top Pee-wee"/>
<link wikidata="Q267721" start="12442" end="12448" title="Grease (film)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340565" start="12464" end="12478" title="Randal Kleiser" label="Randal Kleiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q327988" start="12941" end="12948" title="Occupational burnout" label="burnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593687" start="13152" end="13163" title="List of Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse episodes" label="45 episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593687" start="13170" end="13187" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse Christmas Special" label="Christmas Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179189" start="13223" end="13234" title="Daytime Emmy Award" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="13486" end="13493" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="dubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39970" start="13550" end="13574" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer (film)" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="13585" end="13595" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q189054" start="13609" end="13623" title="Batman Returns" label="Batman Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q384193" start="13653" end="13660" title="Penguin (character)" label="Penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q280400" start="13698" end="13705" title="Matilda (1996 film)" label="Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q645480" start="13722" end="13739" title="Dunston Checks In" label="Dunston Checks In"/>
<link wikidata="Q322328" start="13836" end="13866" title="The Nightmare Before Christmas" label="The Nightmare Before Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q521718" start="14289" end="14301" title="Murphy Brown" label="Murphy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="14371" end="14375" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q530923" start="14392" end="14434" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series" label="Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="14532" end="14535" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="14536" end="14541" title="television pilot" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15147779" start="14617" end="14648" title="You Can&amp;#x27;t Take It with You (play)" label="You Can&amp;#x27;t Take It with You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081312" start="14681" end="14697" title="development hell" label="development hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q946980" start="14789" end="14805" title="Philip Rosenthal" label="Philip Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084074" start="15004" end="15015" title="Mystery Men" label="Mystery Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107406" start="15048" end="15078" title="The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" label="The Tonight Show with Jay Leno"/>
<link wikidata="Q713099" start="15115" end="15128" title="Dwight Yoakam" label="Dwight Yoakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18510515" start="15150" end="15179" title="South of Heaven, West of Hell (film)" label="South of Heaven, West of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="15335" end="15338" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q846662" start="15339" end="15348" title="game show" label="game show"/>
<link wikidata="Q16968307" start="15355" end="15379" title="You Don&amp;#x27;t Know Jack (game show)" label="You Don&amp;#x27;t Know Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786131" start="15396" end="15434" title="You Don&amp;#x27;t Know Jack (franchise)" label="the video game series of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q654513" start="15555" end="15564" title="Ted Demme" label="Ted Demme"/>
<link wikidata="Q631515" start="15589" end="15593" title="Blow (film)" label="Blow"/>
<link wikidata="Q39666" start="15615" end="15628" title="Penélope Cruz" label="Penélope Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="15633" end="15644" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="15906" end="15920" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849170" start="15934" end="15943" title="Reno 911!" label="Reno 911!"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16004" end="16020" title="Reno 911!: Miami" label="Reno 911!: Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q912909" start="16078" end="16092" title="the Raconteurs" label="the Raconteurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q195039" start="16110" end="16129" title="Steady, As She Goes" label="Steady, As She Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q655882" start="16182" end="16193" title="soapbox car" label="soapbox car"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390030" start="16307" end="16320" title="SF Sketchfest" label="SF Sketchfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885658" start="16360" end="16375" title="Ben Fong-Torres" label="Ben Fong-Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="16457" end="16463" title="Situation comedy" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q189350" start="16606" end="16613" title="30 Rock" label="30 Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38978" start="16626" end="16632" title="Inbreeding" label="inbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q14540" start="16662" end="16670" title="Tina Fey" label="Tina Fey"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="16728" end="16730" title="FX (TV network)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q906077" start="16751" end="16755" title="Dirt (TV series)" label="Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q58912" start="16906" end="16919" title="Courteney Cox" label="Courteney Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q294185" start="16941" end="16955" title="David Arquette" label="David Arquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817035" start="17022" end="17033" title="The Tripper" label="The Tripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="17098" end="17106" title="Spike TV" label="Spike TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577195" start="17114" end="17132" title="Guys Choice" label="Guys Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="17234" end="17249" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094319" start="17298" end="17309" title="Re-Animated" label="Re-Animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="17321" end="17337" title="animated cartoon" label="animated cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q756428" start="17351" end="17358" title="Chowder (TV series)" label="Chowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460120" start="17372" end="17393" title="Tom Goes to the Mayor" label="Tom Goes to the Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804540" start="17411" end="17448" title="Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job!" label="Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17534" end="17551" title="List of characters in Pushing Daisies#Alfredo Aldarisio" label="Alfredo Aldarisio"/>
<link wikidata="Q515621" start="17582" end="17597" title="Pushing Daisies" label="Pushing Daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q747697" start="17634" end="17646" title="Raúl Esparza" label="Raúl Esparza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17688" end="17702" title="List of characters in Pushing Daisies#Oscar Vibenius" label="Oscar Vibenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196567" start="17779" end="17782" title="Public service announcement" label="PSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326621" start="17856" end="17867" title="light bulbs" label="light bulbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207571" start="17914" end="17918" title="Compact fluorescent lamp" label="CFLs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553201" start="17923" end="17926" title="LED lamp" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q504656" start="17948" end="17960" title="Todd Solondz" label="Todd Solondz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661541" start="17974" end="17993" title="Life During Wartime (film)" label="Life During Wartime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111860" start="18036" end="18044" title="Bat-Mite" label="Bat-Mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941453" start="19116" end="19137" title="The Fonda Theatre" label="the Music Box Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18753778" start="19190" end="19200" title="The Novo by Microsoft" label="Club Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040985" start="19378" end="19395" title="The Jay Leno Show" label="The Jay Leno Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269507" start="19409" end="19449" title="The Tonight Show with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="The Tonight Show with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746664" start="19499" end="19522" title="The Legally Prohibited from Being Funny on Television Tour" label="Legally Prohibited Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315167" start="19535" end="19553" title="Jimmy Kimmel Live!" label="Jimmy Kimmel Live!"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="19577" end="19584" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="19596" end="19604" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610570" start="19769" end="19793" title="Stephen Sondheim Theatre" label="Stephen Sondheim Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="19878" end="19881" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q829138" start="20065" end="20080" title="TV on the Radio" label="TV on the Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q29831811" start="20110" end="20121" title="Happy Idiot" label="Happy Idiot"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="20148" end="20155" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866175" start="20221" end="20247" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Holiday" label="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q325396" start="20271" end="20282" title="Judd Apatow" label="Judd Apatow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244383" start="20303" end="20311" title="John Lee (producer)" label="John Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792986" start="20339" end="20348" title="Paul Rust" label="Paul Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="20413" end="20420" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20503" end="20532" title="Star Wars: Galaxy&amp;#x27;s Edge" label="Star Wars: Galaxy&amp;#x27;s Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="20585" end="20595" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345090" start="20600" end="20631" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="20635" end="20652" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251688" start="20721" end="20731" title="Star Tours" label="Star Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q28787" start="20761" end="20777" title="Star Wars Rebels" label="Star Wars Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="21351" end="21363" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="21554" end="21563" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170515" start="21688" end="21707" title="Valley of the Dolls (film)" label="Valley of the Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160103" start="22033" end="22042" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Playhouse" label="Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q730811" start="22360" end="22373" title="H.R. Pufnstuf" label="H.R. Pufnstuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q130295" start="22390" end="22416" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" label="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351201" start="22454" end="22465" title="Gary Panter" label="Gary Panter"/>
<link wikidata="Q870889" start="22866" end="22876" title="claymation" label="claymation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="23019" end="23022" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q862197" start="23256" end="23273" title="The Polar Express (film)" label="The Polar Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="23299" end="23318" title="Motion capture" label="performance capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293972" start="23426" end="23454" title="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Adventure" label="Pee-wee&amp;#x27;s Big Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="23470" end="23480" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="23519" end="23530" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q727561" start="23819" end="23831" title="Funny or Die" label="Funny or Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796" start="23893" end="23897" title="iPad" label="iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="23914" end="23924" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="24129" end="24135" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q257443" start="24490" end="24504" title="60th Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q230710" start="24546" end="24560" title="Valeria Golino" label="Valeria Golino"/>
<link wikidata="Q273889" start="24656" end="24666" title="Doris Duke" label="Doris Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q285536" start="24737" end="24750" title="Imelda Marcos" label="Imelda Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488597" start="24764" end="24774" title="Shangri La (Doris Duke)" label="Shangri-La"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="24805" end="24813" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="24815" end="24821" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q238671" start="24857" end="24867" title="Debi Mazar" label="Debi Mazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131601899" start="25095" end="25113" title="Pee-wee as Himself" label="Pee-wee as Himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="25212" end="25215" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="25439" end="25443" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304513" start="25934" end="25953" title="Lynne Marie Stewart" label="Lynne Marie Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192980" start="26048" end="26070" title="Make-a-Wish Foundation" label="Make-a-Wish Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q491540" start="26297" end="26314" title="Sarasota, Florida" label="Sarasota, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q43426" start="26320" end="26337" title="indecent exposure" label="indecent exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q52815" start="26365" end="26378" title="porno theater" label="porno theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843705" start="26854" end="26877" title="Sarasota Herald-Tribune" label="Sarasota Herald-Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="26971" end="26980" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q273889" start="27096" end="27106" title="Doris Duke" label="Doris Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q357789" start="27435" end="27447" title="adjudication" label="adjudication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345090" start="27564" end="27582" title="Disney&amp;#x27;s Hollywood Studios" label="Disney-MGM Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="27660" end="27669" title="voiceover" label="voiceover"/>
<link wikidata="Q696334" start="27691" end="27712" title="Toys &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us" label="Toys &amp;quot;R&amp;quot; Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="27834" end="27844" title="Nolo contendere" label="no contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196567" start="28021" end="28048" title="public service announcement" label="public service announcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="28123" end="28135" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q292081" start="28137" end="28154" title="Annette Funicello" label="Annette Funicello"/>
<link wikidata="Q207405" start="28156" end="28169" title="Zsa Zsa Gabor" label="Zsa Zsa Gabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q230710" start="28175" end="28189" title="Valeria Golino" label="Valeria Golino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351201" start="28297" end="28308" title="Gary Panter" label="Gary Panter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198897" start="28310" end="28329" title="S. Epatha Merkerson" label="S. Epatha Merkerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340565" start="28372" end="28386" title="Randal Kleiser" label="Randal Kleiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656228" start="28572" end="28600" title="A Current Affair (American TV program)" label="&amp;quot;A Current Affair&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q822310" start="28879" end="28906" title="1991 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1991 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="29096" end="29110" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q437015" start="29128" end="29140" title="Minnie Pearl" label="Minnie Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q366172" start="29213" end="29229" title="David LaChapelle" label="David LaChapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="29247" end="29257" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990546" start="29271" end="29311" title="This Train Don&amp;#x27;t Stop There Anymore" label="This Train Don&amp;#x27;t Stop There Anymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770743" start="29371" end="29385" title="search warrant" label="search warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q377662" start="29468" end="29481" title="Jeffrey Jones" label="Jeffrey Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q131711" start="29518" end="29524" title="kitsch" label="kitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123536" start="29596" end="29609" title="city attorney" label="city attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="29663" end="29680" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170621" start="29715" end="29738" title="personal representative" label="personal representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q296505" start="29835" end="29843" title="Rob Lowe" label="Rob Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29851" end="29864" title="Rob Lowe#Sex tape" label="sex videotape"/>
<link wikidata="Q214126" start="29995" end="30024" title="Los Angeles Police Department" label="Los Angeles Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q694324" start="30053" end="30064" title="misdemeanor" label="misdemeanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="30273" end="30279" title="felony" label="felony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355762" start="30326" end="30342" title="Rocky Delgadillo" label="Rocky Delgadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q181001" start="30916" end="30923" title="erotica" label="erotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168168" start="31006" end="31021" title="Erotic art" label="vintage erotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="32186" end="32195" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q11312555" start="32236" end="32245" title="candy bar" label="candy bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q608510" start="32434" end="32450" title="Blind experiment" label="blind taste test"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="32487" end="32509" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32819" end="32827" title="#First arrest and retreat from public eye (1991)" label="arrested"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697087" start="32888" end="32906" title="Fox Family Channel" label="Fox Family Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="32986" end="33001" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="33042" end="33052" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="33298" end="33306" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273568" start="33397" end="33423" title="children&amp;#x27;s television" label="children&amp;#x27;s television"/>
<link wikidata="Q456219" start="33482" end="33493" title="Steve Burns" label="Steve Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q886105" start="33503" end="33520" title="Blue&amp;#x27;s Clues" label="Blue&amp;#x27;s Clues"/>
<link wikidata="Q318750" start="33531" end="33549" title="Stephen Hillenburg" label="Stephen Hillenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q83279" start="33559" end="33580" title="SpongeBob SquarePants" label="SpongeBob SquarePants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="33798" end="33812" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="33914" end="33921" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q154306" start="34093" end="34103" title="Glen plaid" label="Glen plaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086512" start="34189" end="34207" title="Christopher Bailey (fashion designer)" label="Christopher Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054480" start="34209" end="34221" title="Ennio Capasa" label="Ennio Capasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q242342" start="34223" end="34236" title="Miuccia Prada" label="Miuccia Prada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707765" start="34238" end="34255" title="Viktor &amp;amp; Rolf" label="Viktor &amp;amp; Rolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524805" start="34261" end="34272" title="Thom Browne" label="Thom Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q131601899" start="34560" end="34578" title="Pee-wee as Himself" label="Pee-wee as Himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="34603" end="34606" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052562" start="34759" end="34786" title="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center" label="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="34846" end="34853" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="34854" end="34873" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11688946" start="34927" end="34947" title="myelogenous leukemia" label="myelogenous leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="34963" end="34974" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="35147" end="35155" title="Cremation" label="cremated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624932" start="35190" end="35216" title="Hollywood Forever Cemetery" label="Hollywood Forever Cemetery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23917" wikidata="Q1757451" url="?curid=23917" title="Prismatoid">
<text>In geometry, a prismatoid is a polyhedron whose vertices all lie in two parallel planes. Its lateral faces can be trapezoids or triangles. If both planes have the same number of vertices, and the lateral faces are either parallelograms or trapezoids, it is called a prismoid.

==Volume==
If the areas of the two parallel faces are and , the cross-sectional area of the intersection of the prismatoid with a plane midway between the two parallel faces is , and the height (the distance between the two parallel faces) is , then the volume of the prismatoid is given by
formula_1
This formula follows immediately by integrating the area parallel to the two planes of vertices by Simpson&#x27;s rule, since that rule is exact for integration of polynomials of degree up to 3, and in this case the area is at most a quadratic function in the height.

==Prismatoid families==
Families of prismatoids include:

*Pyramids, in which one plane contains only a single point;
*Wedges, in which one plane contains only two points;
*Prisms, whose polygons in each plane are congruent and joined by rectangles or parallelograms;
*Antiprisms, whose polygons in each plane are congruent and joined by an alternating strip of triangles;
*Star antiprisms;
*Cupolae, in which the polygon in one plane contains twice as many points as the other and is joined to it by alternating triangles and rectangles;
*Frusta obtained by truncation of a pyramid or a cone;
*Quadrilateral-faced hexahedral prismatoids:
*# Parallelepipeds – six parallelogram faces
*# Rhombohedrons – six rhombus faces
*# Trigonal trapezohedra – six congruent rhombus faces
*# Cuboids – six rectangular faces
*# Quadrilateral frusta – an apex-truncated square pyramid
*# Cube – six square faces

==Higher dimensions==

In general, a polytope is prismatoidal if its vertices exist in two hyperplanes. For example, in four dimensions, two polyhedra can be placed in two parallel 3-spaces, and connected with polyhedral sides.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="3" end="11" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757451" start="15" end="25" title="Prismatoid" label="prismatoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172937" start="31" end="41" title="polyhedron" label="polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q26401" start="48" end="56" title="vertex (geometry)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="81" end="87" title="Plane (geometry)" label="planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46303" start="114" end="123" title="trapezoid" label="trapezoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19821" start="128" end="136" title="triangle" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45867" start="221" end="234" title="parallelogram" label="parallelogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757451" start="266" end="274" title="Prismatoid" label="prismoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="531" end="537" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="614" end="625" title="integral" label="integrating"/>
<link wikidata="Q722507" start="677" end="696" title="Simpson&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Simpson&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="742" end="752" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q50695" start="812" end="830" title="quadratic function" label="quadratic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358290" start="906" end="914" title="Pyramid (geometry)" label="Pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755127" start="966" end="972" title="Wedge (geometry)" label="Wedges"/>
<link wikidata="Q180544" start="1020" end="1026" title="Prism (geometry)" label="Prisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048057" start="1116" end="1125" title="Antiprism" label="Antiprism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048057" start="1221" end="1235" title="Star antiprism" label="Star antiprism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792895" start="1239" end="1246" title="Cupola (geometry)" label="Cupolae"/>
<link wikidata="Q846235" start="1387" end="1393" title="Frustum" label="Frusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847476" start="1406" end="1416" title="truncation (geometry)" label="truncation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36810" start="1442" end="1455" title="Quadrilateral" label="Quadrilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q668113" start="1462" end="1472" title="hexahedron" label="hexahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q181658" start="1489" end="1503" title="Parallelepiped" label="Parallelepiped"/>
<link wikidata="Q45867" start="1511" end="1524" title="parallelogram" label="parallelogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q854916" start="1534" end="1546" title="Rhombohedron" label="Rhombohedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41159" start="1554" end="1561" title="rhombus" label="rhombus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100536" start="1571" end="1592" title="Trigonal trapezohedron" label="Trigonal trapezohedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q55450691" start="1626" end="1632" title="Cuboid" label="Cuboid"/>
<link wikidata="Q846235" start="1661" end="1681" title="frustum" label="Quadrilateral frusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858200" start="1687" end="1691" title="apex (geometry)" label="apex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847476" start="1692" end="1701" title="truncation (geometry)" label="truncated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075704" start="1702" end="1716" title="square pyramid" label="square pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q812880" start="1720" end="1724" title="Cube" label="Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q747980" start="1782" end="1790" title="polytope" label="polytope"/>
<link wikidata="Q657586" start="1836" end="1846" title="hyperplane" label="hyperplane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23920" wikidata="Q975336" url="?curid=23920" title="Phantom kangaroo">
<text>A phantom kangaroo is a report of kangaroos, wallabies, or their accompanying footprints in areas where there is no native population. Some explanations put forth are escaped zoo or circus animals (as in the UK), or publicity stunts by local businesses using photographs from Australia. Others suggest outbreaks of such sightings are a form of mass psychogenic illness.

==France==
A population of feral red-necked wallabies, often mis-identified as &quot;kangourous&quot;, lives near the township of Émancé, about southwest of Paris. These wallabies are descended from a breeding population which escaped a zoological reserve in the 1970s.

==Japan==
Between 2002 and 2011, there was a series of phantom kangaroo sightings in the Mayama mountain district of Ōsaki, Miyagi city in Miyagi Prefecture.

==New Zealand==
In 1831, after arriving in Australia, two sailors from the &quot;Sydney Packet&quot; reported that they had seen a &quot;giant kangaroo&quot;, 30 feet (nine metres) tall, at a small cove in Dusky Sound, South Island. From a small boat, they observed it standing near the treeline, and when they came too close the animal jumped into the water and swam away, leaving a wake extending from one end of the sound to the other.

Kawau Island in the Hauraki Gulf has a colony of three species of wallabies descending from a deliberate introduction by Sir George Grey, a 19th century Governor.

New Zealand also has a wild population of wallabies in the Waimate District of South Island that were introduced for hunting in the late 19th century.

==United Kingdom==
Documented colonies of red-necked wallabies exist in the United Kingdom. A breeding colony established itself after breaking loose from a private zoo in Leek, Staffordshire in the 1930s. Their population seems to have peaked in the 1970s, reaching numbers between 60 and 70. There were no confirmed sightings of the wallabies between 2000 and 2007, with some locals believing they must have died out. In 2009, newspapers reported wallaby sightings (including clear pictures) that made reference to sightings in 2008. In recent years, BBC News has documented numerous wallaby sightings across the UK.

Inchconnachan, an island in Loch Lomond in Scotland, also has a population of wallabies after they were introduced by Lady Arran Colquhoun in the 1920s.

Subsequent sightings have been made including a report of a Bennett’s wallaby filmed by zoologist Maurice Melzak in Highgate Cemetery, Hampstead, London in October 2013, and an albino wallaby in Northamptonshire in 2015.&lt;br&gt;

==United States==
In 1934, near South Pittsburg, Tennessee, an atypical kangaroo or &quot;kangaroo-like beast&quot; was reported by several witnesses over a five-day period, and to have killed and partially devoured several animals, including ducks, geese, a German Shepherd and other dogs. Kangaroos are typically unaggressive and vegetarian. A witness described the animal as looking &quot;like a large kangaroo, running and leaping across a field.&quot; A search party followed the animal&#x27;s tracks to a mountainside cave where they stopped. The animal was never found, and national news coverage drew widespread ridicule.

In 1974, in Chicago, Illinois, two Chicago police officers were called to investigate a report that a kangaroo was standing in someone&#x27;s porch. After a brief search, the officers located the animal in an alleyway, but were unable to capture it. Over the next month, numerous kangaroo sightings were reported in Illinois and the neighbouring states of Indiana and Wisconsin, with timing suggesting more than one animal if reports were accurate. A kangaroo was seen the next day by a paperboy, the next week in Schiller Woods, Illinois, and the week after that just outside Plano, Illinois, reported by a police officer who said it jumped eight feet from a field into the road. Thirty minutes later, a kangaroo was reported back in Chicago, then reported on the following three days in the surrounding countryside. A few days later, there were a rash of sightings in Indiana. Reports ceased about a month after the original story.

In 1978, in Menomonee Falls, Wisconsin, two men photographed a large kangaroo beside the highway. Author Loren Coleman, described as the &quot;leading authority on North American kangaroo sightings&quot;, suggested the animal looked like a Bennett&#x27;s wallaby.

In 2013, in Oklahoma, a kangaroo was reportedly recorded by hunters in a field. The video was published on the website YouTube, and prompted speculation that the animal may be a pet kangaroo who went missing in the state just over a year earlier.

Also in 2013, &quot;The Ridgefield Press&quot; reported that a motorist in North Salem, New York captured on video what he thought was a kangaroo, and published the video on their website. The newspaper noted that escaped wallabies, smaller than kangaroos, were known in Westchester County, which encompasses North Salem. Several people in the county had kept wallabies as pets.

==See also==
* Forteana
* Phantom cat
* Vagrancy (biology)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q975336" start="2" end="18" title="Phantom kangaroo" label="phantom kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="34" end="42" title="kangaroo" label="kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q623169" start="45" end="54" title="wallaby" label="wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532199" start="344" end="368" title="mass psychogenic illness" label="mass psychogenic illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q249024" start="404" end="424" title="Red-necked wallaby" label="red-necked wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q275670" start="501" end="507" title="Émancé" label="Émancé"/>
<link wikidata="Q385892" start="759" end="772" title="Ōsaki, Miyagi" label="Ōsaki, Miyagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47896" start="781" end="798" title="Miyagi Prefecture" label="Miyagi Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660080" start="882" end="895" title="Sydney Packet" label="Sydney Packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048789" start="1007" end="1018" title="Dusky Sound" label="Dusky Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q472640" start="1241" end="1253" title="Kawau Island" label="Kawau Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q767824" start="1261" end="1273" title="Hauraki Gulf" label="Hauraki Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q76821" start="1362" end="1377" title="George Edward Grey" label="Sir George Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q455690" start="1394" end="1402" title="Governor-General of New Zealand" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460450" start="1464" end="1480" title="Waimate District" label="Waimate District"/>
<link wikidata="Q249024" start="1599" end="1619" title="Red-necked wallaby" label="red-necked wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="1735" end="1748" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47914" start="2177" end="2190" title="Inchconnachan" label="Inchconnachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208926" start="2205" end="2216" title="Loch Lomond" label="Loch Lomond"/>
<link wikidata="Q533697" start="2447" end="2464" title="Highgate Cemetery" label="Highgate Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800120" start="2595" end="2610" title="South Pittsburg, Tennessee" label="South Pittsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="2612" end="2621" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3206" end="3213" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="3215" end="3223" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="3510" end="3518" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="3550" end="3557" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="3562" end="3571" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3708" end="3722" title="Forest Preserve District of Cook County#Region 3: North Cook County" label="Schiller Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q575061" start="3771" end="3776" title="Plano, Illinois" label="Plano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="4064" end="4071" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787576" start="4141" end="4156" title="Menomonee Falls" label="Menomonee Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="4158" end="4167" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656197" start="4234" end="4247" title="Loren Coleman" label="Loren Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q249024" start="4369" end="4391" title="Bennett&amp;#x27;s wallaby" label="Bennett&amp;#x27;s wallaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="4406" end="4414" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="4513" end="4520" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760717" start="4662" end="4682" title="The Ridgefield Press" label="The Ridgefield Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022773" start="4717" end="4738" title="North Salem, New York" label="North Salem, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q54066" start="4913" end="4931" title="Westchester County, New York" label="Westchester County"/>
<link wikidata="Q443325" start="5037" end="5045" title="Forteana" label="Forteana"/>
<link wikidata="Q837084" start="5048" end="5059" title="Phantom cat" label="Phantom cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279329" start="5062" end="5080" title="Vagrancy (biology)" label="Vagrancy (biology)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23922" wikidata="Q21578" url="?curid=23922" title="Princeton University">
<text>Princeton University is a private Ivy League research university in Princeton, New Jersey, United States. Founded in 1746 in Elizabeth as the College of New Jersey, Princeton is the fourth-oldest institution of higher education in the United States and one of the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution. The institution moved to Newark in 1747 and then to its Mercer County campus in Princeton nine years later. It officially became a university in 1896 and was subsequently renamed Princeton University.

The university is governed by the Trustees of Princeton University and has an endowment of $37.7 billion, the largest endowment per student in the United States. Princeton provides undergraduate and graduate instruction in the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, and engineering to approximately 8,500 students on its main campus spanning within the borough of Princeton. It offers postgraduate degrees through the Princeton School of Public and International Affairs, the School of Engineering and Applied Science, the School of Architecture and the Bendheim Center for Finance. The university also manages the Department of Energy&#x27;s Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory and is home to the NOAA&#x27;s Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory. It is classified among &quot;R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity&quot; and has one of the largest university libraries in the world.

Princeton uses a residential college system and is known for its eating clubs for juniors and seniors. The university has over 500 student organizations. Princeton students embrace a wide variety of traditions from both the past and present. The university is an NCAA Division I school and competes in the Ivy League. The school&#x27;s athletic team, the Princeton Tigers, has won the most titles in its conference and has sent many students and alumni to the Olympics.

As of October 2021, 75 Nobel laureates, 16 Fields Medalists and 16 Turing Award laureates have been affiliated with Princeton University as alumni, faculty members, or researchers. In addition, Princeton has been associated with 21 National Medal of Science awardees, 5 Abel Prize awardees, 11 National Humanities Medal recipients, 217 Rhodes Scholars, 137 Marshall Scholars, and
62 Gates Cambridge Scholars. Two U.S. presidents, twelve U.S. Supreme Court justices (three of whom serve on the court ) and numerous living industry and media tycoons and foreign heads of state are all counted among Princeton&#x27;s alumni body. Princeton has graduated many members of the U.S. Congress and the U.S. Cabinet, including eight secretaries of state, three secretaries of defense and two chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

==History==
=== Founding ===

Princeton University, founded as the College of New Jersey, was shaped much in its formative years by the &quot;Log College&quot;, a seminary founded by the Reverend William Tennent at Neshaminy, Pennsylvania, in about 1726. While no legal connection ever existed, many of the pupils and adherents from the Log College would go on to financially support and become substantially involved in the early years of the university. While early writers considered it as the predecessor of the university, the idea has been rebuked by Princeton historians.

The founding of the university itself originated from a split in the Presbyterian church following the Great Awakening. In 1741, New Light Presbyterians were expelled from the Synod of Philadelphia in defense of how the Log College ordained ministers. The four founders of the College of New Jersey, who were New Lights, were either expelled or withdrew from the Synod and devised a plan to establish a new college, for they were disappointed with Harvard and Yale&#x27;s opposition to the Great Awakening and dissatisfied with the limited instruction at the Log College. They convinced three other Presbyterians to join them and decided on New Jersey as the location for the college, as at the time, there was no institution between Yale College in New Haven, Connecticut, and the College of William &amp; Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia; it was also where some of the founders preached. Although their initial request was rejected by the Anglican governor Lewis Morrison, the acting governor after Morrison&#x27;s death, John Hamilton, granted a charter for the College of New Jersey on October 22, 1746. In 1747, approximately five months after acquiring the charter, the trustees elected Jonathan Dickinson as president and opened in Elizabeth, New Jersey, where classes were held in Dickinson&#x27;s parsonage. With its founding, it became the fourth-oldest institution of higher education in the United States, and one of nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution. The founders aimed for the college to have an expansive curriculum to teach people of various professions, not solely ministerial work. Though the school was open to those of any religious denomination, with many of the founders being of Presbyterian faith, the college became the educational and religious capital of Scotch-Irish Presbyterian America.

=== Colonial and early years ===
In 1747, following the death of then President Jonathan Dickinson, the college moved from Elizabeth to Newark, New Jersey, as that was where presidential successor Aaron Burr Sr.&#x27;s parsonage was located. That same year, Princeton&#x27;s first charter came under dispute by Anglicans, but on September 14, 1748, the recently appointed governor Jonathan Belcher granted a second charter. Belcher, a Congregationalist, had become alienated from his alma mater, Harvard, and decided to &quot;adopt&quot; the infant college. Belcher would go on to raise funds for the college and donate his 474-volume library, making it one of the largest libraries in the colonies.

In 1756, the college moved again to its present home in Princeton, New Jersey, because Newark was felt to be too close to New York. Princeton was chosen for its location in central New Jersey and by strong recommendation by Belcher. The college&#x27;s home in Princeton was Nassau Hall, named for the royal William III of England, a member of the House of Orange-Nassau. The trustees of the College of New Jersey initially suggested that Nassau Hall be named in recognition of Belcher because of his interest in the institution; the governor vetoed the request.

Burr, who would die in 1757, devised a curriculum for the school and enlarged the student body. Following the untimely death of Burr and the college&#x27;s next three presidents, John Witherspoon became president in 1768 and remained in that post until his death in 1794. With his presidency, Witherspoon focused the college on preparing a new generation of both educated clergy and secular leadership in the new American nation. To this end, he tightened academic standards, broadened the curriculum, solicited investment for the college, and grew its size.

A signatory of the Declaration of Independence, Witherspoon and his leadership led the college to becoming influential to the American Revolution. In 1777, the college became the site for the Battle of Princeton. During the battle, British soldiers briefly occupied Nassau Hall before eventually surrendering to American forces led by General George Washington. During the summer and fall of 1783, the Continental Congress and Washington met in Nassau Hall, making Princeton the country&#x27;s capital for four months; Nassau Hall is where Congress learned of the peace treaty between the colonies and the British. The college did suffer from the revolution, with a depreciated endowment and hefty repair bills for Nassau Hall.

=== 19th century ===
In 1795, President Samuel Stanhope Smith took office, the first alumnus to become president. Nassau Hall suffered a large fire that destroyed its interior in 1802, which Smith blamed on rebellious students. The college raised funds for reconstruction, as well as the construction of two new buildings. In 1807, a large student riot occurred at Nassau Hall, spurred by underlying distrust of educational reforms by Smith away from the Church. Following Smith&#x27;s mishandling of the situation, falling enrollment, and faculty resignations, the trustees of the university offered resignation to Smith, which he accepted. In 1812, Ashbel Green was unanimously elected by the trustees of the college to become the eighth president. After the liberal tenure of Smith, Green represented the conservative &quot;Old Side&quot;, in which he introduced rigorous disciplinary rules and heavily embraced religion. Even so, believing the college was not religious enough, he took a prominent role in establishing the Princeton Theological Seminary next door. While student riots were a frequent occurrence during Green&#x27;s tenure, enrollment did increase under his administration.

In 1823, James Carnahan became president, arriving as an unprepared and timid leader. With the college riven by conflicting views between students, faculty, and trustees, and enrollment hitting its lowest in years, Carnahan considered closing the university. Carnahan&#x27;s successor, John Maclean Jr., who was only a professor at the time, recommended saving the university with the help of alumni; as a result, Princeton&#x27;s alumni association, led by James Madison, was created and began raising funds. With Carnahan and Maclean, now vice-president, working as partners, enrollment and faculty increased, tensions decreased, and the college campus expanded. Maclean took over the presidency in 1854, and led the university through the American Civil War. When Nassau Hall burned down again in 1855, Maclean raised funds and used the money to rebuild Nassau Hall and run the university on an austerity budget during the war years. With a third of students from the college being from the South, enrollment fell. Once many of the Southerners left, the campus became a sharp proponent for the Union, even bestowing an honorary degree to President Lincoln. James McCosh became the college&#x27;s president in 1868, and lifted the institution out of a low period that had been brought about by the war. During his two decades of service, he overhauled the curriculum, oversaw an expansion of inquiry into the sciences, recruited distinguished faculty, and supervised the addition of a number of buildings in the High Victorian Gothic style to the campus. McCosh&#x27;s tenure also saw the creation and rise of many extracurricular activities, like the Princeton Glee Club, the Triangle Club, the first intercollegiate football team, and the first permanent eating club, as well as the elimination of fraternities and sororities. In 1879, Princeton conferred its first doctorates on James F. Williamson and William Libby, both members of the Class of 1877.

Francis Patton took the presidency in 1888, and although his election was not met by unanimous enthusiasm, he was well received by undergraduates. Patton&#x27;s administration was marked by great change, for Princeton&#x27;s enrollment and faculty had doubled. At the same time, the college underwent large expansion and social life was changing in reflection of the rise in eating clubs and burgeoning interest in athletics. In 1893, the honor system was established, allowing for unproctored exams. In 1896, the college officially became a university, and as a result, it officially changed its name to Princeton University. In 1900, the Graduate School was formally established. Even with such accomplishments, Patton&#x27;s administration remained lackluster with its administrative structure and towards its educational standards. Due to profile changes in the board of trustees and dissatisfaction with his administration, he was forced to resign in 1902.

=== 20th century ===

Following Patton&#x27;s resignation, Woodrow Wilson, an alumnus and popular professor, was elected the 13th president of the university. Noticing falling academic standards, Wilson orchestrated significant changes to the curriculum, where freshman and sophomores followed a unified curriculum while juniors and seniors concentrated study in one discipline. Ambitious seniors were allowed to undertake independent work, which would eventually shape Princeton&#x27;s emphasis on the practice for the future. Wilson further reformed the educational system by introducing the preceptorial system in 1905, a then-unique concept in the United States that augmented the standard lecture method of teaching with a more personal form in which small groups of students, or precepts, could interact with a single instructor, or preceptor, in their field of interest. The changes brought about many new faculty and cemented Princeton&#x27;s academics for the first half of the 20th century. Due to the tightening of academic standards, enrollment declined severely until 1907. In 1906, the reservoir Lake Carnegie was created by Andrew Carnegie, and the university officially became nonsectarian. Before leaving office, Wilson strengthened the science program to focus on &quot;pure&quot; research and broke the Presbyterian lock on the board of trustees. However, he did fail in winning support for the permanent location of the Graduate School and the elimination of the eating clubs, which he proposed replacing with quadrangles, a precursor to the residential college system. Wilson also continued to keep Princeton closed off from accepting Black students. When an aspiring Black student wrote a letter to Wilson, he got his secretary to reply telling him to attend a university where he would be more welcome.

John Grier Hibben became president in 1912, and would remain in the post for two decades. On October 2, 1913, the Princeton University Graduate College was dedicated. When the United States entered World War I in 1917, Hibben allocated all available University resources to the government. As a result, military training schools opened on campus and laboratories and other facilities were used for research and operational programs. Overall, more than 6,000 students served in the armed forces, with 151 dying during the war. After the war, enrollment spiked and the trustees established the system of selective admission in 1922. From the 1920s to the 1930s, the student body featured many students from preparatory schools, zero Black students, and dwindling Jewish enrollment because of quotas. Aside from managing Princeton during WWI, Hibben introduced the senior thesis in 1923 as a part of The New Plan of Study. He also brought about great expansion to the university, with the creation of the School of Architecture in 1919, the School of Engineering in 1921, and the School of Public and International Affairs in 1930. By the end of his presidency, the endowment had increased by 374 percent, the total area of the campus doubled, the faculty experienced impressive growth, and the enrollment doubled.

Hibben&#x27;s successor, Harold Willis Dodds would lead the university through the Great Depression, World War II, and the Korean Conflict. With the Great Depression, many students were forced to withdraw due to financial reasons. At the same time, Princeton&#x27;s reputation in physics and mathematics surged as many European scientists left for the United States due to uneasy tension caused by Nazi Germany. In 1930, the Institute for Advanced Study was founded to provide a space for the influx of scientists, such as Albert Einstein. Many Princeton scientists would work on the Manhattan Project during the war, including the entire physics department. During World War II, Princeton offered an accelerated program for students to graduate early before entering the armed forces. Student enrollment fluctuated from month to month, and many faculty were forced to teach unfamiliar subjects. Still, Dodds maintained academic standards and would establish a program for servicemen, so they could resume their education once discharged.

===1945 to present===

The post-war years saw scholars renewing broken bonds through numerous conventions, expansion of the campus, and the introduction of distribution requirements. The period saw the desegregation of Princeton, which was stimulated by changes to the New Jersey constitution. Princeton began undertaking a sharper focus towards research in the years after the war, with the construction of Firestone Library in 1948 and the establishment of the Forrestal Research Center in nearby Plainsboro Township in the 1950s. Government sponsored research increased sharply, particularly in the physics and engineering departments, with much of it occurring at the new Forrestal campus. Though, as the years progressed, scientific research at the Forrestal campus declined, and in 1973, some of the land was converted to commercial and residential spaces.

Robert Goheen would succeed Dodds by unanimous vote and serve as president until 1972. Goheen&#x27;s presidency was characterized as being more liberal than previous presidents, and his presidency would see a rise in Black applicants, as well as the eventual coeducation of the university in 1969. During this period of rising diversity, the Third World Center (now known as the Carl A. Fields Center) was dedicated in 1971. Goheen also oversaw great expansion for the university, with square footage increasing by 80 percentage.

Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, Princeton experienced unprecedented activism, with most of it centered on the Vietnam War. While Princeton activism initially remained relatively timid compared to other institutions, protests began to grow with the founding of a local chapter of Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) in 1965, which organized many of the later Princeton protests. In 1966, the SDS gained prominence on campus following picketing against a speech by President Lyndon B. Johnson, which gained frontpage coverage by the &quot;New York Times.&quot; A notable point of contention on campus was the Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) and would feature multiple protests, some of which required police action. In 1967, SDS members and sympathizers beat the campus R.O.T.C. chapter in a game of touch football. As the years went on, the protests&#x27; agenda broadened to investments in South Africa, environmental issues, and women&#x27;s rights. In response to these broadening protests, the Council of the Princeton University Community (CPUC) was founded to serve as a method for greater student voice in governance. Activism culminated in 1970 with a student, faculty, and staff member strike, so the university could become an &quot;institution against expansion of the war.&quot; Princeton&#x27;s protests would taper off later that year, with &quot;The&quot; &quot;Daily Princetonian&quot; saying that, &quot;Princeton 1970–71 was an emotionally burned out university.&quot;

In 1982, the residential college system was officially established under Goheen&#x27;s successor William G. Bowen, who would serve until 1988. During his presidency, Princeton&#x27;s endowment increased from $625 million to $2 billion, and a major fundraising drive known as &quot;A Campaign for Princeton&quot; was conducted. President Harold T. Shapiro would succeed Bowen and remain president until 2001. Shapiro would continue to increase the endowment, expand academic programs, raise student diversity, and oversee the most renovations in Princeton&#x27;s history. One of Shapiro&#x27;s initiatives was the formation of the multidisciplinary Princeton Environmental Institute in 1994, renamed the High Meadows Environmental Institute in 2020. In 2001, Princeton shifted the financial aid policy to a system that replaced all loans with grants. That same year, Princeton elected its first female president, Shirley M. Tilghman. Before retiring in 2012, Tilghman expanded financial aid offerings and conducted several major construction projects like the Lewis Center for the Arts and a sixth residential college. Tilghman also lead initiatives for more global programs, the creation of an office of sustainability, and investments into the sciences.

Princeton&#x27;s 20th and current president, Christopher Eisgruber, was elected in 2013. In 2017, Princeton University unveiled a large-scale public history and digital humanities investigation into its historical involvement with slavery called the Princeton &amp; Slavery Project. The project saw the publication of hundreds of primary sources, 80 scholarly essays, a scholarly conference, a series of short plays, and an art project. In April 2018, university trustees announced that they would name two public spaces for James Collins Johnson and Betsey Stockton, enslaved people who lived and worked on Princeton&#x27;s campus and whose stories were publicized by the project. In 2019, large-scale student activism again entered the mainstream concerning the school&#x27;s implementation of federal Title IX policy relating to campus sexual assault. The activism consisted of sit-ins in response to a student&#x27;s disciplinary sentence.

In April 2024, students joined other campuses across the United States in protests and establishing encampments against the Israel–Hamas war and the alleged genocide of Palestinians in Gaza. The protestors called for divestment from Israel, started a hunger strike and were joined by faculty. The sit-in of Clio Hall led to arrests by police. Activism and protests continued in the new academic year starting September 2024 with administrators facing calls for resignation from faculty.

=== Coeducation ===
Princeton explicitly prohibited the admission of women from its founding in 1746 until 1969. Since it lacked an affiliated women&#x27;s college, it was often referred to as a &quot;monastery&quot;, both lovingly and derisively, by members of the Princeton community.
For about a decade, from 1887 to 1897, nearby Evelyn College for Women was largely composed of daughters of professors and sisters of Princeton undergraduates. While no legal connection existed, many Princeton professors taught there and several Princeton administrators, such as Francis Patton, were on its board of trustees. It closed in 1897 following the death of its founder, Joshua McIlvaine.

In 1947, three female members of the library staff enrolled in beginning Russian courses to deal with an increase in Russian literature in the library. In 1961, Princeton admitted its first female graduate student, Sabra Follett Meservey, who would go on to be the first woman to earn a master&#x27;s degree at Princeton. Meservey was, at the time of her admission, already a member of the faculty at Douglass College within Princeton. The dean of the graduate school issued a statement clarifying that Meservey&#x27;s admission was an exception, and that &quot;Princeton may permit other women in the future as special cases, but does not plan to make general admissions of women graduate students.&quot; The student-run &quot;Daily Princetonian&quot; ran four articles about Meservey in one issue, including an editorial lamenting the potential &quot;far reaching implications&quot; of Meservey&#x27;s admission which concluded: &quot;Princeton is unique as an undergraduate men&#x27;s college and must remain so.&quot; Eight more women enrolled the following year in the Graduate School. In 1964, T&#x27;sai-ying Cheng became the first woman at Princeton to receive a Ph.D. In 1963, five women came to Princeton for one year to study &quot;critical languages&quot; as undergraduates, but were not candidates for a Princeton degree. Following abortive discussions with Sarah Lawrence College to relocate the women&#x27;s college to Princeton and merge it with the university in 1967, the administration commissioned a report on admitting women. The final report was issued in January 1969, supporting the idea. That same month, Princeton&#x27;s trustees voted 24–8 in favor of coeducation and began preparing the institution for the transition. The university finished these plans in April 1969 and announced there would be coeducation in September. Ultimately, 101 female freshman and 70 female transfer students enrolled at Princeton in September 1969. Those admitted were housed in Pyne Hall, a fairly isolated dormitory; a security system was added, although the women deliberately broke it within a day.

In 1971, Mary St. John Douglas and Susan Savage Speers became the first female trustees, and in 1974, quotas for men and women were eliminated. Following a 1979 lawsuit, the eating clubs were required to go coeducational in 1991, after an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court was denied. In 2001, Princeton elected its first female president.

==Campus==


The main campus consists of more than 200 buildings on in Princeton, New Jersey. The James Forrestal Campus, a smaller location designed mainly as a research and instruction complex, is split between nearby Plainsboro and South Brunswick. The campuses are situated about one hour from both New York City and Philadelphia on the train. The university also owns more than of property in West Windsor Township, and is where Princeton is planning to construct a graduate student housing complex, which will be known as &quot;Lake Campus North&quot;.

The first building on campus was Nassau Hall, completed in 1756, and situated on the northern edge of the campus facing Nassau Street. The campus expanded steadily around Nassau Hall during the early and middle 19th century. The McCosh presidency (1868–88) saw the construction of a number of buildings in the High Victorian Gothic and Romanesque Revival styles, although many of them are now gone, leaving the remaining few to appear out of place. At the end of the 19th century, much of Princeton&#x27;s architecture was designed by the Cope and Stewardson firm (led by the same University of Pennsylvania professors of architecture who designed a large part of Washington University in St. Louis and University of Pennsylvania) resulting in the Collegiate Gothic style for which Princeton is known for today. Implemented initially by William Appleton Potter, and later enforced by the university&#x27;s supervising architect, Ralph Adams Cram, the Collegiate Gothic style remained the standard for all new building on the Princeton campus until 1960. A flurry of construction projects in the 1960s produced a number of new buildings on the south side of the main campus, many of which have been poorly received. Several prominent architects have contributed some more recent additions, including Frank Gehry (Lewis Library), I. M. Pei (Spelman Halls), Demetri Porphyrios (Whitman College, a Collegiate Gothic project), Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown (Frist Campus Center, among several others), Minoru Yamasaki (Robertson Hall), and Rafael Viñoly (Carl Icahn Laboratory).

A group of 20th-century sculptures scattered throughout the campus forms the Putnam Collection of Sculpture. It includes works by Alexander Calder (&quot;Five Disks: One Empty&quot;), Jacob Epstein (&quot;Albert Einstein&quot;), Henry Moore (&quot;Oval with Points&quot;), Isamu Noguchi (&quot;White Sun&quot;), and Pablo Picasso (&quot;Head of a Woman&quot;). Richard Serra&#x27;s &quot;The Hedgehog and The Fox&quot; is located between Peyton and Fine halls next to Princeton Stadium and the Lewis Library.

At the southern edge of the campus is Lake Carnegie, an artificial lake named for Andrew Carnegie. Carnegie financed the lake&#x27;s construction in 1906 at the behest of a friend and his brother who were both Princeton alumni. Carnegie hoped the opportunity to take up rowing would inspire Princeton students to forsake football, which he considered &quot;not gentlemanly.&quot; The Shea Rowing Center on the lake&#x27;s shore continues to serve as the headquarters for Princeton rowing.

Princeton&#x27;s grounds were designed by Beatrix Farrand between 1912 and 1943. Her contributions were most recently recognized with the naming of a courtyard for her. Subsequent changes to the landscape were introduced by Quennell Rothschild &amp; Partners in 2000. In 2005, Michael Van Valkenburgh was hired as the new consulting landscape architect for Princeton&#x27;s 2016 Campus Plan. Lynden B. Miller was invited to work with him as Princeton&#x27;s consulting gardening architect, focusing on the 17 gardens that are distributed throughout the campus.

===Buildings===
====Nassau Hall====

Nassau Hall is the oldest building on campus. Begun in 1754 and completed in 1756, it was the first seat of the New Jersey Legislature in 1776, was involved in the Battle of Princeton in 1777, and was the seat of the Congress of the Confederation (and thus capitol of the United States) from June 30, 1783, to November 4, 1783. Since 1911, the front entrance has been flanked by two bronze tigers, a gift of the Princeton Class of 1879, which replaced two lions previously given in 1889. Starting in 1922, commencement has been held on the front lawn of Nassau Hall when there is good weather. In 1966, Nassau Hall was added to the National Register of Historic Places. Nowadays, it houses the office of the university president and other administrative offices.

To the south of Nassau Hall lies a courtyard that is known as Cannon Green. Buried in the ground at the center is the &quot;Big Cannon&quot;, which was left in Princeton by British troops as they fled following the Battle of Princeton. It remained in Princeton until the War of 1812, when it was taken to New Brunswick. In 1836, the cannon was returned to Princeton and placed at the eastern end of town. Two years later, it was moved to the campus under cover of night by Princeton students, and in 1840, it was buried in its current location. A second &quot;Little Cannon&quot; is buried in the lawn in front of nearby Whig Hall. The cannon, which may also have been captured in the Battle of Princeton, was stolen by students of Rutgers University in 1875. The theft ignited the Rutgers-Princeton Cannon War. A compromise between the presidents of Princeton and Rutgers ended the war and forced the return of the Little Cannon to Princeton. The protruding cannons are occasionally painted scarlet by Rutgers students who continue the traditional dispute.

====Art Museum====
Though art collection at the university dates back to its very founding, the Princeton University Art Museum was not officially established until 1882 by President McCosh. Its establishment arose from a desire to provide direct access to works of art in a museum for a curriculum in the arts, an education system familiar to many European universities at the time. The museum took on the purposes of providing &quot;exposure to original works of art and to teach the history of art through an encyclopedic collection of world art.&quot;

Numbering over 112,000 objects, the collections range from ancient to contemporary art and come from Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Americas. The museum&#x27;s art is divided into ten extensive curatorial areas. There is a collection of Greek and Roman antiquities, including ceramics, marbles, bronzes, and Roman mosaics from faculty excavations in Antioch, as well as other art from the ancient Egyptian, Byzantium, and Islamic worlds. The non-Islamic coins were catalogued by Dorothy B. Waage. Medieval Europe is represented by sculpture, metalwork, and stained glass. The collection of Western European paintings includes examples from the early Renaissance through the 19th century, with pieces by Monet, Cézanne, and Van Gogh, and features a growing collection of 20th-century and contemporary art, including paintings such as Andy Warhol&#x27;s Blue Marilyn.

The museum features a collection of Chinese and Japanese art, with holdings in bronzes, tomb figurines, painting, and calligraphy, as well as collections of Korean, Southeast, and Central Asian art. Its collection of pre-Columbian art includes examples of Mayan and Olmec art, and its indigenous art ranges from Chile to Alaska to Greenland. The museum has collections of old master prints and drawings, and it has a comprehensive collection of over 20,000 photographs. Approximately 750 works of African art are represented. The Museum oversees the outside John B. Putnam Jr., Memorial Collection of Sculpture.

====University Chapel====

The Princeton University Chapel is located on the north side of campus near Nassau Street. It was built between 1924 and 1928 at a cost of $2.3 million, approximately $ million adjusted for inflation in 2020. Ralph Adams Cram, the university&#x27;s supervising architect, designed the chapel, which he viewed as the crown jewel for the Collegiate Gothic motif he had championed for the campus. At the time of its construction, it was the second largest university chapel in the world, after King&#x27;s College Chapel, Cambridge. It underwent a two-year, $10 million restoration campaign between 2000 and 2002. The Chapel seats around 2,000 and serves as a site for religious services and local celebrations.

Measured on the exterior, the chapel is long, wide at its transepts, and high. The exterior is Pennsylvania sandstone, trimmed with Indiana limestone, and the interior is made of limestone and Aquia Creek sandstone. The design evokes characteristics of an English church of the Middle Ages. The extensive iconography, in stained glass, stonework, and wood carvings, has the common theme of connecting religion and scholarship.

===Sustainability===
Published in 2008, the Sustainability Action Plan was the first formal plan for sustainability enacted by the university. It focused on reducing greenhouse gas emissions, conservation of resources, and research, education, and civic engagement for sustainability through 10 year objectives. Since the 2008 plan, Princeton has aimed at reducing its carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels without the purchase of market offsets and predicts to meet the goal by 2026 (the former goal was by 2020 but COVID-19 requirements delayed this). Princeton released its second Sustainability Action Plan in 2019 on Earth Day with its main goal being reducing campus greenhouse gases to net zero by 2046 as well as other objectives building on those in the 2008 plan. In 2021, the university agreed to divest from thermal coal and tar sand segments of the fossil fuel industry and from companies that are involved in climate disinformation after student protest. Princeton is a member of the Ivy Plus Sustainability Consortium, through which it has committed to best-practice sharing and the ongoing exchange of campus sustainability solutions along with other member institutions.

Princeton&#x27;s Sustainability Action Plan also aims to have zero waste through recycling programs, sustainable purchasing, and behavioral and operational strategies.

==Organization and administration==

=== Governance and structure ===

Princeton&#x27;s 20th and current president is Christopher Eisgruber, who was appointed by the university&#x27;s board of trustees in 2013. The board is responsible for the overall direction of the university. It consists of no fewer than 23 and no more than 40 members at any one time, with the president of the university and the governor of New Jersey serving as ex officio members. It approves the operating and capital budgets, supervises the investment of the university&#x27;s endowment, and oversees campus real estate and long-range physical planning. The trustees also exercise prior review and approval concerning changes in major policies such as those in instructional programs and admission as well as tuition and fees and the hiring of faculty members.

The university is composed of the Undergraduate College, the Graduate School, the School of Architecture, the School of Engineering and Applied Science, and the School of Public and International Affairs. Additionally, the school&#x27;s Bendheim Center for Finance provides education for the area of money and finance in lieu of a business school. Princeton did host a Princeton Law School for a short period, before eventually closing in 1852 due to poor income. Princeton&#x27;s lack of other professional schools can be attributed to a university focus on undergraduates.

The university has ties with the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton Theological Seminary, Rutgers University, and the Westminster Choir College of Rider University. Princeton is a member of the Association of American Universities, the Universities Research Association, and the National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities. The university is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education (MSCHE), with its last reaffirmation in 2014.

=== Finances ===
Princeton University&#x27;s endowment of $37 billion (per 2021 figures) was ranked as the fourth largest endowment in the United States, and it had the greatest per-student endowment in the world at over $4.4 million per student. The endowment is sustained through continued donations and is maintained by investment advisers. Princeton&#x27;s operating budget is over $2 billion per year, with 50% going to academic departments and programs, 33% to administrative and student service departments, 10% to financial aid departments, and 7% to the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory.

==Academics==

=== Undergraduate ===

Princeton follows a liberal arts curriculum, and offers two bachelor&#x27;s degrees to students: a Bachelor of Arts (A.B.) and a Bachelor of Science in Engineering (B.S.E.). Typically, A.B. students choose a major (called a concentration) at the end of sophomore year, while B.S.E. students declare at the end of their freshman year. Students must complete distribution requirements, departmental requirements, and independent work to graduate with either degree. A.B. students must complete distribution requirements in literature and the arts, science and engineering, social analysis, cultural difference, epistemology and cognition, ethical thought and moral values, historical analysis, and quantitative and computational reasoning; they must also have satisfactory ability in a foreign language. Additionally, they must complete two papers of independent work during their junior year—known as the junior papers—and craft a senior thesis to graduate; both revolve around the concentration they are pursuing. B.S.E. majors complete fewer courses in the humanities and social sciences and instead fulfill requirements in mathematics, physics, chemistry, and computer programming. They likewise must complete independent work, which typically involves a design project or senior thesis, but not the junior papers. A.B. majors must complete 31 courses, whereas B.S.E. majors must complete 36 courses.

Students can choose from either 36 concentrations or create their own. They can also participate in 55 interdisciplinary certificate programs; since Princeton does not offer an academic minor, the certificates effectively serve as one. Course structure is determined by the instructor and department. Classes vary in their format, ranging from small seminars to medium-sized lecture courses to large lecture courses. The latter two typically have precepts, which are extra weekly discussion sessions that are led by either the professor or a graduate student. The average class meeting time is 3–4 hours a week, although this can vary depending on the course. The student to faculty ratio is 5 to 1, and a majority of classes have fewer than 20 students. In the &quot;Fiske Guide to Colleges&quot;, academic culture is considered as &quot;tight-knit, extremely hardworking, highly cooperative, and supportive.&quot;

Undergraduates agree to adhere to an academic integrity policy called the Honor Code. Under the Honor Code, faculty do not proctor examinations; instead, the students proctor one another and must report any suspected violation to an Honor Committee made up of undergraduates. The Committee investigates reported violations and holds a hearing if it is warranted. An acquittal at such a hearing results in the destruction of all records of the hearing; a conviction results in the student&#x27;s suspension or expulsion. Violations pertaining to all other academic work fall under the jurisdiction of the Faculty-Student Committee on Discipline. Undergraduates are expected to sign a pledge on their written work affirming that they have not plagiarized the work.

====Grade deflation policy====
The first focus on issues of grade inflation by the Princeton administration began in 1998 when a university report was released showcasing a steady rise in undergraduate grades from 1973 to 1997. Subsequent reports and discussion from the report culminated to when in 2004, Nancy Weiss Malkiel, the dean of the college, implemented a grade deflation policy to address the findings. Malkiel&#x27;s reason for the policy was that an A was becoming devalued as a larger percentage of the student body received one. Following its introduction, the number of A&#x27;s and average GPA on campus dropped, although A&#x27;s and B&#x27;s were still the most frequent grades awarded. The policy received mixed approval from both faculty and students when first instituted. Criticism for grade deflation continued through the years, with students alleging negative effects like increased competition and lack of willingness to choose challenging classes. Other criticism included job market and graduate school prospects, although Malkiel responded by saying that she sent 3,000 letters to numerous institutions and employers informing them. In 2009, transcripts began including a statement about the policy.

In October 2013, Princeton President Christopher Eisgruber created a faculty committee to review the deflation policy. In August 2014, the committee released a report recommending the removal of the policy and instead develop consistent standards for grading across individual departments. In October 2014, following a faculty vote, the numerical targets were removed in response to the report. In a 2020 analysis of undergraduate grades following the removal of a policy, there were no long-lasting effects, with the percent of students receiving A&#x27;s higher than in 1998.

=== Graduate ===

For the 2019–2020 academic year, the Graduate School enrolled 2,971 students. Approximately 40% of the students were female, 42% were international, and 35% of domestic students were a member of a U.S. minority group. The average time to complete a doctoral degree was 5.7 years. The university awarded 318 Ph.D. degrees and 174 final master&#x27;s degrees for the 2019–2020 academic year.

The Graduate School offers degrees in 42 academic departments and programs, which span the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, and engineering. Doctoral education is available for all departments while master&#x27;s degrees are only available in the architecture, engineering, finance, and public policy departments. Doctoral education focuses on original, independent scholarship whereas master&#x27;s degrees focus more on career preparation in both public life and professional practice. Graduate students can also concentrate in an interdisciplinary program and be granted a certificate. Joint degrees are available for several disciplines, as are dual M.D./Ph.D. or M.P.A./J.D. programs.

Students in the graduate school can participate in regional cross-registration agreements, domestic exchanges with other Ivy League schools and similar institutions, and in international partnerships and exchanges.

===Rankings===
Princeton is one of the world&#x27;s most prominent research universities, featured at the top of &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;″s national university rankings for the ninth consecutive year in 2024, as well as topping comparable lists by &quot;Forbes&quot; and &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;.

=== Research ===
Princeton is classified among &quot;R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity.&quot; Based on data for the 2020 fiscal year, the university received approximately US$250 million in sponsored research for its main campus, with 81.4% coming from the government, 12.1% from foundations, 5.5% from industry, and 1.0% from private and other. An additional $120 million in sponsored research was for the Plasma Physics Lab; the main campus and the lab combined totaled to $370 million for sponsored research. Based on 2017 data, the university ranked 72nd among 902 institutions for research expenditures.

Based on 2018 data, Princeton&#x27;s National Academy Membership totaled to 126, ranking 9th in the nation. The university hosts 75 research institutes and centers and two national laboratories. Princeton is a member of the New Jersey Space Grant Consortium.

==== Library system ====
The Princeton University Library system houses over 13 million holdings through 11 buildings, including seven million bound volumes, making it one of the largest university libraries in the United States. Built in 1948, the main campus library is Firestone Library and serves as the main repository for the humanities and social sciences. Its collections include the autographed manuscript of F. Scott Fitzgerald&#x27;s &quot;The Great Gatsby&quot; and George F. Kennan&#x27;s Long Telegram. In addition to Firestone library, specialized libraries exist for architecture, art and archaeology, East Asian studies, engineering, music, public and international affairs, public policy and university archives, and the sciences. The library system provides access to subscription-based electronic resources and databases to students.

====National laboratories====
The Department of Energy&#x27;s Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL) stemmed from Project Matterhorn, a top secret cold war project created in 1951 aimed at achieving controlled nuclear fusion. Princeton astrophysics professor Lyman Spitzer became the first director of the project and remained director until the lab&#x27;s declassification in 1961 when it received its current name. Today, it is an institute for fusion energy research and plasma physics research.

Founded in 1955 and located at Princeton&#x27;s Forrestal Campus since 1968, the NOAA&#x27;s Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) conducts climate research and modeling. Princeton faculty, research scientists, and graduate scientists can participate in research with the lab.

== Admissions and financial aid ==

=== Admissions ===
Princeton offers several methods to apply: the Common Application, the Coalition Application, and the QuestBridge Application. Princeton&#x27;s application requires several writing supplements and submitting a graded written paper.

Princeton&#x27;s undergraduate program is highly selective, admitting 5.8% of undergraduate applicants in the 2019–2020 admissions cycle (for the Class of 2024). The middle 50% range of SAT scores was 1470–1560, the middle 50% range of the ACT composite score was 33–35, and the average high school GPA was a 3.91. For graduate admissions, in the 2021–2022 academic year, Princeton received 12,553 applications for admission and accepted 1,322 applicants, with a yield rate of 51%.

In the 1950s, Princeton used an ABC system to function as a precursory early program, where admission officers would visit feeder schools and assign A, B, or C ratings to students. From 1977 to 1995, Princeton employed an early action program, and in 1996, transitioned to an early decision program. In September 2006, the university announced that all applicants for the Class of 2012 would be considered in a single pool, ending the school&#x27;s early decision program. In February 2011, following decisions by the University of Virginia and Harvard University to reinstate their early admissions programs, Princeton announced it would institute a single-choice early action option for applicants, which it still uses.

Princeton reinstated its transfer students program in 2018 after a three decade moratorium; the program encourages applicants from low-income families, the military, and community colleges.

=== Costs and financial aid ===
As of the 2021–2022 academic year, the total cost of attendance is $77,690. 61% of all undergraduates receive financial aid, with the average financial aid grant being $57,251. Tuition, room, and board is free for families making up to $65,000, and financial aid is offered to families making up to $180,000. In 2001, expanding on earlier reforms, Princeton became the first university to eliminate the use of student loans in financial aid, replacing them with grants. In addition, all admissions are need-blind, and financial aid meets 100% of demonstrated financial need. The university does not use academic or athletic merit scholarships. In September 2022, Princeton announced that it would cover all costs for families earning $100,000 a year or less, with reduced costs for higher income families as well.

&quot;Kiplinger&quot; magazine in 2019 ranked Princeton as the fifth best value school in a combined list comparing private universities, private liberal arts colleges, and public colleges, noting that the average graduating debt was $9,005. For its 2021 rankings, the &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked it second in its category for &quot;Best Value Schools&quot;.

==Student life and culture==
=== Residential colleges ===
The university guarantees housing for students for all four years, with more than 98% of undergraduates living on campus. Freshman and sophomores are required to live on campus, specifically in one of the university&#x27;s seven residential colleges. Once put into a residential college, students have an upperclassmen residential college adviser to adjust to college life and a faculty academic adviser for academic guidance. Upperclassmen are given the option to keep living in the college or decide to move into upperclassmen dorms; upperclassmen still remain affiliated with their college even if they live somewhere else.

Each residential college has its own distinct layout and architecture. Additionally, each college has its own faculty head, dean, director of studies, and director of student life. The colleges feature various amenities, such as dining halls, common rooms, laundry rooms, academic spaces, and arts and entertainment resources. Out of the seven undergraduate colleges (excluding the Graduate College) three of the colleges house students from all classes while the other four house only underclassmen. Present-day residential colleges are:

Princeton&#x27;s residential college system dates back to when university president Woodrow Wilson&#x27;s proposed the creation of quadrangles. While the plan was vetoed, it eventually made a resurgence with the creation of Wilson Lodge (now known as First College) in 1957 to provide an alternative to the eating clubs. Wilson Lodge was dedicated as Wilson College in 1968 and served as an experiment for the residential college system. In 2020, Princeton University elected to change the name of Wilson College to First College after the recent deaths involving police brutality of black individuals. When enrollment increased in the 1970s, a university report in 1979 recommended the establishment of five residential colleges. Funding was raised within a year, leading to the development of Rockefeller College (1982), Mathey College (1983), Butler College (1983), and Forbes College (1984). Whitman College was founded and constructed in 2007 at a cost of $100 million. Butler&#x27;s dorms were demolished in 2007 and a new complex was built in 2009. Butler and Mathey previously acted as only underclassmen colleges, but transitioned to four-year colleges in fall 2009. Princeton completed and opened two new residential colleges—Yeh College and New College West—at the beginning of the academic year in September 2022. The university plans to construct a new residential college named Hobson College where First College currently stands.

Princeton has one graduate residential college, known as the Graduate College, located on a hill about half a mile from the main campus. The location of the Graduate College was the result of a dispute between Woodrow Wilson and then-Graduate School Dean Andrew Fleming West. Wilson preferred a central location for the college; West wanted the graduate students as far as possible from the campus, and ultimately, he prevailed. The Graduate College is composed of a large Collegiate Gothic section crowned by Cleveland Tower, a memorial tower for former Princeton trustee Grover Cleveland. The tower also has 67 carillon bells, making it one of the largest carillons in the world. The attached New Graduate College provides a modern contrast in architectural style to the gothic Old Graduate College. Graduate students also have the option of living in student apartments.

=== Eating clubs and dining ===
Each residential college has a dining hall for students in the college, and they vary in their environment and food served. Upperclassmen who no longer live in the college can choose from a variety of options: join an eating club and choose a shared meal plan; join a dining co-op, where groups of students eat, prepare, and cook food together; or organize their own dining. The university offers kosher dining through the Center for Jewish Life and halal dining options for Muslim students in the dining halls.

Social life takes place primarily on campus and is involved heavily with one&#x27;s residential college or eating club. Residential colleges host a variety of social events and activities, ranging from Broadway show outings to regular barbecues. Eating clubs, while not affiliated with the university, are co-ed organizations that serve as social centers, host events, and invite guest speakers. Additionally, they serve as a place of community for upperclassmen. Five of the clubs have first-serve memberships called &quot;sign-ins&quot; and six clubs use a selective process, in which students must &quot;bicker&quot;. This requires prospective members to undergo an interviewing process. Each eating club has a fee to join which ranges from around $9,000 to $10,000. As a result, Princeton increases financial aid for upperclassmen, and the eating clubs also offer financial assistance. Cumulatively, there are ten clubs located on Prospect Avenue—Cannon, Cap and Gown, Charter, Cloister, Colonial, Cottage, Ivy, Quadrangle, Tiger, and Tower—and one located on Washington Road—Terrace. Sixty-eight percent of upperclassmen are members of a club, with each one containing around 150 to 200 students

=== Campus organizations ===
Princeton hosts around 500 recognized student organizations and several campus centers. The Undergraduate Student Government (USG) serves as Princeton&#x27;s student government. The USG funds student organization events, sponsors campus events, and represents the undergraduate student body when convening with faculty and administration.

Founded in about 1765, the American Whig-Cliosophic Society is the nation&#x27;s oldest collegiate political, literary, and debate society, and is the largest and oldest student organization on campus. The Whig-Clio Society has several subsidiary organizations, each specialized to different areas of politics: the Princeton Debate Panel, International Relations Council, Princeton Mock Trial, and Princeton Model Congress. The International Relations Council manages two Model United Nations conferences: the Princeton Diplomatic Invitational (PDI) for collegiate competition and the Princeton Model United Nations Conference (PMUNC) for high school competition.

There are several publications on campus and a radio station. Founded in 1876, &quot;The Daily Princetonian&quot;, otherwise known as &quot;The Prince&quot;, is the second oldest college daily student newspaper in the United States. Other publications include &quot;The Nassau Literary Review&quot;, the &quot;Princeton Tory&quot;, a campus journal of conservative thought, &quot;The Princeton Diplomat&quot;, the only student-run magazine on global affairs, the &quot;Princeton Political Review&quot;, the only multi-partisan political publication on campus, and the recently revived &quot;Princeton Progressive&quot;, the only left-leaning political publication on campus, among others. Princeton&#x27;s WPRB (103.3 FM) radio station is the oldest licensed college radio station in the nation.

Princeton is home to a variety of performing arts and music groups. Many of the groups are represented by the Performing Arts Council. Dating back to 1883, the Princeton Triangle Club is America&#x27;s oldest touring musical-comedy theater group. It performs its annual Triangle Show every fall at the 1,000 seat McCarter Theatre, as well as original musical comedies, revues, and other shows throughout campus. Princeton&#x27;s oldest choir is the Glee Club, which began in 1874. The comedic scramble Tiger Band was formed in 1919 and plays at halftime shows and other events. Other groups include the Princeton University Orchestra, the flagship symphony orchestra group founded in 1896, and the Princeton Symphony Orchestra, both of which perform at Alexander Hall.

A cappella groups are a staple of campus life, with many holding concerts, informal shows, and arch sings. Arch sings are where a cappella performances are held in one of Princeton&#x27;s many gothic arches. The oldest a cappella ensemble is the Nassoons, which were formed in 1941. All-male groups include the Tigertones (1946) and Footnotes (1959); all-female groups include the Tigerlilies (1971), Tigressions (1981), Wildcats (1987); the oldest coed a cappella group in the Ivy League is the Princeton Katzenjammers (1973), which was followed by the Roaring 20 (1983) and Shere Khan (1994).

Princeton features several campus centers for students that provide resources and information for students with certain identities. These include the Center for Jewish Life, the Davis International Center, the Carl A. Fields Center for Equality and Cultural Understanding, the Women&#x27;s Center, and the LGBT Center. The Frist Campus Center and the Campus Club are additional facilities for the entire campus community that hold various activities and events.

Princeton features 15 chaplaincies and multiple religious student groups. The following faiths are represented on campus: Baha&#x27;i, Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Judaism, Islam, Sikhism, and Unitarian Universalism.

===Traditions===
Princeton students partake in a wide variety of campus traditions, both past and present. Current traditions Princeton students celebrate include the ceremonial bonfire, which takes place on the Cannon Green behind Nassau Hall. It is held only if Princeton beats both Harvard University and Yale University at football in the same season. Another tradition is the use of traditional college cheers at events and reunions, like the &quot;Locomotive&quot;, which dates back to before 1894. Princeton students abide by the tradition of never exiting the campus through FitzRandolph Gates until one graduates. According to tradition, anyone who exits campus before their graduation will not graduate. A more controversial tradition is Newman&#x27;s Day, where some students attempt to drink 24 beers in the 24 hours of April 24. According to &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;the day got its name from an apocryphal quote attributed to Paul Newman: &#x27;24 beers in a case, 24 hours in a day. Coincidence? I think not. Newman has spoken out against the tradition. One of the biggest traditions celebrated annually are Reunions, which are massive annual gatherings of alumni. At Reunions, a traditional parade of alumni and their families, known as the &quot;P-rade&quot;, process through the campus.

Princeton also has several traditions that have faded into the past. One of them was clapper theft, the act of climbing to the top of Nassau Hall to steal the bell clapper, which rings to signal the start of classes on the first day of the school year. For safety reasons, the clapper was permanently removed. Another was the Nude Olympics, an annual nude and partially nude frolic in Holder Courtyard that used to take place during the first snow of the winter. Started in the early 1970s, the Nude Olympics went co-educational in 1979 and gained much notoriety with the American press. Due to issues of sexual harassment and safety reasons, the administration banned the Olympics in 2000 to the disappointment of students.

=== Alma mater ===

&quot;Old Nassau&quot; has been Princeton University&#x27;s school song since 1859, when it was written that year by freshman Harlan Page Peck. It was originally published in the &quot;Nassau Literary Magazine&quot;, where it won the magazine&#x27;s prize for best college song. After an unsuccessful attempt at singing it to &quot;Auld Lang Syne&quot;&#x27;s melody, Karl Langlotz, a Princeton professor, wrote the music for it. In 1987, the university changed the gendered lyrics of &quot;Old Nassau&quot; to reflect the school&#x27;s co-educational student body.

=== Transportation ===
Tiger Transit is the bus system of the university, mostly open to the public and linking university campuses and areas around Princeton; routes are updated upon community feedback. The service sees an average of 3,500 boardings per day on weekdays and 1,100 boardings per day on weekends. NJ Transit provides bus service on the lines and rail service on the Dinky, a small commuter train that provides service to the Princeton Junction Station. Coach USA, through their subsidiary Suburban Transit, provides bus service to New York City and other destinations in New Jersey.

== Student body ==
Princeton has made significant progress in expanding the diversity of its student body in recent years. The 2021 admitted freshman class was one of the most diverse in the school&#x27;s history, with 68% of students identifying as students of color. The university has worked to increase its enrollment of first-generation and low-income students in recent years. The median family income of Princeton students is $186,100, with 72% of students coming from the top 20% highest-earning families. In 2017, 22% of freshman qualified for federal Pell Grants, above the 16% average for the top 150 schools ranked by the &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;; nationwide, the average was 44%. Based on data in a 2019 article in &quot;The Daily Princetonian,&quot; 10% of students hail from &quot;Bloomberg&#x27;s&quot; 2018 list of &quot;100 richest places&quot;, and that the top 20% of high schools send as many students to Princeton as the bottom 80%.

In 1999, 10% of the student body was Jewish, a percentage lower than those at other Ivy League schools. 16% of the student body was Jewish in 1985; the number decreased by 40% from 1985 to 1999. This decline prompted &quot;The Daily Princetonian&quot; to write a series of articles on the decline and its reasons. &quot;The New York Observer&quot; wrote that Princeton was &quot;long dogged by a reputation for anti-Semitism&quot; and that this history as well as Princeton&#x27;s elite status caused the university and its community to feel sensitivity towards the decrease of Jewish students. In the &quot;Observer&quot;, several theories are proposed for the drop, ranging from campus culture to changing admission policies to national patterns. As of 2021, according to the Center for Jewish Life on campus, the university has approximately 700 Jewish students. As of 2024, according to Hillel International, there are approximately 450 Jewish undergraduates at Princeton, comprising about 8.6% of the undergraduate student body. In addition, about 250 Jewish graduate students are enrolled at Princeton, comprising about 7.9% of the graduate student body. Consequently, as American Jews are accounting for 2.4% of the total US population, there are 358% more Jews among students at Princeton than Jews among the total US population, which makes Jewish students the best represented minority group at Princeton.

Starting in 1967, African American enrollment surged from 1.7% to 10% but has stagnated ever since. Bruce M. Wright was admitted into the university in 1936 as the first African American; however, his admission was a mistake and when he got to campus he was asked to leave. Three years later Wright asked the dean for an explanation on his dismissal and the dean suggested to him that &quot;a member of your race might feel very much alone&quot; at Princeton University. Princeton would not admit its first Black students until in 1945 when Princeton instituted the V-12 program on campus. In 1947, John L. Howard, one of the four naval cadets admitted to the program, would become the first Black student to graduate with a bachelor&#x27;s degree.

==Athletics==

Princeton supports organized athletics at three levels: varsity intercollegiate, club intercollegiate, and intramural. It also provides &quot;a variety of physical education and recreational programs&quot; for members of the Princeton community. Most undergraduates participate in athletics at some level. Princeton&#x27;s colors are orange and black. The school&#x27;s athletes are known as the &quot;Tigers&quot;, and the mascot is a tiger. The Princeton administration considered naming the mascot in 2007, but the effort was dropped in the face of alumni and student opposition.

===Varsity===

Princeton hosts 37 men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s varsity sports. Princeton is an NCAA Division I school, with its athletic conference being the Ivy League. Its rowing teams compete in the Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges, and its men&#x27;s volleyball team competes in the Eastern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association. Princeton&#x27;s sailing team, though a club sport, competes at the varsity level in the MAISA conference of the Inter-Collegiate Sailing Association.

Princeton&#x27;s football team competes in the Football Championship Subdivision of NCAA Division I with the rest of the Ivy League. Princeton played against Rutgers University in the first intercollegiate football game in the U.S. on November 6, 1869; Rutgers won the game. From 1877 until at least 1903, Princeton played football using rugby rules.

As of 2021, Princeton claims 28 national football championships, which would make it the most of any school, although the NCAA only recognizes 15 of the wins. With its last win being in 2018, Princeton has won 12 Ivy League championships. In 1951, Dick Kazmaier won Princeton its only Heisman Trophy, the last to come from the Ivy League.

The men&#x27;s basketball program is noted for its success under Pete Carril, the head coach from 1967 to 1996. During this time, Princeton won 13 Ivy League titles and made 11 NCAA tournament appearances. Carril introduced the Princeton offense, an offensive strategy that has since been adopted by a number of college and professional basketball teams. Carril&#x27;s final victory at Princeton came when the Tigers beat UCLA, the defending national champion, in the opening round of the 1996 NCAA tournament. On December 14, 2005, Princeton tied the record for the fewest points in a Division I game since the institution of the three-point line in 1986–87, when the Tigers scored 21 points in a loss against Monmouth University.

Princeton women&#x27;s soccer team advanced to the NCAA Division I Women&#x27;s Soccer Championship semi-finals in 2004, becoming the first Ivy League team to do so in a 64 team setting. The men&#x27;s soccer team was coached from 1984 to 1995 by Princeton alumnus and future United States men&#x27;s national team manager Bob Bradley, who lead the Tigers to win two Ivy League titles and make an appearance at the NCAA Final Four in 1993. Princeton&#x27;s men&#x27;s lacrosse program undertook a period of notable success from 1992 to 2001, during which time it won six national championships. In 2012, its field hockey team became the first in the Ivy League to win a national championship.

Princeton has won at least one Ivy League title every year since 1957, and it became the first university in its conference to win over 500 Ivy League athletic championships. From 1896 to 2018, 113 athletes from Princeton have competed in the Olympics, winning 19 gold medals, 24 silver medals, and 23 bronze medals.

=== Club and intramural ===

In addition to varsity sports, Princeton hosts 37 club sports teams, which are open to all Princeton students of any skill level. Teams compete against other collegiate teams both in the Northeast and nationally. The intramural sports program is also available on campus, which schedules competitions between residential colleges, eating clubs, independent groups, students, and faculty and staff. Several leagues with differing levels of competitiveness are available.

In the fall, freshman and sophomores participate in the intramural athletic competition called Cane Spree. Although the event centers on cane wrestling, freshman and sophomores compete in other sports and competitions. This commemorates a time in the 1870s when sophomores, angry with the freshmen who strutted around with fancy canes, stole all of the canes from the freshmen, hitting them with their own canes in the process.

== Notable people ==
=== Alumni ===


U.S. Presidents James Madison and Woodrow Wilson and vice presidents Aaron Burr, George M. Dallas, and John Breckinridge graduated from Princeton, as did Michelle Obama, the former First Lady of the United States. Former Chief Justice of the United States Oliver Ellsworth was an alumnus, as are current U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justices Samuel Alito, Elena Kagan, and Sonia Sotomayor. Alumnus Jerome Powell was appointed as Chair of the U.S. Federal Reserve Board in 2018. Pete Hegseth, 29th U.S. Secretary of Defense, is a 2003 graduate of Princeton.

Princeton graduates played a major role in the American Revolution, including the first and last Colonels to die on the Patriot side Philip Johnston and Nathaniel Scudder, as well as the highest ranking civilian leader on the British side David Mathews.

Notable graduates of Princeton&#x27;s School of Engineering and Applied Science include Apollo astronaut and commander of Apollo 12 Pete Conrad, Amazon CEO and founder Jeff Bezos, former chairman of Alphabet Inc. Eric Schmidt, and Lisa P. Jackson, former Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.

Actors Jimmy Stewart, Wentworth Miller, José Ferrer, David Duchovny, and Brooke Shields graduated from Princeton, as did composers Edward T. Cone and Milton Babbitt. Soccer-player alumna, Diana Matheson, scored the game-winning goal that earned Canada their Olympic bronze medal in 2012.

Writers Booth Tarkington, F. Scott Fitzgerald, and Eugene O&#x27;Neill attended but did not graduate. Writer Selden Edwards and poet W. S. Merwin graduated from Princeton. American novelist Jodi Picoult and author David Remnick graduated. Pulitzer prize-winning journalists Barton Gellman and Lorraine Adams, as well as Nobel Peace Prize laureate Maria Ressa, are Princeton alumni. William P. Ross, Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation and founding editor of the &quot;Cherokee Advocate&quot;, graduated in 1844.

Notable graduate alumni include Allen Shenstone, Pedro Pablo Kuczynski, Thornton Wilder, Richard Feynman, Lee Iacocca, John Nash, Alonzo Church, Alan Turing, Terence Tao, Edward Witten, John Milnor, John Bardeen, Steven Weinberg, John Tate, and David Petraeus. Royals such as Prince Moulay Hicham of Morocco, Prince Turki bin Faisal Al Saud, and Queen Noor of Jordan attended Princeton.

=== Faculty ===

As of 2021, notable current faculty members include Angus Deaton, Robert Keohane, Edward W. Felten, Anthony Grafton, Peter Singer, Jim Peebles, Manjul Bhargava, Brian Kernighan, Betsy Levy Paluck and Robert P. George. Notable former faculty members include John Witherspoon, Walter Kaufmann, John von Neumann, Ben Bernanke, Paul Krugman, Joseph Henry, Toni Morrison, Joyce Carol Oates, Michael Mullen, Andrew Wiles, Jhumpa Lahiri, Cornel West, Daniel Kahneman, and alumnus Woodrow Wilson.

Albert Einstein, though on the faculty at the Institute for Advanced Study rather than at Princeton, came to be associated with the university through frequent lectures and visits on the campus.

==In popular culture==
Princeton University is widely considered to be an institution that affiliates with and produces some of the most elite members of society. The university&#x27;s reputation has made it a frequent reference in media.

*&quot;This Side of Paradise&quot; (1920): In F. Scott Fitzgerald&#x27;s debut novel, the narrator, Amory Blaine details his life at Princeton, dabbling in literature and unfulfilled romances. 
* &quot;A Beautiful Mind&quot; (2001): A biographical film centered around the award-winning mathematician, John Nash, featuring him studying for his PhD at Princeton in the first part of the film.
* &quot;A Cinderella Story&quot; (2004): The main love interest, Austin Ames dreams of becoming a writer and gets accepted into Princeton. 
* &quot;The Rule of Four&quot; (2004): A thriller novel by Ian Caldwell and Dustin Thomason about four Princeton seniors: Tom, Paul, Charlie and Gil try to solve the mystery of a coded manuscript.
* &quot;Never Have I Ever&quot; (2020): The protagonist, Devi Vishwakumar gets accepted into Princeton. 
* &quot;Oppenheimer&quot; (2023): The biographical film tells the story of J. Robert Oppenheimer, the theoretical physicist who led the Manhattan Project during World War II. It featured Princeton as Oppenheimer was the director of Princeton&#x27;s Institute for Advanced Study (IAS).
* &quot;Across the Spider-Verse&quot; (2023): Princeton is mentioned as the dream school of Miles Morales, the protagonist.

==See also==
* Big Three (colleges)
* Higher education in New Jersey
* Ivy League 
* Princeton University Department of Physics
* The Princeton University Summer Journalism Program

==Notes==
==References==
=== Works cited ===

* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* 
* 
* Princeton Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="0" end="20" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="26" end="33" title="private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q49113" start="34" end="44" title="Ivy League" label="Ivy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="45" end="64" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="68" end="89" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q138311" start="125" end="134" title="Elizabeth, New Jersey" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="142" end="163" title="Princeton University" label="College of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188663" start="182" end="207" title="List of Colonial Colleges" label="fourth-oldest institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887889" start="211" end="248" title="higher education in the United States" label="higher education in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188663" start="269" end="286" title="colonial colleges" label="colonial colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="308" end="327" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="354" end="360" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q496886" start="385" end="398" title="Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Mercer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848211" start="565" end="597" title="Trustees of Princeton University" label="Trustees of Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610682" start="649" end="670" title="List of colleges and universities in the United States by endowment" label="endowment per student"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="712" end="725" title="undergraduate education" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="730" end="750" title="graduate education" label="graduate instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="758" end="768" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="770" end="785" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="787" end="802" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="809" end="820" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911266" start="892" end="899" title="borough (New Jersey)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349578" start="957" end="1009" title="Princeton School of Public and International Affairs" label="Princeton School of Public and International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245028" start="1015" end="1056" title="Princeton University School of Engineering and Applied Science" label="School of Engineering and Applied Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741567" start="1062" end="1084" title="Princeton University School of Architecture" label="School of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887062" start="1093" end="1120" title="Bendheim Center for Finance" label="Bendheim Center for Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="1154" end="1181" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077236" start="1182" end="1217" title="Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory" label="Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="1237" end="1248" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="NOAA&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306220" start="1249" end="1286" title="Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory" label="Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="1294" end="1304" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680291" start="1459" end="1478" title="residential college" label="residential college"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331292" start="1507" end="1519" title="Eating clubs at Princeton University" label="eating clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="1705" end="1720" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528314" start="1797" end="1813" title="Princeton Tigers" label="Princeton Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="1902" end="1910" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722436" start="1933" end="1951" title="List of Nobel laureates affiliated with Princeton University as alumni or faculty" label="75 Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="2145" end="2170" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q188184" start="2183" end="2193" title="Abel Prize" label="Abel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571938" start="2207" end="2232" title="National Humanities Medal" label="National Humanities Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="2249" end="2264" title="Rhodes Scholars" label="Rhodes Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442635" start="2270" end="2287" title="Marshall Scholarship" label="Marshall Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q490063" start="2296" end="2320" title="Gates Cambridge Scholars" label="Gates Cambridge Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2326" end="2341" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2350" end="2368" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="2584" end="2597" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="2606" end="2618" title="U.S. Cabinet" label="U.S. Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="2636" end="2656" title="United States Secretary of State" label="secretaries of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="2664" end="2686" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="secretaries of defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763459" start="2695" end="2732" title="Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="chairmen of the Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666806" start="2877" end="2888" title="Log College" label="Log College"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="2898" end="2906" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568994" start="2931" end="2946" title="William Tennent" label="William Tennent"/>
<link wikidata="Q90776920" start="2950" end="2973" title="Neshaminy, Pennsylvania" label="Neshaminy, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="3384" end="3396" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q835439" start="3418" end="3433" title="Great Awakening" label="Great Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754909" start="3444" end="3453" title="Old Side–New Side Controversy" label="New Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662556" start="3491" end="3512" title="Synod of Philadelphia" label="Synod of Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3763" end="3770" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="3775" end="3779" title="Yale University" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="4065" end="4087" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="4097" end="4126" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="4130" end="4152" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="4254" end="4262" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536900" start="4272" end="4286" title="Lewis Morris (governor)" label="Lewis Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676866" start="4292" end="4307" title="acting governor" label="acting governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239797" start="4337" end="4350" title="John Hamilton (New Jersey politician)" label="John Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6272949" start="4506" end="4524" title="Jonathan Dickinson (New Jersey minister)" label="Jonathan Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q138311" start="4552" end="4573" title="Elizabeth, New Jersey" label="Elizabeth, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q607241" start="4619" end="4628" title="Clergy house" label="parsonage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188663" start="4663" end="4688" title="Colonial colleges" label="fourth-oldest institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="4786" end="4805" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="5125" end="5137" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scotch-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="5297" end="5315" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q301773" start="5358" end="5372" title="Aaron Burr Sr." label="Aaron Burr Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6272552" start="5542" end="5558" title="Jonathan Belcher" label="Jonathan Belcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="5596" end="5613" title="Congregational church" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q174376" start="5645" end="5655" title="alma mater" label="alma mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="5918" end="5939" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945571" start="6035" end="6053" title="central New Jersey" label="central New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967574" start="6136" end="6147" title="Nassau Hall" label="Nassau Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="6169" end="6191" title="William III of England" label="William III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q155483" start="6209" end="6231" title="House of Orange-Nassau" label="House of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q207137" start="6464" end="6474" title="curriculum" label="curriculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q121047280" start="6592" end="6602" title="President of Princeton University" label="presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246390" start="6604" end="6620" title="John Witherspoon" label="John Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="7004" end="7031" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="7111" end="7130" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132579" start="7177" end="7196" title="Battle of Princeton" label="Battle of Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="7328" end="7345" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="7387" end="7407" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="7464" end="7486" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="country&amp;#x27;s capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620430" start="7663" end="7672" title="college endowment" label="endowment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412687" start="7754" end="7775" title="Samuel Stanhope Smith" label="Samuel Stanhope Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804609" start="8365" end="8377" title="Ashbel Green" label="Ashbel Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q909696" start="8741" end="8771" title="Princeton Theological Seminary" label="Princeton Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131046" start="8918" end="8932" title="James Carnahan" label="James Carnahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246290" start="9195" end="9211" title="John Maclean Jr." label="John Maclean Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="9367" end="9380" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="9651" end="9669" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814650" start="9807" end="9816" title="austerity" label="austerity"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="10006" end="10011" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="10050" end="10067" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="President Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139232" start="10069" end="10081" title="James McCosh" label="James McCosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757358" start="10423" end="10444" title="High Victorian Gothic" label="High Victorian Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244961" start="10563" end="10582" title="Princeton Glee Club" label="Princeton Glee Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245021" start="10588" end="10601" title="Princeton Triangle Club" label="Triangle Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331292" start="10668" end="10679" title="Eating clubs at Princeton University" label="eating club"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="10779" end="10789" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="doctorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481675" start="10868" end="10882" title="Francis Landey Patton" label="Francis Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278332" start="11243" end="11255" title="eating clubs" label="eating clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741808" start="11508" end="11523" title="Princeton University Graduate School" label="Graduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="11890" end="11904" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705691" start="12941" end="12954" title="Lake Carnegie" label="Lake Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="12970" end="12985" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049579" start="13024" end="13036" title="nonsectarian" label="nonsectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236332" start="13658" end="13675" title="John Grier Hibben" label="John Grier Hibben"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245025" start="13772" end="13809" title="Princeton University Graduate College" label="Princeton University Graduate College"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="13856" end="13867" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662623" start="14996" end="15015" title="Harold W. Dodds" label="Harold Willis Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="15054" end="15070" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="15072" end="15084" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="15094" end="15109" title="Korean War" label="Korean Conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="15369" end="15381" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="15396" end="15424" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="15494" end="15509" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="15555" end="15572" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932982" start="16510" end="16529" title="Plainsboro Township, New Jersey" label="Plainsboro Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344173" start="16875" end="16888" title="Robert F. Goheen" label="Robert Goheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="17516" end="17527" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250103" start="17685" end="17718" title="Students for a Democratic Society" label="Students for a Democratic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480879" start="17843" end="17852" title="picketing" label="picketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="17873" end="17882" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="17883" end="17900" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665138" start="18017" end="18047" title="Institute for Defense Analyses" label="Institute for Defense Analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="18183" end="18191" title="Reserve Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="R.O.T.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q970584" start="18213" end="18227" title="Touch football (American)" label="touch football"/>
<link wikidata="Q49775" start="18609" end="18615" title="General strike" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568448" start="18999" end="19015" title="William G. Bowen" label="William G. Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493211" start="19239" end="19256" title="Harold Tafler Shapiro" label="Harold T. Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975519" start="19605" end="19641" title="High Meadows Environmental Institute" label="High Meadows Environmental Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482356" start="19814" end="19833" title="Shirley M. Tilghman" label="Shirley M. Tilghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194044" start="20203" end="20224" title="Christopher L. Eisgruber" label="Christopher Eisgruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q441989" start="20300" end="20314" title="public history" label="public history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026962" start="20319" end="20337" title="digital humanities" label="digital humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="20389" end="20396" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898233" start="20709" end="20724" title="Betsey Stockton" label="Betsey Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="20962" end="20970" title="Title IX" label="Title IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028733" start="20990" end="21011" title="campus sexual assault" label="campus sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="21039" end="21045" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q125957926" start="21134" end="21173" title="List of pro-Palestinian protests on university campuses in the United States in 2024" label="other campuses across the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="21227" end="21243" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q109678397" start="21252" end="21284" title="Palestinian genocide accusation" label="alleged genocide of Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q895904" start="21320" end="21342" title="Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions" label="divestment from Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147337" start="21400" end="21406" title="sit-in" label="sit-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416300" start="21924" end="21948" title="Evelyn College for Women" label="Evelyn College for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q20487051" start="22259" end="22275" title="Joshua Hall McIlvaine" label="Joshua McIlvaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051840" start="23649" end="23671" title="Sarah Lawrence College" label="Sarah Lawrence College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="24643" end="24661" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932982" start="24950" end="24960" title="Plainsboro Township, New Jersey" label="Plainsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932994" start="24965" end="24980" title="South Brunswick, New Jersey" label="South Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073777" start="25128" end="25149" title="West Windsor Township, New Jersey" label="West Windsor Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757358" start="25600" end="25621" title="High Victorian Gothic" label="High Victorian Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q744373" start="25626" end="25644" title="Romanesque Revival architecture" label="Romanesque Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168338" start="25829" end="25848" title="Cope and Stewardson" label="Cope and Stewardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="25954" end="25988" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="25993" end="26019" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q56266198" start="26038" end="26055" title="Collegiate Gothic" label="Collegiate Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004507" start="26127" end="26150" title="William Appleton Potter" label="William Appleton Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287147" start="26219" end="26235" title="Ralph Adams Cram" label="Ralph Adams Cram"/>
<link wikidata="Q180374" start="26589" end="26600" title="Frank Gehry" label="Frank Gehry"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="26618" end="26627" title="I. M. Pei" label="I. M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185427" start="26645" end="26663" title="Demetri Porphyrios" label="Demetri Porphyrios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996609" start="26665" end="26680" title="Whitman College, Princeton University" label="Whitman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q212312" start="26712" end="26726" title="Robert Venturi" label="Robert Venturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q457718" start="26731" end="26749" title="Denise Scott Brown" label="Denise Scott Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506959" start="26751" end="26770" title="Frist Campus Center" label="Frist Campus Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q347215" start="26795" end="26810" title="Minoru Yamasaki" label="Minoru Yamasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q952826" start="26833" end="26846" title="Rafael Viñoly" label="Rafael Viñoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q981479" start="26848" end="26858" title="Carl Icahn" label="Carl Icahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q151580" start="27003" end="27019" title="Alexander Calder" label="Alexander Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q354779" start="27057" end="27070" title="Jacob Epstein" label="Jacob Epstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q151097" start="27102" end="27113" title="Henry Moore" label="Henry Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q19760151" start="27121" end="27137" title="Oval with Points" label="Oval with Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q442628" start="27146" end="27159" title="Isamu Noguchi" label="Isamu Noguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="27189" end="27202" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q321245" start="27234" end="27247" title="Richard Serra" label="Richard Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739293" start="27261" end="27285" title="The Hedgehog and the Fox (sculpture)" label="The Hedgehog and The Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="27704" end="27712" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492143" start="27767" end="27785" title="Shea Rowing Center" label="Shea Rowing Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q437714" start="27915" end="27930" title="Beatrix Farrand" label="Beatrix Farrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835054" start="28150" end="28173" title="Michael Van Valkenburgh" label="Michael Van Valkenburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q82512826" start="28265" end="28281" title="Lynden B. Miller" label="Lynden B. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867079" start="28584" end="28606" title="New Jersey Legislature" label="New Jersey Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195929" start="28689" end="28718" title="Congress of the Confederation" label="Congress of the Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="29104" end="29140" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="29507" end="29518" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="29541" end="29554" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="29968" end="29986" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382825" start="30018" end="30046" title="Rutgers-Princeton Cannon War" label="Rutgers-Princeton Cannon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603905" start="30391" end="30422" title="Princeton University Art Museum" label="Princeton University Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q220659" start="31104" end="31115" title="Artifact (archaeology)" label="antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="31201" end="31208" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="31258" end="31267" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q115352039" start="31330" end="31346" title="Dorothy B. Waage" label="Dorothy B. Waage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="31348" end="31356" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="31501" end="31512" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="31554" end="31559" title="Claude Monet" label="Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35548" start="31561" end="31568" title="Paul Cézanne" label="Cézanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="31574" end="31582" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="31684" end="31695" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="31836" end="31847" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="31935" end="31948" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="31974" end="31979" title="Maya civilization" label="Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="31984" end="31989" title="Olmecs" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306138" start="32090" end="32106" title="old master print" label="old master print"/>
<link wikidata="Q386302" start="32215" end="32226" title="African art" label="African art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262322" start="32276" end="32328" title="Putnam Collection of Sculpture, Princeton University" label="John B. Putnam Jr., Memorial Collection of Sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378798" start="32362" end="32389" title="Princeton University Chapel" label="Princeton University Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263246" start="32849" end="32886" title="King&amp;#x27;s College Chapel, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College Chapel, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="33126" end="33135" title="transepts" label="transepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="33163" end="33175" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="33176" end="33185" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="33200" end="33207" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="33208" end="33217" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782879" start="33261" end="33282" title="Aquia Creek sandstone" label="Aquia Creek sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438509" start="33324" end="33357" title="Architecture of the medieval cathedrals of England" label="English church of the Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="33662" end="33676" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488967" start="33936" end="33943" title="Carbon offset" label="offsets"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="34015" end="34023" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q124473" start="34120" end="34129" title="Earth Day" label="Earth Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="34191" end="34199" title="Carbon neutrality" label="net zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="34318" end="34330" title="Coal" label="thermal coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q297322" start="34335" end="34343" title="Oil sands" label="tar sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848211" start="35040" end="35057" title="Trustees of Princeton University" label="board of trustees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112728" start="35259" end="35281" title="governor of New Jersey" label="governor of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="35293" end="35310" title="ex officio member" label="ex officio member"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741808" start="35757" end="35772" title="Princeton University Graduate School" label="Graduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741567" start="35778" end="35800" title="Princeton University School of Architecture" label="School of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245028" start="35806" end="35847" title="Princeton University School of Engineering and Applied Science" label="School of Engineering and Applied Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349578" start="35857" end="35899" title="Princeton School of Public and International Affairs" label="School of Public and International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887062" start="35933" end="35960" title="Bendheim Center for Finance" label="Bendheim Center for Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143635" start="36027" end="36042" title="business school" label="business school"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244976" start="36065" end="36085" title="Princeton Law School" label="Princeton Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q909696" start="36335" end="36365" title="Princeton Theological Seminary" label="Princeton Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567531" start="36395" end="36420" title="Westminster Choir College" label="Westminster Choir College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551664" start="36424" end="36440" title="Rider University" label="Rider University"/>
<link wikidata="Q743812" start="36471" end="36507" title="Association of American Universities" label="Association of American Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005852" start="36513" end="36546" title="Universities Research Association" label="Universities Research Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970684" start="36556" end="36617" title="National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities" label="National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303245" start="36655" end="36699" title="Middle States Commission on Higher Education" label="Middle States Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610682" start="36854" end="36860" title="List of US colleges and universities by endowment" label="fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077236" start="37310" end="37345" title="Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory" label="Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="37406" end="37418" title="Liberal arts education" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="37485" end="37501" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q798132" start="37515" end="37549" title="Bachelor of Science in Engineering" label="Bachelor of Science in Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="37995" end="38007" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267612" start="38967" end="38981" title="academic minor" label="academic minor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39237" end="39245" title="Precept#Higher education" label="precepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q39046937" start="39558" end="39581" title="Fiske Guide to Colleges" label="Fiske Guide to Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="40448" end="40459" title="Plagiarism" label="plagiarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q97453429" start="40777" end="40796" title="Nancy Weiss Malkiel" label="Nancy Weiss Malkiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741808" start="42336" end="42351" title="Princeton University Graduate School" label="Graduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="42781" end="42791" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="42793" end="42808" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="42810" end="42826" title="natural sciences" label="natural sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="42845" end="42863" title="Doctorate" label="Doctoral education"/>
<link wikidata="Q716855" start="43293" end="43306" title="Joint degrees" label="Joint degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033557" start="43358" end="43368" title="MD–PhD" label="M.D./Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q49113" start="43516" end="43526" title="Ivy League" label="Ivy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="43678" end="43699" title="research university" label="research universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="43730" end="43758" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="43881" end="43887" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="43904" end="43927" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="43966" end="43976" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="44605" end="44621" title="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine" label="National Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978618" start="44792" end="44825" title="Space Grant" label="New Jersey Space Grant Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297681" start="44857" end="44885" title="Princeton University Library" label="Princeton University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297681" start="45100" end="45117" title="Firestone Library" label="Firestone Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="45246" end="45265" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q214371" start="45279" end="45295" title="The Great Gatsby" label="The Great Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q156058" start="45306" end="45322" title="George F. Kennan" label="George F. Kennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q980029" start="45330" end="45343" title="Long Telegram" label="Long Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="45717" end="45737" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077236" start="45745" end="45780" title="Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory" label="Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077236" start="45801" end="45819" title="Project Matterhorn" label="Project Matterhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="45897" end="45911" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q431503" start="45946" end="45959" title="Lyman Spitzer" label="Lyman Spitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="46268" end="46272" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="NOAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306220" start="46280" end="46317" title="Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory" label="Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153281" start="46574" end="46592" title="Common Application" label="Common Application"/>
<link wikidata="Q106935964" start="46598" end="46619" title="Coalition for College" label="Coalition Application"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271432" start="46629" end="46652" title="QuestBridge" label="QuestBridge Application"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="46946" end="46949" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="47000" end="47003" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q428602" start="47366" end="47380" title="feeder schools" label="feeder schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326785" start="47465" end="47477" title="early action" label="early action"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326799" start="47519" end="47533" title="early decision" label="early decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="47761" end="47783" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834008" start="47991" end="48008" title="transfer students" label="transfer students"/>
<link wikidata="Q462058" start="48599" end="48611" title="student loan" label="student loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627832" start="48616" end="48629" title="Student financial aid (United States)" label="financial aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q936700" start="48691" end="48701" title="Need-blind admission" label="need-blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414654" start="49010" end="49019" title="Kiplinger" label="Kiplinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="49120" end="49140" title="Private university" label="private universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="49150" end="49170" title="liberal arts college" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="49177" end="49192" title="Public university" label="public colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="49279" end="49307" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680291" start="49671" end="49690" title="residential college" label="residential college"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023016" start="50861" end="50874" title="First College" label="First College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355041" start="51405" end="51424" title="Rockefeller College" label="Rockefeller College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787079" start="51433" end="51447" title="Mathey College" label="Mathey College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002595" start="51456" end="51470" title="Butler College" label="Butler College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467232" start="51483" end="51497" title="Forbes College" label="Forbes College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996609" start="51506" end="51521" title="Whitman College, Princeton University" label="Whitman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q97353949" start="51846" end="51857" title="Residential College 7" label="Yeh College"/>
<link wikidata="Q112114660" start="51862" end="51878" title="New College West" label="New College West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245025" start="52117" end="52133" title="Princeton University Graduate College" label="Graduate College"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600153" start="52311" end="52330" title="Andrew Fleming West" label="Andrew Fleming West"/>
<link wikidata="Q56266198" start="52529" end="52546" title="Collegiate Gothic" label="Collegiate Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132268" start="52566" end="52581" title="Cleveland Tower" label="Cleveland Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="52629" end="52645" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="52669" end="52677" title="carillon" label="carillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331292" start="53181" end="53192" title="Eating clubs at Princeton University" label="eating club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076110" start="53360" end="53366" title="Kosher foods" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="53413" end="53418" title="halal" label="halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="53678" end="53686" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q20679800" start="54427" end="54433" title="Cannon Club" label="Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034445" start="54435" end="54447" title="Cap and Gown Club" label="Cap and Gown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244945" start="54449" end="54456" title="Princeton Charter Club" label="Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134923" start="54458" end="54466" title="Cloister Inn" label="Cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148302" start="54468" end="54476" title="Colonial Club" label="Colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894669" start="54478" end="54485" title="University Cottage Club" label="Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742785" start="54487" end="54490" title="Ivy Club" label="Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268309" start="54492" end="54502" title="Quadrangle Club" label="Quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801420" start="54504" end="54509" title="Tiger Inn" label="Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245019" start="54515" end="54520" title="Tower Club" label="Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703174" start="54556" end="54563" title="Terrace Club" label="Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="54865" end="54883" title="Student Government" label="student government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745375" start="55074" end="55106" title="American Whig–Cliosophic Society" label="American Whig-Cliosophic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q14476370" start="55797" end="55819" title="The Daily Princetonian" label="The Daily Princetonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q738377" start="55905" end="55922" title="Student publication" label="student newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245018" start="56022" end="56036" title="The Princeton Tory" label="Princeton Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954440" start="56418" end="56422" title="WPRB" label="WPRB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245021" start="56669" end="56692" title="Princeton Triangle Club" label="Princeton Triangle Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="56860" end="56876" title="musical comedies" label="musical comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="56878" end="56883" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244961" start="56958" end="56967" title="Princeton Glee Club" label="Glee Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438710" start="57002" end="57010" title="Scramble band" label="scramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245022" start="57011" end="57021" title="Princeton University Band" label="Tiger Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768772" start="57112" end="57142" title="Princeton University Orchestra" label="Princeton University Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245007" start="57207" end="57235" title="Princeton Symphony Orchestra" label="Princeton Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719046" start="57262" end="57276" title="Alexander Hall (Princeton University)" label="Alexander Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="57279" end="57289" title="A cappella" label="A cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244982" start="57525" end="57533" title="Princeton Nassoons" label="Nassoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245016" start="57590" end="57600" title="Princeton Tigertones" label="Tigertones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244958" start="57612" end="57621" title="Princeton Footnotes" label="Footnotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217198" start="57775" end="57798" title="Princeton Katzenjammers" label="Princeton Katzenjammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="58460" end="58471" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baha&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="58523" end="58530" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="58536" end="58558" title="Unitarian Universalism" label="Unitarian Universalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="58888" end="58896" title="College football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865576" start="59144" end="59161" title="FitzRandolph Gate" label="FitzRandolph Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018444" start="59309" end="59326" title="Newman Day" label="Newman&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="59422" end="59440" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="59514" end="59525" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245001" start="59697" end="59705" title="Princeton Reunions" label="Reunions"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="59965" end="59972" title="Bell clapper" label="clapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975164" start="60632" end="60642" title="Old Nassau" label="Old Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q211939" start="60958" end="60972" title="Auld Lang Syne" label="Auld Lang Syne"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610462" start="61216" end="61229" title="Tiger Transit" label="Tiger Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q498553" start="61505" end="61515" title="NJ Transit" label="NJ Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244937" start="61574" end="61579" title="Princeton Branch" label="Dinky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244972" start="61633" end="61659" title="Princeton Junction Station" label="Princeton Junction Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137600" start="61661" end="61670" title="Coach USA" label="Coach USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632391" start="61697" end="61713" title="Suburban Transit" label="Suburban Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="62042" end="62059" title="students of color" label="students of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="62604" end="62620" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038698" start="63084" end="63105" title="The New York Observer" label="The New York Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="63175" end="63188" title="anti-Semitism" label="anti-Semitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q119945" start="63655" end="63675" title="Hillel International" label="Hillel International"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="63942" end="63955" title="American Jews" label="American Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="64351" end="64367" title="African Americans" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905616" start="64747" end="64759" title="V-12 Navy College Training Program" label="V-12 program"/>
<link wikidata="Q382647" start="65053" end="65063" title="Intramural sports" label="intramural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="65624" end="65639" title="NCAA Division I" label="NCAA Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q49113" start="65687" end="65697" title="Ivy League" label="Ivy League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65731" end="65769" title="College rowing in the United States#Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges" label="Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330224" start="65822" end="65868" title="Eastern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association" label="Eastern Intercollegiate Volleyball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841212" start="65959" end="65964" title="Middle Atlantic Intercollegiate Sailing Association" label="MAISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045823" start="65983" end="66019" title="Inter-Collegiate Sailing Association" label="Inter-Collegiate Sailing Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245012" start="66022" end="66052" title="Princeton Tigers football" label="Princeton&amp;#x27;s football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555251" start="66206" end="66253" title="1869 New Jersey vs. Rutgers football game" label="first intercollegiate football game in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q5273083" start="66622" end="66635" title="Dick Kazmaier" label="Dick Kazmaier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="66659" end="66673" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245013" start="66718" end="66747" title="Princeton Tigers men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="men&amp;#x27;s basketball program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900794" start="66779" end="66790" title="Pete Carril" label="Pete Carril"/>
<link wikidata="Q996954" start="66891" end="66906" title="NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Championship" label="NCAA tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110417" start="66942" end="66959" title="Princeton offense" label="Princeton offense"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="67136" end="67140" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994972" start="67203" end="67223" title="1996 NCAA Men&amp;#x27;s Division I Basketball Tournament" label="1996 NCAA tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q922647" start="67425" end="67444" title="Monmouth University" label="Monmouth University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154558" start="67498" end="67546" title="NCAA Division I Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer Championship" label="NCAA Division I Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="67723" end="67761" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States men&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q442325" start="67770" end="67781" title="Bob Bradley" label="Bob Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245015" start="67904" end="67931" title="Princeton Tigers men&amp;#x27;s lacrosse" label="men&amp;#x27;s lacrosse program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="68384" end="68392" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q105044023" start="69054" end="69064" title="Cane Spree" label="Cane Spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="69426" end="69441" title="President of the United States" label="U.S. Presidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="69442" end="69455" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="69460" end="69474" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179090" start="69495" end="69505" title="Aaron Burr" label="Aaron Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q310849" start="69507" end="69523" title="George M. Dallas" label="George M. Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q273212" start="69529" end="69546" title="John C. Breckinridge" label="John Breckinridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13133" start="69580" end="69594" title="Michelle Obama" label="Michelle Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="69607" end="69638" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="69647" end="69681" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q515858" start="69682" end="69698" title="Oliver Ellsworth" label="Oliver Ellsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="69730" end="69748" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="69749" end="69767" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q11138" start="69768" end="69780" title="Samuel Alito" label="Samuel Alito"/>
<link wikidata="Q11105" start="69782" end="69793" title="Elena Kagan" label="Elena Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11107" start="69799" end="69814" title="Sonia Sotomayor" label="Sonia Sotomayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182718" start="69824" end="69837" title="Jerome Powell" label="Jerome Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172014" start="69904" end="69916" title="Pete Hegseth" label="Pete Hegseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="70031" end="70050" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183859" start="70117" end="70132" title="Philip Johnston (New Jersey soldier)" label="Philip Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966794" start="70137" end="70154" title="Nathaniel Scudder" label="Nathaniel Scudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237218" start="70223" end="70236" title="David Mathews" label="David Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q213076" start="70371" end="70382" title="Pete Conrad" label="Pete Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="70384" end="70390" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312556" start="70407" end="70417" title="Jeff Bezos" label="Jeff Bezos"/>
<link wikidata="Q20800404" start="70438" end="70451" title="Alphabet Inc." label="Alphabet Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q92747" start="70452" end="70464" title="Eric Schmidt" label="Eric Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q445734" start="70470" end="70485" title="Lisa P. Jackson" label="Lisa P. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="70515" end="70546" title="Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="70556" end="70569" title="Jimmy Stewart" label="Jimmy Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q484662" start="70571" end="70587" title="Wentworth Miller" label="Wentworth Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q312098" start="70589" end="70600" title="José Ferrer" label="José Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q484365" start="70602" end="70616" title="David Duchovny" label="David Duchovny"/>
<link wikidata="Q189400" start="70622" end="70636" title="Brooke Shields" label="Brooke Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345526" start="70680" end="70694" title="Edward T. Cone" label="Edward T. Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q318518" start="70699" end="70713" title="Milton Babbitt" label="Milton Babbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q454285" start="70737" end="70751" title="Diana Matheson" label="Diana Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="70807" end="70814" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q893138" start="70846" end="70862" title="Booth Tarkington" label="Booth Tarkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="70864" end="70883" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q93157" start="70889" end="70908" title="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447592" start="70947" end="70961" title="Selden Edwards" label="Selden Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q680368" start="70971" end="70983" title="W. S. Merwin" label="W. S. Merwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234443" start="71028" end="71040" title="Jodi Picoult" label="Jodi Picoult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176307" start="71052" end="71065" title="David Remnick" label="David Remnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="71077" end="71091" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865622" start="71112" end="71126" title="Barton Gellman" label="Barton Gellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681570" start="71131" end="71145" title="Lorraine Adams" label="Lorraine Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="71158" end="71175" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761526" start="71185" end="71196" title="Maria Ressa" label="Maria Ressa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016502" start="71220" end="71235" title="William P. Ross" label="William P. Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="71260" end="71275" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070337" start="71303" end="71332" title="Cherokee Phoenix" label="&amp;quot;Cherokee Advocate&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731874" start="71386" end="71401" title="Allen Shenstone" label="Allen Shenstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q381027" start="71403" end="71424" title="Pedro Pablo Kuczynski" label="Pedro Pablo Kuczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q155087" start="71426" end="71441" title="Thornton Wilder" label="Thornton Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="71443" end="71458" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q281847" start="71460" end="71471" title="Lee Iacocca" label="Lee Iacocca"/>
<link wikidata="Q128736" start="71473" end="71482" title="John Forbes Nash Jr." label="John Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q92741" start="71484" end="71497" title="Alonzo Church" label="Alonzo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="71499" end="71510" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q295981" start="71512" end="71523" title="Terence Tao" label="Terence Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q201513" start="71525" end="71538" title="Edward Witten" label="Edward Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q215765" start="71540" end="71551" title="John Milnor" label="John Milnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q949" start="71553" end="71565" title="John Bardeen" label="John Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179282" start="71567" end="71582" title="Steven Weinberg" label="Steven Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q351822" start="71584" end="71593" title="John Tate (mathematician)" label="John Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28591" start="71599" end="71613" title="David Petraeus" label="David Petraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006518" start="71615" end="71621" title="Royal family" label="Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106919" start="71630" end="71661" title="Prince Moulay Hicham of Morocco" label="Prince Moulay Hicham of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165651" start="71663" end="71694" title="Turki bin Faisal Al Saud" label="Prince Turki bin Faisal Al Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q240575" start="71700" end="71720" title="Queen Noor of Jordan" label="Queen Noor of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204078" start="71811" end="71823" title="Angus Deaton" label="Angus Deaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q544500" start="71825" end="71839" title="Robert Keohane" label="Robert Keohane"/>
<link wikidata="Q92932" start="71841" end="71857" title="Edward Felten" label="Edward W. Felten"/>
<link wikidata="Q555308" start="71859" end="71874" title="Anthony Grafton" label="Anthony Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q211539" start="71876" end="71888" title="Peter Singer" label="Peter Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q728331" start="71890" end="71901" title="Jim Peebles" label="Jim Peebles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398727" start="71903" end="71918" title="Manjul Bhargava" label="Manjul Bhargava"/>
<link wikidata="Q92608" start="71920" end="71935" title="Brian Kernighan" label="Brian Kernighan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54861491" start="71937" end="71954" title="Betsy Levy Paluck" label="Betsy Levy Paluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q472881" start="71959" end="71975" title="Robert P. George" label="Robert P. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246390" start="72016" end="72032" title="John Witherspoon" label="John Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q62977" start="72034" end="72049" title="Walter Kaufmann (philosopher)" label="Walter Kaufmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="72051" end="72067" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q201795" start="72069" end="72081" title="Ben Bernanke" label="Ben Bernanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="72083" end="72095" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q157043" start="72097" end="72109" title="Joseph Henry" label="Joseph Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q72334" start="72111" end="72124" title="Toni Morrison" label="Toni Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q217557" start="72126" end="72143" title="Joyce Carol Oates" label="Joyce Carol Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q503161" start="72145" end="72159" title="Michael Mullen" label="Michael Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184433" start="72161" end="72173" title="Andrew Wiles" label="Andrew Wiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q465208" start="72175" end="72188" title="Jhumpa Lahiri" label="Jhumpa Lahiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q712469" start="72190" end="72201" title="Cornel West" label="Cornel West"/>
<link wikidata="Q233950" start="72203" end="72218" title="Daniel Kahneman" label="Daniel Kahneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="72232" end="72246" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="72249" end="72264" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="72295" end="72323" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581681" start="72692" end="72713" title="This Side of Paradise" label="This Side of Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="72731" end="72750" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q164103" start="72887" end="72903" title="A Beautiful Mind (film)" label="A Beautiful Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q128736" start="72987" end="72996" title="John Forbes Nash Jr." label="John Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q276415" start="73085" end="73103" title="A Cinderella Story" label="A Cinderella Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321357" start="73225" end="73241" title="The Rule of Four" label="The Rule of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q90138922" start="73422" end="73439" title="Never Have I Ever (TV series)" label="Never Have I Ever"/>
<link wikidata="Q108839994" start="73527" end="73538" title="Oppenheimer (film)" label="Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="73594" end="73615" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="73655" end="73672" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="73680" end="73692" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="73768" end="73796" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="" start="73812" end="73835" title="Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse" label="Across the Spider-Verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906535" start="73944" end="73964" title="Big Three (colleges)" label="Big Three (colleges)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758367" start="73967" end="73997" title="Higher education in New Jersey" label="Higher education in New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49113" start="74000" end="74010" title="Ivy League" label="Ivy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q85794547" start="74014" end="74056" title="Princeton University Department of Physics" label="Princeton University Department of Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758348" start="74059" end="74109" title="The Princeton University Summer Journalism Program" label="The Princeton University Summer Journalism Program"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23923" wikidata="Q1321666" url="?curid=23923" title="Posthumous execution">
<text>Posthumous execution is the ritual or ceremonial mutilation of an already dead body as a punishment.

==Dissection as a punishment in England==
Some Christians believed that the resurrection of the dead on Judgment Day requires that the body be buried whole facing east so that the body could rise facing God. If dismemberment stopped the possibility of the resurrection of an intact body, then a posthumous execution was an effective way of punishing a criminal.

==Examples==

* When the Persian king Cambyses conquered Egypt in 525 BC and ended the 26th (Saite) Dynasty, Herodotus recorded the desecration of the mummy of Amasis II (who died the year before) by Cambyses:

* In 897, Pope Stephen VI had the corpse of Pope Formosus disinterred and put on trial during the Cadaver Synod. Found guilty, the corpse had three of its fingers cut off and was later thrown into the Tiber.
* Harold I Harefoot, king of the Anglo-Saxons (1035–1040), illegitimate son of Cnut, died in 1040 and his half-brother, Harthacanute, on succeeding him, had his body taken from its tomb and cast in a pen with animals.
* Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester, died of wounds suffered at the Battle of Evesham in 1265; his corpse was beheaded, castrated and quartered by the knights of Henry III of England.
* Roger d&#x27;Amory (c. 1290 – before 14 March 1321/1322) died following the Battle of Burton Bridge and was then posthumously executed for treason by Edward II.
* John Wycliffe (1328–1384) was burned as a heretic forty-five years after his death.
* Sir Henry Percy (d. 1404) after he was killed in action while leading his troops at the Battle of Shrewsbury, King Henry IV of England ordered Percy&#x27;s body posthumously beheaded, quartered, and attainted for high treason
* Vlad the Impaler (1431–1476) was beheaded following his assassination.
* Jacopo Bonfadio (1508–1550) was beheaded for sodomy and then his corpse was burned at the stake for heresy.
* Nils Dacke, leader of a 16th-century peasant revolt in southern Sweden, was decapitated and dismembered after his death in combat.
* In 1538, during the Dissolution of the Monasteries on orders from King Henry VIII. He had the bones of Thomas Becket (1119–1170) destroyed, his shrine destroyed, and ordered all mention of his name obliterated.
* By order of Mary I, the body of Martin Bucer (1491–1551) was exhumed and burned at the Market Square in Cambridge, England.
* In 1600, after the failure of the Gowrie conspiracy, the corpses of John, Earl of Gowrie and his brother Alexander Ruthven were hanged and quartered at the Mercat Cross, Edinburgh. Their heads were put on spikes at Edinburgh&#x27;s Old Tolbooth and their limbs upon spikes at various locations around Perth, Scotland.

* Gilles van Ledenberg, whose embalmed corpse was hanged from a gibbet in 1619, after his conviction of treason in the trial of Johan van Oldenbarnevelt.
* A number of the 59 regicides of Charles I of England, including the most prominent of the regicides, the former Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell, died before the Restoration of his son Charles II in 1660. Parliament passed an order of attainder for High Treason on the four most prominent deceased regicides: John Bradshaw the court president; Oliver Cromwell; Henry Ireton; and Thomas Pride. The bodies were exhumed and three were hanged for a day at Tyburn and then beheaded. The three bodies were then thrown into a pit close to the gallows, while the heads were placed, with Bradshaw&#x27;s in the middle, at the end of Westminster Hall (the symbolism was lost on no one as that was the building where the trial of Charles I had taken place). Oliver Cromwell&#x27;s head was finally buried in 1960. The body of Pride was not &quot;punished&quot;, perhaps because it had decayed too much.
* Edward Teach (1680–1718), better known as &quot;Blackbeard&quot;, was killed by the sailors of &quot;HMS Pearl&quot; who boarded on his ship, the &quot;Adventure&quot;. British First Lieutenant Robert Maynard examined Edward Teach&#x27;s body, decapitated and tied his head to the bowsprit of his ship for the trip back to Virginia. Upon returning to his home port of Hampton, the head was placed on a stake near the mouth of the Hampton River as a warning to other pirates.
* Joseph Warren (1741–1775), a physician and major general of American colonial militias, was stripped of his clothing, bayoneted until unrecognizable, and then he was shoved into a shallow ditch, after he was killed at the Battle of Bunker and Breed&#x27;s Hill. Days later, British Lieutenant James Drew had Joseph Warren&#x27;s body exhumed again; his body was stomped on, beaten, decapitated and humiliated on the area, according to eyewitness testimonies.
* In 1793, following the death sentence of 22 Girondin leaders, Charles Éléonor Dufriche de Valazé committed suicide, but his corpse was still guillotined along with his 21 fellows.
* In 1917, the body of Rasputin, the Russian mystic, was exhumed from the ground by a mob and burned.
* In 1918, the secret grave of Lavr Kornilov, the White Russian general, was found by the Bolsheviks by accident. The body was then exhumed and disfigured before being burned.
* In 1966, during the Cultural Revolution, Red Guards stormed the Dingling Mausoleum, destroyed thousands of artifacts, and dragged the remains of the Wanli Emperor and his two empresses to the front of the tomb where they were posthumously denounced and burned after photographs were taken of their skulls.
* The body of General Gracia Jacques, a supporter of François Duvalier (&quot;Papa Doc&quot;) (1907–1971), the Haitian dictator, was exhumed and ritually beaten to &quot;death&quot; in 1986.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1321666" start="0" end="20" title="Posthumous execution" label="Posthumous execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="28" end="34" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627975" start="38" end="48" title="ceremonial" label="ceremonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q767568" start="49" end="59" title="mutilation" label="mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186361" start="89" end="99" title="punishment" label="punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="149" end="159" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894158" start="178" end="202" title="resurrection of the dead" label="resurrection of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="206" end="218" title="Judgment Day" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="305" end="308" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q182483" start="503" end="511" title="Cambyses II" label="Cambyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q105760556" start="512" end="527" title="First Achaemenid conquest of Egypt" label="conquered Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="574" end="583" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312045" start="625" end="634" title="Amasis II" label="Amasis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q238947" start="686" end="701" title="Pope Stephen VI" label="Pope Stephen VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q170499" start="720" end="733" title="Pope Formosus" label="Pope Formosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414811" start="774" end="787" title="Cadaver Synod" label="Cadaver Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="877" end="882" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q188627" start="886" end="903" title="Harold Harefoot" label="Harold I Harefoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="917" end="929" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="963" end="967" title="Cnut" label="Cnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q190091" start="1004" end="1016" title="Harthacanute" label="Harthacanute"/>
<link wikidata="Q310092" start="1104" end="1144" title="Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester" label="Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339928" start="1177" end="1194" title="Battle of Evesham" label="Battle of Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="1219" end="1227" title="Decapitation" label="beheaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="1229" end="1238" title="Castration" label="castrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q877524" start="1243" end="1252" title="Hanged, drawn and quartered" label="quartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="1260" end="1267" title="knights" label="knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="1271" end="1291" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380126" start="1295" end="1313" title="Roger d&amp;#x27;Amory" label="Roger d&amp;#x27;Amory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870596" start="1371" end="1394" title="Battle of Burton Bridge (1322)" label="Battle of Burton Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="1445" end="1454" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q173893" start="1458" end="1471" title="John Wycliffe" label="John Wycliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="1488" end="1494" title="Death by burning" label="burned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="1500" end="1507" title="Christian heresy" label="heretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q471421" start="1548" end="1559" title="Henry Percy (Hotspur)" label="Henry Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210392" start="1583" end="1599" title="killed in action" label="killed in action"/>
<link wikidata="Q166961" start="1632" end="1652" title="Battle of Shrewsbury" label="Battle of Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q161866" start="1659" end="1678" title="Henry IV of England" label="Henry IV of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818067" start="1743" end="1752" title="attainder" label="attainted"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994022" start="1757" end="1769" title="High treason in the United Kingdom" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q43715" start="1772" end="1788" title="Vlad the Impaler" label="Vlad the Impaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="1828" end="1841" title="assassination" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433261" start="1845" end="1860" title="Jacopo Bonfadio" label="Jacopo Bonfadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q206426" start="1890" end="1896" title="sodomy" label="sodomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="1945" end="1951" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347396" start="1955" end="1965" title="Nils Dacke" label="Nils Dacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2019" end="2025" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="2108" end="2138" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="Dissolution of the Monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2159" end="2169" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="2191" end="2204" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="2313" end="2319" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I"/>
<link wikidata="Q318622" start="2333" end="2345" title="Martin Bucer" label="Martin Bucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q104987619" start="2461" end="2478" title="Gowrie conspiracy" label="Gowrie conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965275" start="2495" end="2515" title="John Ruthven, 3rd Earl of Gowrie" label="John, Earl of Gowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719994" start="2532" end="2549" title="Alexander Ruthven" label="Alexander Ruthven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818041" start="2583" end="2606" title="Mercat Cross, Edinburgh" label="Mercat Cross, Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085231" start="2642" end="2671" title="Old Tolbooth, Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh&amp;#x27;s Old Tolbooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="2728" end="2743" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth, Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756881" start="2748" end="2768" title="Gilles van Ledenberg" label="Gilles van Ledenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="2776" end="2784" title="Embalming" label="embalmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198167" start="2810" end="2816" title="Gibbeting" label="gibbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q166623" start="2874" end="2898" title="Johan van Oldenbarnevelt" label="Johan van Oldenbarnevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439921" start="2918" end="2930" title="List of regicides of Charles I" label="59 regicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="2934" end="2954" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q512196" start="3014" end="3028" title="Lord Protector" label="Lord Protector"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="3029" end="3044" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="3062" end="3073" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="3085" end="3095" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="3105" end="3115" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q862685" start="3126" end="3144" title="Bill of attainder" label="order of attainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994022" start="3149" end="3161" title="High treason in the United Kingdom" label="High Treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634873" start="3209" end="3222" title="John Bradshaw (Judge)" label="John Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q719724" start="3261" end="3273" title="Henry Ireton" label="Henry Ireton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525493" start="3279" end="3291" title="Thomas Pride" label="Thomas Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362341" start="3352" end="3358" title="Tyburn, London" label="Tyburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q114004148" start="3524" end="3540" title="Westminster Hall" label="Westminster Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631941" start="3610" end="3628" title="trial of Charles I" label="trial of Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012031" start="3647" end="3674" title="Oliver Cromwell&amp;#x27;s head" label="Oliver Cromwell&amp;#x27;s head"/>
<link wikidata="Q213518" start="3794" end="3806" title="Blackbeard" label="Edward Teach"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161131" start="3895" end="3904" title="HMS Pearl (1708)" label="HMS Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q715110" start="3988" end="4002" title="Robert Maynard" label="Robert Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="4038" end="4049" title="Decapitation" label="decapitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="4117" end="4125" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q342043" start="4162" end="4169" title="Hampton, Virginia" label="Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646275" start="4224" end="4237" title="Hampton River" label="Hampton River"/>
<link wikidata="Q590644" start="4271" end="4284" title="Joseph Warren" label="Joseph Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="4300" end="4309" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="4314" end="4327" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336248" start="4340" end="4357" title="Minutemen" label="colonial militias"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="4493" end="4531" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Battle of Bunker and Breed&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4755" end="4792" title="Girondins#1793 trial of Girondins" label="death sentence of 22 Girondin leaders"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4794" end="4828" title="Charles Éléonor Dufriche de Valazé" label="Charles Éléonor Dufriche de Valazé"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="4873" end="4883" title="guillotine" label="guillotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="4935" end="4943" title="Rasputin" label="Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="4949" end="4956" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q276193" start="5045" end="5058" title="Lavr Kornilov" label="Lavr Kornilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="5064" end="5069" title="White movement" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="5104" end="5114" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="5212" end="5231" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q821788" start="5233" end="5242" title="Red Guards (China)" label="Red Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11087810" start="5256" end="5274" title="Dingling (Ming)" label="Dingling Mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q10061" start="5341" end="5354" title="Wanli Emperor" label="Wanli Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q187697" start="5551" end="5568" title="François Duvalier" label="François Duvalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="5609" end="5614" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23924" wikidata="Q191968" url="?curid=23924" title="Passenger pigeon">
<text>The passenger pigeon or wild pigeon (Ectopistes migratorius) is an extinct species of pigeon that was endemic to North America. Its common name is derived from the French word &quot;passager&quot;, meaning &quot;passing by&quot;, due to the migratory habits of the species. The scientific name also refers to its migratory characteristics. The morphologically similar mourning dove (&quot;Zenaida macroura&quot;) was long thought to be its closest relative, and the two were at times confused, but genetic analysis has shown that the genus &quot;Patagioenas&quot; is more closely related to it than the &quot;Zenaida&quot; doves.

The passenger pigeon was sexually dimorphic in size and coloration. The male was in length, mainly gray on the upperparts, lighter on the underparts, with iridescent bronze feathers on the neck, and black spots on the wings. The female was , and was duller and browner than the male overall. The juvenile was similar to the female, but without iridescence. It mainly inhabited the deciduous forests of eastern North America and was also recorded elsewhere, but bred primarily around the Great Lakes. The pigeon migrated in enormous flocks, constantly searching for food, shelter, and breeding grounds, and was once the most abundant bird in North America, numbering around 3 billion, and possibly up to 5 billion. A very fast flyer, the passenger pigeon could reach a speed of . The bird fed mainly on mast, and also fruits and invertebrates. It practiced communal roosting and communal breeding, and its extreme gregariousness may have been linked with searching for food and predator satiation.

Passenger pigeons were hunted by Native Americans, but hunting intensified after the arrival of Europeans, particularly in the 19th century. Pigeon meat was commercialized as cheap food, resulting in hunting on a massive scale for many decades. There were several other factors contributing to the decline and subsequent extinction of the species, including shrinking of the large breeding populations necessary for preservation of the species and widespread deforestation, which destroyed its habitat. A slow decline between about 1800 and 1870 was followed by a rapid decline between 1870 and 1890. In 1900, the last confirmed wild bird was shot in southern Ohio. The last captive birds were divided in three groups around the turn of the 20th century, some of which were photographed alive. Martha, thought to be the last passenger pigeon, died on September 1, 1914, at the Cincinnati Zoo. The eradication of the species is a notable example of anthropogenic extinction.

==Taxonomy==

Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus coined the binomial name &quot;Columba macroura&quot; for both the mourning dove and the passenger pigeon in the 1758 edition of his work &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; (the starting point of biological nomenclature), wherein he appears to have considered the two identical. This composite description cited accounts of these birds in two pre-Linnean books. One of these was Mark Catesby&#x27;s description of the passenger pigeon, which was published in his 1731 to 1743 work &quot;Natural History of Carolina, Florida and the Bahama Islands&quot;, which referred to this bird as &quot;Palumbus migratorius&quot;, and was accompanied by the earliest published illustration of the species. Catesby&#x27;s description was combined with the 1743 description of the mourning dove by George Edwards, who used the name &quot;C. macroura&quot; for that bird. There is nothing to suggest Linnaeus ever saw specimens of these birds himself, and his description is thought to be fully derivative of these earlier accounts and their illustrations. In his 1766 edition of &quot;Systema Naturae&quot;, Linnaeus dropped the name &quot;C. macroura&quot;, and instead used the name &quot;C. migratoria&quot; for the passenger pigeon, and &quot;C. carolinensis&quot; for the mourning dove. In the same edition, Linnaeus also named &quot;C. canadensis&quot;, based on &quot;Turtur canadensis&quot;, as used by Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760. Brisson&#x27;s description was later shown to have been based on a female passenger pigeon.

In 1827, William Swainson moved the passenger pigeon from the genus &quot;Columba&quot; to the new monotypic genus &quot;Ectopistes&quot;, due in part to the length of the wings and the wedge shape of the tail. In 1906 Outram Bangs suggested that because Linnaeus had wholly copied Catesby&#x27;s text when coining &quot;C. macroura&quot;, this name should apply to the passenger pigeon, as &quot;E. macroura&quot;. In 1918 Harry C. Oberholser suggested that &quot;C. canadensis&quot; should take precedence over &quot;C. migratoria&quot; (as &quot;E. canadensis&quot;), as it appeared on an earlier page in Linnaeus&#x27; book. In 1952 Francis Hemming proposed that the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN) secure the specific name &quot;macroura&quot; for the mourning dove, and the name &quot;migratorius&quot; for the passenger pigeon, since this was the intended use by the authors on whose work Linnaeus had based his description. This was accepted by the ICZN, which used its plenary powers to designate the species for the respective names in 1955.

===Evolution===

The passenger pigeon was a member of the pigeon and dove family, Columbidae. The oldest known fossil of the genus is an isolated humerus (USNM 430960) known from the Lee Creek Mine in North Carolina in sediments belonging to the Yorktown Formation, dating to the Zanclean stage of the Pliocene, between 5.3 and 3.6 million years ago. Its closest living relatives were long thought to be the &quot;Zenaida&quot; doves, based on morphological grounds, particularly the physically similar mourning dove (now &quot;Z. macroura&quot;). It was even suggested that the mourning dove belonged to the genus &quot;Ectopistes&quot; and was listed as &quot;E. carolinensis&quot; by some authors, including Thomas Mayo Brewer. The passenger pigeon was supposedly descended from &quot;Zenaida&quot; pigeons that had adapted to the woodlands on the plains of central North America.

The passenger pigeon differed from the species in the genus &quot;Zenaida&quot; in being larger, lacking a facial stripe, being sexually dimorphic, and having iridescent neck feathers and a smaller clutch. In a 2002 study by American geneticist Beth Shapiro et al., museum specimens of the passenger pigeon were included in an ancient DNA analysis for the first time (in a paper focusing mainly on the dodo), and it was found to be the sister taxon of the cuckoo-dove genus &quot;Macropygia&quot;. The &quot;Zenaida&quot; doves were instead shown to be related to the quail-doves of the genus &quot;Geotrygon&quot; and the &quot;Leptotila&quot; doves.

A more extensive 2010 study instead showed that the passenger pigeon was most closely related to the New World &quot;Patagioenas&quot; pigeons, including the band-tailed pigeon (&quot;P. fasciata&quot;) of western North America, which are related to the Southeast Asian species in the genera &quot;Turacoena&quot;, &quot;Macropygia&quot;, and &quot;Reinwardtoena&quot;. This clade is also related to the &quot;Columba&quot; and &quot;Streptopelia&quot; doves of the Old World (collectively termed the &quot;typical pigeons and doves&quot;). The authors of the study suggested that the ancestors of the passenger pigeon may have colonized the New World from South East Asia by flying across the Pacific Ocean, or perhaps across Beringia in the north.

In a 2012 study, the nuclear DNA of the passenger pigeon was analyzed for the first time, and its relationship with the &quot;Patagioenas&quot; pigeon was confirmed. In contrast to the 2010 study, these authors suggested that their results could indicate that the ancestors of the passenger pigeon and its Old World relatives may have originated in the Neotropical region of the New World.

The cladogram below follows the 2012 DNA study showing the position of the passenger pigeon among its closest relatives:
DNA in old museum specimens is often degraded and fragmentary, and passenger pigeon specimens have been used in various studies to discover improved methods of analyzing and assembling genomes from such material. DNA samples are often taken from the toe pads of bird skins in museums, as this can be done without causing significant damage to valuable specimens. The passenger pigeon had no known subspecies. Hybridization occurred between the passenger pigeon and the Barbary dove (&quot;Streptopelia risoria&quot;) in the aviary of Charles Otis Whitman (who owned many of the last captive birds around the turn of the 20th century, and kept them with other pigeon species) but the offspring were infertile.

===Etymology===
The genus name, &quot;Ectopistes&quot;, translates as &quot;moving about&quot; or &quot;wandering&quot;, while the specific name, &quot;migratorius&quot;, indicates its migratory habits. The full binomial can thus be translated as &quot;migratory wanderer&quot;. The English common name &quot;passenger pigeon&quot; derives from the French word &quot;&quot;, which means &quot;to pass by&quot; in a fleeting manner. While the pigeon was extant, the name &quot;passenger pigeon&quot; was used interchangeably with &quot;wild pigeon&quot;. The bird also gained some less-frequently used names, including blue pigeon, merne rouck pigeon, wandering long-tailed dove, and wood pigeon. In the 18th century, the passenger pigeon was known as &quot;tourte&quot; in New France (in modern Canada), but to the French in Europe it was known as &quot;tourtre&quot;. In modern French, the bird is known as &quot;tourte voyageuse&quot; or &quot;pigeon migrateur&quot;, among other names.

In the Native American Algonquian languages, the pigeon was called &quot;amimi&quot; by the Lenape, &#x27; by the Ojibwe, and &#x27; by the Kaskaskia Illinois. Other names in indigenous American languages include &#x27; in Mohawk, and &#x27;, or &quot;lost dove&quot;, in Choctaw. The Seneca people called the pigeon &#x27;, meaning &quot;big bread&quot;, as it was a source of food for their tribes. Chief Simon Pokagon of the Potawatomi stated that his people called the pigeon &#x27;, and that the Europeans did not adopt native names for the bird, as it reminded them of their domesticated pigeons, instead calling them &quot;wild&quot; pigeons, as they called the native peoples &quot;wild&quot; men.

==Description==
The passenger pigeon was sexually dimorphic in size and coloration. It weighed between . The adult male was about in length. It had a bluish-gray head, nape, and hindneck. On the sides of the neck and the upper mantle were iridescent display feathers that have variously been described as being a bright bronze, violet, or golden-green, depending on the angle of the light. The upper back and wings were a pale or slate gray tinged with olive brown, that turned into grayish-brown on the lower wings. The lower back and rump were a dark blue-gray that became grayish-brown on the upper tail-covert feathers. The greater and median wing-covert feathers were pale gray, with a small number of irregular black spots near the end. The primary and secondary feathers of the wing were a blackish-brown with a narrow white edge on the outer side of the secondaries. The two central tail feathers were brownish gray, and the rest were white.

The tail pattern was distinctive as it had white outer edges with blackish spots that were prominently displayed in flight. The lower throat and breast were richly pinkish-rufous, grading into a paler pink further down, and into white on the abdomen and undertail covert feathers. The undertail coverts also had a few black spots. The bill was black, while the feet and legs were a bright coral red. It had a carmine-red iris surrounded by a narrow purplish-red eye-ring. The wing of the male measured , the tail , the bill , and the tarsus was .

The adult female passenger pigeon was slightly smaller than the male at in length. It was duller than the male overall, and was a grayish-brown on the forehead, crown, and nape down to the scapulars, and the feathers on the sides of the neck had less iridescence than those of the male. The lower throat and breast were a buff-gray that developed into white on the belly and undertail-coverts. It was browner on the upperparts and paler buff brown and less rufous on the underparts than the male. The wings, back, and tail were similar in appearance to those of the male except that the outer edges of the primary feathers were edged in buff or rufous buff. The wings had more spotting than those of the male. The tail was shorter than that of the male, and the legs and feet were a paler red. The iris was orange red, with a grayish blue, naked orbital ring. The wing of the female was , the tail , the bill , and the tarsus was .

The juvenile passenger pigeon was similar in plumage to the adult female, but lacked the spotting on the wings, and was a darker brownish-gray on the head, neck, and breast. The feathers on the wings had pale gray fringes (also described as white tips), giving it a scaled look. The secondaries were brownish-black with pale edges, and the tertial feathers had a rufous wash. The primaries were also edged with a rufous-brown color. The neck feathers had no iridescence. The legs and feet were dull red, and the iris was brownish, and surrounded by a narrow carmine ring. The plumage of the sexes was similar during their first year.

Of the hundreds of surviving skins, only one appears to be aberrant in coloran adult female from the collection of Walter Rothschild, Natural History Museum at Tring. It is a washed brown on the upper parts, wing covert, secondary feathers, and tail (where it would otherwise have been gray), and white on the primary feathers and underparts. The normally black spots are brown, and it is pale gray on the head, lower back, and upper-tail covert feathers, yet the iridescence is unaffected. The brown mutation is a result of a reduction in eumelanin, due to incomplete synthesis (oxidation) of this pigment. This sex-linked mutation is common in female wild birds, but it is thought the white feathers of this specimen are instead the result of bleaching due to exposure to sunlight.

The passenger pigeon was physically adapted for speed, endurance, and maneuverability in flight, and has been described as having a streamlined version of the typical pigeon shape, such as that of the generalized rock dove (&quot;Columba livia&quot;). The wings were very long and pointed, and measured from the wing-chord to the primary feathers, and to the secondaries. The tail, which accounted for much of its overall length, was long and wedge-shaped (or graduated), with two central feathers longer than the rest. The body was slender and narrow, and the head and neck were small.

The internal anatomy of the passenger pigeon has rarely been described. Robert W. Shufeldt found little to differentiate the bird&#x27;s osteology from that of other pigeons when examining a male skeleton in 1914, but Julian P. Hume noted several distinct features in a more detailed 2015 description. The pigeon&#x27;s particularly large breast muscles indicated a powerful flight (musculus pectoralis major for downstroke and the smaller musculus supracoracoideus for upstroke). The coracoid bone (which connects the scapula, furcula, and sternum) was large relative to the size of the bird, , with straighter shafts and more robust articular ends than in other pigeons. The furcula had a sharper V-shape and was more robust, with expanded articular ends. The scapula was long, straight, and robust, and its distal end was enlarged. The sternum was very large and robust compared to that of other pigeons; its keel was deep. The overlapping uncinate processes, which stiffen the ribcage, were very well developed. The wing bones (humerus, radius, ulna, and carpometacarpus) were short but robust compared to other pigeons. The leg bones were similar to those of other pigeons.

===Vocalizations===
The noise produced by flocks of passenger pigeons was described as deafening, audible for miles away, and the bird&#x27;s voice as loud, harsh, and unmusical. It was also described by some as clucks, twittering, and cooing, and as a series of low notes, instead of an actual song. The birds apparently made croaking noises when building nests, and bell-like sounds when mating. During feeding, some individuals would give alarm calls when facing a threat, and the rest of the flock would join the sound while taking off.

In 1911, American behavioral scientist Wallace Craig published an account of the gestures and sounds of this species as a series of descriptions and musical notations, based on observation of C. O. Whitman&#x27;s captive passenger pigeons in 1903. Craig compiled these records to assist in identifying potential survivors in the wild (as the physically similar mourning doves could otherwise be mistaken for passenger pigeons), while noting this &quot;meager information&quot; was likely all that would be left on the subject. According to Craig, one call was a simple harsh &quot;keck&quot; that could be given twice in succession with a pause in between. This was said to be used to attract the attention of another pigeon. Another call was a more frequent and variable scolding. This sound was described as &quot;kee-kee-kee-kee&quot; or &quot;tete! tete! tete!&quot;, and was used to call either to its mate or towards other creatures it considered to be enemies. One variant of this call, described as a long, drawn-out &quot;tweet&quot;, could be used to call down a flock of passenger pigeons passing overhead, which would then land in a nearby tree. &quot;Keeho&quot; was a soft cooing that, while followed by louder &quot;keck&quot; notes or scolding, was directed at the bird&#x27;s mate. A nesting passenger pigeon would also give off a stream of at least eight mixed notes that were both high and low in tone and ended with &quot;keeho&quot;. Overall, female passenger pigeons were quieter and called infrequently. Craig suggested that the loud, strident voice and &quot;degenerated&quot; musicality was the result of living in populous colonies where only the loudest sounds could be heard.

==Distribution and habitat==
The passenger pigeon was found across most of North America east of the Rocky Mountains, from the Great Plains to the Atlantic coast in the east, to the south of Canada in the north, and the north of Mississippi in the southern United States, coinciding with its primary habitat, the eastern deciduous forests. Within this range, it constantly migrated in search of food and shelter. It is unclear if the birds favored particular trees and terrain, but they were possibly not restricted to one type, as long as their numbers could be supported. It originally bred from the southern parts of eastern and central Canada south to eastern Kansas, Oklahoma, Mississippi, and Georgia in the United States, but the primary breeding range was in southern Ontario and the Great Lakes states south through states north of the Appalachian Mountains. Though the western forests were ecologically similar to those in the east, these were occupied by band-tailed pigeons, which may have kept out the passenger pigeons through competitive exclusion.

The passenger pigeon wintered from Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina south to Texas, the Gulf Coast, and northern Florida, though flocks occasionally wintered as far north as southern Pennsylvania and Connecticut. It preferred to winter in large swamps, particularly those with alder trees; if swamps were not available, forested areas, particularly with pine trees, were favored roosting sites. There were also sightings of passenger pigeons outside of its normal range, including in several Western states, Bermuda, Cuba, and Mexico, particularly during severe winters. It has been suggested that some of these extralimital records may have been due to the paucity of observers rather than the actual extent of passenger pigeons; North America was then unsettled country, and the bird may have appeared anywhere on the continent except for the far west. There were also records of stragglers in Scotland, Ireland, and France, although these birds may have been escaped captives, or the records incorrect.

More than 130 passenger pigeon fossils have been found scattered across 25 US states, including in the La Brea Tar Pits of California. These records date as far back as 100,000 years ago in the Pleistocene era, during which the pigeon&#x27;s range extended to several western states that were not a part of its modern range. The abundance of the species in these regions and during this time is unknown.

==Ecology and behavior==
The passenger pigeon was nomadic, constantly migrating in search of food, shelter, or nesting grounds. In his 1831 &quot;Ornithological Biography&quot;, American naturalist and artist John James Audubon described a migration he observed in 1813 as follows:
These flocks were frequently described as being so dense that they blackened the sky and as having no sign of subdivisions. The flocks ranged from only above the ground in windy conditions to as high as . These migrating flocks were typically in narrow columns that twisted and undulated, and they were reported as being in nearly every conceivable shape. A skilled flyer, the passenger pigeon is estimated to have averaged during migration. It flew with quick, repeated flaps that increased the bird&#x27;s velocity the closer the wings got to the body. It was equally adept and quick flying through a forest as through open space. A flock was also adept at following the lead of the pigeon in front of it, and flocks swerved together to avoid a predator. When landing, the pigeon flapped its wings repeatedly before raising them at the moment of landing. The pigeon was awkward when on the ground, and moved around with jerky, alert steps.

The passenger pigeon was one of the most social of all land birds. Estimated to have numbered three to five billion at the height of its population, it may have been the most numerous bird on Earth; researcher Arlie W. Schorger believed that it accounted for between 25 and 40 percent of the total land bird population in the United States. The passenger pigeon&#x27;s historic population is roughly the equivalent of the number of birds that overwinter in the United States every year in the early 21st century. Even within their range, the size of individual flocks could vary greatly. In November 1859, Henry David Thoreau, writing in Concord, Massachusetts, noted that &quot;quite a little flock of [passenger] pigeons bred here last summer,&quot; while only seven years later, in 1866, one flock in southern Ontario was described as being wide and long, took 14 hours to pass, and held in excess of 3.5 billion birds. Such a number would likely represent a large fraction of the entire population at the time, or perhaps all of it. Most estimations of numbers were based on single migrating colonies, and it is unknown how many of these existed at a given time. American writer Christopher Cokinos has suggested that if the birds flew single file, they would have stretched around the Earth 22 times.

A 2014 genetic study (based on coalescent theory and on &quot;sequences from most of the genome&quot; of three individual passenger pigeons) suggested that the passenger pigeon population experienced dramatic fluctuations across the last million years, due to their dependence on availability of mast (which itself fluctuates). The study suggested the bird was not always abundant, mainly persisting at around 1/10,000 the amount of the several billions estimated in the 1800s, with vastly larger numbers present during outbreak phases. Some early accounts also suggest that the appearance of flocks in great numbers was an irregular occurrence. These large fluctuations in population may have been the result of a disrupted ecosystem and have consisted of outbreak populations much larger than those common in pre-European times. The authors of the 2014 genetic study note that a similar analysis of the human population size arrives at an &quot;effective population size&quot; of between 9,000 and 17,000 individuals (or approximately 1/550,000th of the peak total human population size of 7 billion cited in the study).

For a 2017 genetic study, the authors sequenced the genomes of two additional passenger pigeons, as well as analyzing the mitochondrial DNA of 41 individuals. This study found evidence that the passenger-pigeon population had been stable for at least the previous 20,000 years. The study also found that the size of the passenger pigeon population over that time period was larger than the found in the 2014 genetic study. However, the 2017 study&#x27;s &quot;conservative&quot; estimate of an &quot;effective population size&quot; of 13 million birds is still only about 1/300th of the bird&#x27;s estimated historic population of approximately 3–5 billion before their &quot;19th century decline and eventual extinction.&quot; A similar study inferring human population size from genetics (published in 2008, and using human mitochondrial DNA and Bayesian coalescent inference methods) showed considerable accuracy in reflecting overall patterns of human population growth as compared to data deduced by other means—though the study arrived at a human effective population size (as of 1600 AD, for Africa, Eurasia, and the Americas combined) that was roughly 1/1000 of the census population estimate for the same time and area based on anthropological and historical evidence.

The 2017 passenger-pigeon genetic study also found that, in spite of its large population size, the genetic diversity was very low in the species. The authors suggested that this was a side-effect of natural selection, which theory and previous empirical studies suggested could have a particularly great impact on species with very large and cohesive populations. Natural selection can reduce genetic diversity over extended regions of a genome through &#x27;selective sweeps&#x27; or &#x27;background selection&#x27;. The authors found evidence of a faster rate of adaptive evolution and faster removal of harmful mutations in passenger pigeons compared to band-tailed pigeons, which are some of passenger pigeons&#x27; closest living relatives. They also found evidence of lower genetic diversity in regions of the passenger pigeon genome that have lower rates of genetic recombination. This is expected if natural selection, via selective sweeps or background selection, reduced their genetic diversity, but not if population instability did. The study concluded that earlier suggestion that population instability contributed to the extinction of the species was invalid. Evolutionary biologist A. Townsend Peterson said of the two passenger-pigeon genetic studies (published in 2014 and 2017) that, though the idea of extreme fluctuations in the passenger-pigeon population was &quot;deeply entrenched,&quot; he was persuaded by the 2017 study&#x27;s argument, due to its &quot;in-depth analysis&quot; and &quot;massive data resources.&quot;

A communally roosting species, the passenger pigeon chose roosting sites that could provide shelter and enough food to sustain their large numbers for an indefinite period. The time spent at one roosting site may have depended on the extent of human persecution, weather conditions, or other, unknown factors. Roosts ranged in size and extent, from a few acres to or greater. Some roosting areas would be reused for subsequent years, others would only be used once. The passenger pigeon roosted in such numbers that even thick tree branches would break under the strain. The birds frequently piled on top of each other&#x27;s backs to roost. They rested in a slumped position that hid their feet. They slept with their bills concealed by the feathers in the middle of the breast while holding their tail at a 45-degree angle. Dung could accumulate under a roosting site to a depth of over .

If the pigeon became alert, it would often stretch out its head and neck in line with its body and tail, then nod its head in a circular pattern. When aggravated by another pigeon, it raised its wings threateningly, but passenger pigeons almost never actually fought. The pigeon bathed in shallow water, and afterwards lay on each side in turn and raised the opposite wing to dry it.

The passenger pigeon drank at least once a day, typically at dawn, by fully inserting its bill into lakes, small ponds, and streams. Pigeons were seen perching on top of each other to access water, and if necessary, the species could alight on open water to drink. One of the primary causes of natural mortality was the weather, and every spring many individuals froze to death after migrating north too early. In captivity, a passenger pigeon was capable of living at least 15 years; Martha, the last known living passenger pigeon, was at least 17 and possibly as old as 29 when she died. It is undocumented how long wild pigeons lived.

The bird is believed to have played a significant ecological role in the composition of pre-Columbian forests of eastern North America. For instance, while the passenger pigeon was extant, forests were dominated by white oaks. This species germinated in the fall, therefore making its seeds almost useless as a food source during the spring breeding season, while red oaks produced acorns during the spring, which the pigeons devoured. The absence of the passenger pigeon&#x27;s seed consumption may have contributed to the modern dominance of red oaks. Due to the immense amount of dung present at roosting sites, few plants grew for years after the pigeons left. Also, the accumulation of flammable debris (such as limbs broken from trees and foliage killed by excrement) at these sites may have increased both the frequency and intensity of forest fires, which would have favored fire-tolerant species, such as bur oaks, black oaks, and white oaks over less fire-tolerant species, such as red oaks, thus helping to explain the change in the composition of eastern forests since the passenger pigeon&#x27;s extinction (from white oaks, bur oaks, and black oaks predominating in presettlement forests, to the &quot;dramatic expansion&quot; of red oaks today).

A study released in 2018 concluded that the &quot;vast numbers&quot; of passenger pigeons present for &quot;tens of thousands of years&quot; would have influenced the evolution of the tree species whose seeds they ate. Those masting trees that produced seeds during the spring nesting season (such as red oaks) evolved so that some portion of their seeds would be too large for passenger pigeons to swallow (thus allowing some of their seeds to escape predation and grow new trees). White oak, in contrast, with its seeds sized consistently in the edible range, evolved an irregular masting pattern that took place in the fall, when fewer passenger pigeons would have been present. The study further concluded that this allowed white oaks to be the dominant tree species in regions where passenger pigeons were commonly present in the spring.

With the large numbers in passenger pigeon flocks, the excrement they produced was enough to destroy surface-level vegetation at long-term roosting sites, while adding high quantities of nutrients to the ecosystem. Because of this—along with the breaking of tree limbs under their collective weight and the great amount of mast they consumed—passenger pigeons are thought to have influenced both the structure of eastern forests and the composition of the species present there. Due to these influences, some ecologists have considered the passenger pigeon a keystone species, with the disappearance of their vast flocks leaving a major gap in the ecosystem. Their role in creating forest disturbances has been linked to greater vertebrate diversity in forests by creating more niches for animals to fill. To help fill that ecological gap, it has been proposed that modern land managers attempt to replicate some of their effects on the ecosystem by creating openings in forest canopies to provide more understory light.

The American chestnut trees that provided much of the mast on which the passenger pigeon fed was itself almost driven to extinction by an imported Asian fungus (chestnut blight) around 1905. As many as thirty billion trees are thought to have died as a result in the following decades, but this did not affect the passenger pigeon, which was already extinct in the wild at the time.

After the disappearance of the passenger pigeon, the population of another acorn feeding species, the white-footed mouse, grew exponentially because of the increased availability of the seeds of the oak, beech, and chestnut trees. It has been speculated that the extinction of passenger pigeons may have increased the prevalence of tick-borne lyme disease in modern times as white-footed mice are the reservoir hosts of &quot;Borrelia burgdorferi&quot;.

===Diet===

Beeches and oaks produced the mast needed to support nesting and roosting flocks. The passenger pigeon changed its diet depending on the season. In the fall, winter, and spring, it mainly ate beechnuts, acorns, and chestnuts. During the summer, berries and softer fruits, such as blueberries, grapes, cherries, mulberries, pokeberries, and bunchberry, became the main objects of its consumption. It also ate worms, caterpillars, snails, and other invertebrates, particularly while breeding. It took advantage of cultivated grains, particularly buckwheat, when it found them. It was especially fond of salt, which it ingested either from brackish springs or salty soil.

Mast occurs in large quantities in different places at different times, and rarely in consecutive years, which is one of the reasons why the large flocks were constantly on the move. As mast is produced during autumn, there would have to be a large amount of it left by the summer, when the young were reared. It is unknown how they located this fluctuating food source, but their eyesight and flight powers helped them survey large areas for places that could provide food enough for a temporary stay.

The passenger pigeon foraged in flocks of tens or hundreds of thousands of individuals that overturned leaves, dirt, and snow with their bills in search of food. One observer described the motion of such a flock in search of mast as having a rolling appearance, as birds in the back of the flock flew overhead to the front of the flock, dropping leaves and grass in flight. The flocks had wide leading edges to better scan the landscape for food sources.

When nuts on a tree loosened from their caps, a pigeon would land on a branch and, while flapping vigorously to stay balanced, grab the nut, pull it loose from its cap, and swallow it whole. Collectively, a foraging flock was capable of removing nearly all fruits and nuts from their path. Birds in the back of the flock flew to the front in order to pick over unsearched ground; however, birds never ventured far from the flock and hurried back if they became isolated. It is believed that the pigeons used social cues to identify abundant sources of food, and a flock of pigeons that saw others feeding on the ground often joined them. During the day, the birds left the roosting forest to forage on more open land. They regularly flew away from their roost daily in search of food, and some pigeons reportedly traveled as far as , leaving the roosting area early and returning at night.

The passenger pigeon&#x27;s very elastic mouth and throat and a joint in the lower bill enabled it to swallow acorns whole. It could store large quantities of food in its crop, which could expand to about the size of an orange, causing the neck to bulge and allowing a bird quickly to grab any food it discovered. The crop was described as being capable of holding at least 17 acorns or 28 beechnuts, 11 grains of corn, 100 maple seeds, plus other material; it was estimated that a passenger pigeon needed to eat about of food a day to survive. If shot, a pigeon with a crop full of nuts would fall to the ground with a sound described as like the rattle of a bag of marbles. After feeding, the pigeons perched on branches and digested the food stored in their crop overnight with the aid of a muscular gizzard, which often contained gravel.

The pigeon could eat and digest of acorns per day. At the historic population of three billion passenger pigeons, this amounted to of food a day. The pigeon could regurgitate food from its crop when more desirable food became available. A 2018 study found that the dietary range of the passenger pigeon was restricted to certain sizes of seed, due to the size of its gape. This would have prevented it from eating some of the seeds of trees such as red oaks, black oaks, and the American chestnut. Specifically, the study found that between 13% and 69% of red oak seeds were too large for passenger pigeons to have swallowed, that only a &quot;small proportion&quot; of the seeds of black oaks and American chestnuts were too large for the birds to consume, and that all white oak seeds were sized within an edible range. They also found that seeds would be completely destroyed during digestion, which therefore hindered dispersal of seeds this way. Instead, passenger pigeons may have spread seeds by regurgitation, or after dying.

===Reproduction===
Other than finding roosting sites, the migrations of the passenger pigeon were connected with finding places appropriate for this communally breeding bird to nest and raise its young. It is not certain how many times a year the birds bred; once seems most likely, but some accounts suggest more. The nesting period lasted around four to six weeks. The flock arrived at a nesting ground around March in southern latitudes, and some time later in more northern areas. The pigeon had no site fidelity, often choosing to nest in a different location each year. The formation of a nesting colony did not necessarily take place until several months after the pigeons arrived on their breeding grounds, typically during late March, April, or May.

The colonies, which were known as &quot;cities&quot;, were immense, ranging from to thousands of hectares in size, and were often long and narrow in shape (L-shaped), with a few areas untouched for unknown reasons. Due to the topography, they were rarely continuous. Since no accurate data was recorded, it is not possible to give more than estimates on the size and population of these nesting areas, but most accounts mention colonies containing millions of birds. The largest nesting area ever recorded was in central Wisconsin in 1871; it was reported as covering , with the number of birds nesting there estimated to be around 136,000,000. As well as these &quot;cities&quot;, there were regular reports of much smaller flocks or even individual pairs setting up a nesting site. The birds do not seem to have formed as vast breeding colonies at the periphery of their range.

Courtship took place at the nesting colony. Unlike other pigeons, courtship took place on a branch or perch. The male, with a flourish of the wings, made a &quot;keck&quot; call while near a female. The male then gripped tightly to the branch and vigorously flapped his wings up and down. When the male was close to the female, he then pressed against her on the perch with his head held high and pointing at her. If receptive, the female pressed back against the male. When ready to mate, the pair preened each other. This was followed by the birds billing, in which the female inserted its bill into and clasped the male&#x27;s bill, shook for a second, and separated quickly while standing next to each other. The male then scrambled onto the female&#x27;s back and copulated, which was then followed by soft clucking and occasionally more preening. John James Audubon described the courtship of the passenger pigeon as follows:


After observing captive birds, Wallace Craig found that this species did less charging and strutting than other pigeons (as it was awkward on the ground), and thought it probable that no food was transferred during their brief billing (unlike in other pigeons), and he therefore considered Audubon&#x27;s description partially based on analogy with other pigeons as well as imagination.

Nests were built immediately after pair formation and took two to four days to construct; this process was highly synchronized within a colony. The female chose the nesting site by sitting on it and flicking her wings. The male then carefully selected nesting materials, typically twigs, and handed them to the female over her back. The male then went in search of more nesting material while the female constructed the nest beneath herself. Nests were built between above the ground, though typically above , and were made of 70 to 110 twigs woven together to create a loose, shallow bowl through which the egg could easily be seen. This bowl was then typically lined with finer twigs. The nests were about wide, high, and deep. Though the nest has been described as crude and flimsy compared to those of many other birds, remains of nests could be found at sites where nesting had taken place several years prior. Nearly every tree capable of supporting nests had them, often more than 50 per tree; one hemlock was recorded as holding 317 nests. The nests were placed on strong branches close to the tree trunks. Some accounts state that ground under the nesting area looked as if it had been swept clean, due to all the twigs being collected at the same time, yet this area would also have been covered in dung. As both sexes took care of the nest, the pairs were monogamous for the duration of the nesting.

Generally, the eggs were laid during the first two weeks of April across the pigeon&#x27;s range. Each female laid its egg immediately or almost immediately after the nest was completed; sometimes the pigeon was forced to lay it on the ground if the nest was not complete. The normal clutch size appears to have been a single egg, but there is some uncertainty about this, as two have also been reported from the same nests. Occasionally, a second female laid its egg in another female&#x27;s nest, resulting in two eggs being present. The egg was white and oval shaped and averaged in size. If the egg was lost, it was possible for the pigeon to lay a replacement egg within a week. A whole colony was known to re-nest after a snowstorm forced them to abandon their original colony. Both parents incubated The egg for 12 to 14 days, with the male incubating it from midmorning to midafternoon and the female incubating it the rest of the time.

Upon hatching, the nestling (or squab) was blind and sparsely covered with yellow, hairlike down. The nestling developed quickly and within 14 days weighed as much as its parents. During this brooding period both parents took care of the nestling, with the male attending in the middle of the day and the female at other times. The nestlings were fed crop milk (a substance similar to curd, produced in the crops of the parent birds) exclusively for the first days after hatching. Adult food was gradually introduced after three to six days. After 13 to 15 days, the parents fed the nestling for a last time and then abandoned it, leaving the nesting area &quot;en masse&quot;. The nestling begged in the nest for a day or two, before climbing from the nest and fluttering to the ground, whereafter it moved around, avoided obstacles, and begged for food from nearby adults. It was another three or four days before it fledged. The entire nesting cycle lasted about 30 days. It is unknown whether colonies re-nested after a successful nesting. The passenger pigeon sexually matured during its first year and bred the following spring.

Alfred Russel Wallace, in his historic 1858 paper On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection, used the passenger pigeon as an example of an immensely successful species despite laying fewer eggs than most other birds:

===Predators and parasites===
Nesting colonies attracted large numbers of predators, including American minks (&quot;Neogale vison&quot;), long-tailed weasels (&quot;Neogale frenata&quot;), American martens (&quot;Martes americana&quot;), and raccoons (&quot;Procyon lotor&quot;) that preyed on eggs and nestlings, birds of prey, such as owls, hawks, and eagles that preyed on nestlings and adults, and wolves (&quot;Canis lupus&quot;), foxes (&quot;Urocyon cinereoargenteus&quot; and &quot;Vulpes vulpes&quot;), bobcats (&quot;Lynx rufus&quot;), American black bears (&quot;Ursus americanus&quot;), and cougars (&quot;Puma concolor&quot;) that preyed on injured adults and fallen nestlings. Hawks of the genus &quot;Accipiter&quot; and falcons pursued and preyed upon pigeons in flight, which in turn executed complex aerial maneuvers to avoid them; Cooper&#x27;s hawk (&quot;Accipiter cooperii&quot;) was known as the &quot;great pigeon hawk&quot; due to its successes, and these hawks allegedly followed migrating passenger pigeons. While many predators were drawn to the flocks, individual pigeons were largely protected due to the sheer size of the flock, and overall little damage could be inflicted on the flock by predation. Despite the number of predators, nesting colonies were so large that they were estimated to have a 90% success rate if not disturbed. After being abandoned and leaving the nest, the very fat juveniles were vulnerable to predators until they were able to fly. The sheer number of juveniles on the ground meant that only a small percentage of them were killed; predator satiation may therefore be one of the reasons for the extremely social habits and communal breeding of the species.

Two parasites have been recorded on passenger pigeons. One species of phtilopterid louse, &quot;Columbicola extinctus&quot;, was originally thought to have lived on just passenger pigeons and to have become coextinct with them. This was proven inaccurate in 1999 when &quot;C. extinctus&quot; was rediscovered living on band-tailed pigeons. This, and the fact that the related louse &quot;C. angustus&quot; is mainly found on cuckoo-doves, further supports the relation between these pigeons, as the phylogeny of lice broadly mirrors that of their hosts. Another louse, &quot;Campanulotes defectus&quot;, was thought to have been unique to the passenger pigeon, but is now believed to have been a case of a contaminated specimen, as the species is considered to be the still-extant &quot;Campanulotes flavus&quot; of Australia. There is no record of a wild pigeon dying of either disease or parasites.

==Relationship with humans==
For fifteen thousand years or more before the arrival of Europeans in the Americas, passenger pigeons and Native Americans coexisted in the forests of what would later become the eastern part of the continental United States. A study published in 2008 found that, throughout most of the Holocene, Native American land-use practices greatly influenced forest composition. The regular use of prescribed burn, the girdling of unwanted trees, and the planting and tending of favored trees suppressed the populations of a number of tree species that did not produce nuts, acorns, or fruit, while increasing the populations of numerous tree species that did. In addition, the burning away of forest-floor litter made these foods easier to find, once they had fallen from the trees. Some have argued that such Native American land-use practices increased the populations of various animal species, including the passenger pigeon, by increasing the food available to them, while elsewhere it has been claimed that, by hunting passenger pigeons and competing with them for some kinds of nuts and acorns, Native Americans suppressed their population size. Genetic research may shed some light on this question. A 2017 study of passenger-pigeon DNA found that the passenger-pigeon population size was stable for 20,000 years prior to its 19th-century decline and subsequent extinction, while a 2016 study of ancient Native American DNA found that the Native American population went through a period of rapid expansion, increasing 60-fold, starting about 13–16 thousand years ago. If both of these studies are correct, then a great change in the size of the Native American population had no apparent impact on the size of the passenger-pigeon population. This suggests that the net effect of Native American activities on passenger-pigeon population size was neutral.

The passenger pigeon played a religious role for some northern Native American tribes. The Wyandot people (or Huron) believed that every twelve years during the Feast of the Dead, the souls of the dead changed into passenger pigeons, which were then hunted and eaten. Before hunting the juvenile pigeons, the Seneca people made an offering of wampum and brooches to the old passenger pigeons; these were placed in a small kettle or other receptacle by a smoky fire. The Ho-Chunk people considered the passenger pigeon to be the bird of the chief, as they were served whenever the chieftain gave a feast. The Seneca people believed that a white pigeon was the chief of the passenger pigeon colony, and that a Council of Birds decided that the pigeons had to give their bodies to the Seneca because they were the only birds that nested in colonies. The Seneca developed a pigeon dance as a way of showing their gratitude.

French explorer Jacques Cartier was the first European to report on passenger pigeons, during his voyage in 1534. The bird was subsequently observed and noted by historical figures such as Samuel de Champlain and Cotton Mather. Most early accounts dwell on the vast number of pigeons, the resulting darkened skies, and the enormous amount of hunted birds (50,000 birds were reportedly sold at a Boston market in 1771). The early colonists thought that large flights of pigeons would be followed by ill fortune or sickness. When the pigeons wintered outside of their normal range, some believed that they would have &quot;a sickly summer and autumn.&quot; In the 18th and 19th centuries, various parts of the pigeon were thought to have medicinal properties. The blood was supposed to be good for eye disorders, the powdered stomach lining was used to treat dysentery, and the dung was used to treat a variety of ailments, including headaches, stomach pains, and lethargy. Though they did not last as long as the feathers of a goose, the feathers of the passenger pigeon were frequently used for bedding. Pigeon feather beds were so popular that for a time in Saint-Jérôme, Quebec, every dowry included a bed and pillows made of pigeon feathers. In 1822, one family in Chautauqua County, New York, killed 4,000 pigeons in a day solely for this purpose.

The passenger pigeon was featured in the writings of many significant early naturalists, as well as accompanying illustrations. Mark Catesby&#x27;s 1731 illustration, the first published depiction of this bird, is somewhat crude, according to some later commentators. The original watercolor that the engraving is based on was bought by the British royal family in 1768, along with the rest of Catesby&#x27;s watercolors. The naturalists Alexander Wilson and John James Audubon both witnessed large pigeon migrations first hand, and published detailed accounts wherein both attempted to deduce the total number of birds involved. The most famous and often reproduced depiction of the passenger pigeon is Audubon&#x27;s illustration (handcolored aquatint) in his book &quot;The Birds of America&quot;, published between 1827 and 1838. Audubon&#x27;s image has been praised for its artistic qualities, but criticized for its supposed scientific inaccuracies. As Wallace Craig and R. W. Shufeldt (among others) pointed out, the birds are shown perched and billing one above the other, whereas they would instead have done this side by side, the male would be the one passing food to the female, and the male&#x27;s tail would not be spread. Craig and Shufeldt instead cited illustrations by American artist Louis Agassiz Fuertes and Japanese artist K. Hayashi as more accurate depictions of the bird. Illustrations of the passenger pigeon were often drawn after stuffed birds, and Charles R. Knight is the only &quot;serious&quot; artist known to have drawn the species from life. He did so on at least two occasions; in 1903 he drew a bird possibly in one of the three aviaries with surviving birds, and some time before 1914, he drew Martha, the last individual, in the Cincinnati Zoo.

The bird has been written about (including in poems, songs, and fiction) and illustrated by many notable writers and artists, and is depicted in art to this day, for example in Walton Ford&#x27;s 2002 painting &quot;Falling Bough&quot;, and National Medal of Arts winner John A. Ruthven&#x27;s 2014 mural in Cincinnati, which commemorates the 100th anniversary of Martha&#x27;s death. The &quot;Project Passenger Pigeon&quot; outreach group used the centennial of its extinction to spread awareness about human-induced extinction, and to recognize its relevance in the 21st century. It has been suggested that the passenger pigeon could be used as a &quot;flagship&quot; species to spread awareness of other threatened, but less well-known North American birds.

===Hunting===
The passenger pigeon was an important source of food for the people of North America. Native Americans ate pigeons, and tribes near nesting colonies would sometimes move to live closer to them and eat the juveniles, killing them at night with long poles. Many Native Americans were careful not to disturb the adult pigeons, and instead ate only the juveniles as they were afraid that the adults might desert their nesting grounds; in some tribes, disturbing the adult pigeons was considered a crime. Away from the nests, large nets were used to capture adult pigeons, sometimes up to 800 at a time. Low-flying pigeons could be killed by throwing sticks or stones. At one site in Oklahoma, the pigeons leaving their roost every morning flew low enough that the Cherokee could throw clubs into their midst, which caused the lead pigeons to try to turn aside and in the process created a blockade that resulted in a large mass of flying, easily hit pigeons. Among the game birds, passenger pigeons were second only to the wild turkey (&quot;Meleagris gallopavo&quot;) in terms of importance for the Native Americans living in the southeastern United States. The bird&#x27;s fat was stored, often in large quantities, and used as butter. Archaeological evidence supports the idea that Native Americans ate the pigeons frequently prior to colonization.

What may be the earliest account of Europeans hunting passenger pigeons dates to January 1565, when the French explorer René Laudonnière wrote of killing close to 10,000 of them around Fort Caroline in a matter of weeks:
This amounted to about one passenger pigeon per day for each person in the fort.

After European colonization, the passenger pigeon was hunted with more intensive methods than the more sustainable methods practiced by the natives. Yet it has also been suggested that the species was rare prior to 1492, and that the subsequent increase in their numbers may be due to the decrease in the Native American population (who, as well as hunting the birds, competed with them for mast) caused by European immigration, and the supplementary food (agricultural crops) the immigrants imported (a theory for which Joel Greenberg offered a detailed rebuttal in his book, &quot;A Feathered River Across the Sky&quot;). The passenger pigeon was of particular value on the frontier, and some settlements counted on its meat to support their population. The flavor of the flesh of passenger pigeons varied depending on how they were prepared. In general, juveniles were thought to taste the best, followed by birds fattened in captivity and birds caught in September and October. It was common practice to fatten trapped pigeons before eating them or storing their bodies for winter. Dead pigeons were commonly stored by salting or pickling the bodies; other times, only the breasts of the pigeons were kept, in which case they were typically smoked. In the early 19th century, commercial hunters began netting and shooting the birds to sell as food in city markets, and even as pig fodder. Once pigeon meat became popular, commercial hunting started on a prodigious scale.

Passenger pigeons were shot with such ease that many did not consider them to be a game bird, as an amateur hunter could easily bring down six with one shotgun blast; a particularly good shot with both barrels of a shotgun at a roost could kill 61 birds. The birds were frequently shot either in flight during migration or immediately after, when they commonly perched in dead, exposed trees. Hunters only had to shoot toward the sky without aiming, and many pigeons would be brought down. The pigeons proved difficult to shoot head-on, so hunters typically waited for the flocks to pass overhead before shooting them. Trenches were sometimes dug and filled with grain so that a hunter could shoot the pigeons along this trench. Hunters largely outnumbered trappers, and hunting passenger pigeons was a popular sport for young boys. In 1871, a single seller of ammunition provided three tons of powder and 16 tons (32,000 lb) of shot during a nesting. In the latter half of the 19th century, thousands of passenger pigeons were captured for use in the sports shooting industry. The pigeons were used as living targets in shooting tournaments, such as &quot;trap-shooting&quot;, the controlled release of birds from special traps. Competitions could also consist of people standing regularly spaced while trying to shoot down as many birds as possible in a passing flock. The pigeon was considered so numerous that 30,000 birds had to be killed to claim the prize in one competition.

Humans used a wide variety of other methods to capture and kill passenger pigeons. Nets were propped up to allow passenger pigeons entry, and then closed by knocking loose the stick that supported the opening, trapping twenty or more pigeons inside. Tunnel nets were also used to great effect, and one particularly large net was capable of catching 3,500 pigeons at a time. These nets were used by many farmers on their own property as well as by professional trappers. Food would be placed on the ground near the nets to attract the pigeons. Decoy or &quot;stool pigeons&quot; (sometimes blinded by having their eyelids sewn together) were tied to a stool. When a flock of pigeons passed by, a cord would be pulled that made the stool pigeon flutter to the ground, making it seem as if it had found food, and the flock would be lured into the trap. Salt was also frequently used as bait, and many trappers set up near salt springs. At least one trapper used alcohol-soaked grain as bait to intoxicate the birds and make them easier to kill. Another method of capture was to hunt at a nesting colony, particularly during the period of a few days after the adult pigeons abandoned their nestlings, but before the nestlings could fly. Some hunters used sticks to poke the nestlings out of the nest, while others shot the bottom of a nest with a blunt arrow to dislodge the pigeon. Others cut down a nesting tree in such a way that when it fell, it would also hit a second nesting tree and dislodge the pigeons within. In one case, of large trees were speedily cut down to get birds, and such methods were common. A severe method was to set fire to the base of a tree nested with pigeons; the adults would flee and the juveniles would fall to the ground. Sulfur was sometimes burned beneath the nesting tree to suffocate the birds, which fell out of the tree in a weakened state.

By the mid-19th century, railroads had opened new opportunities for pigeon hunters. While it was once extremely difficult to ship masses of pigeons to eastern cities, railway access permitted pigeon hunting to become commercialized. An extensive telegraph system was introduced in the 1860s, which improved communication across the United States, making it easier to spread information about the whereabouts of pigeon flocks. After being opened up to the railroads, the town of Plattsburgh, New York, is estimated to have shipped 1.8 million pigeons to larger cities in 1851 alone at a price of 31 to 56 cents a dozen. By the late 19th century, the trade of passenger pigeons had become commercialized. Large commission houses employed trappers (known as &quot;pigeoners&quot;) to follow the flocks of pigeons year-round. A single hunter is reported to have sent three million birds to eastern cities during his career. In 1874, at least 600 people were employed as pigeon trappers, a number which grew to 1,200 by 1881. Pigeons were caught in such numbers that by 1876, shipments of dead pigeons were unable to recoup the costs of the barrels and ice needed to ship them. The price of a barrel full of pigeons dropped to below fifty cents, due to overstocked markets. Passenger pigeons were instead kept alive so their meat would be fresh when killed, and sold once their market value had increased. Thousands of birds were kept in large pens, though the bad conditions led many to die from lack of food and water, and by fretting (gnawing) themselves; many rotted away before they could be sold.

Hunting of passenger pigeons was documented and depicted in contemporaneous newspapers, wherein various trapping methods and uses were featured. The most often reproduced of these illustrations was captioned &quot;Winter sports in northern Louisiana: shooting wild pigeons&quot;, and published in 1875. Passenger pigeons were also seen as agricultural pests, because feeding flocks could destroy entire crops. The bird was described as a &quot;perfect scourge&quot; by some farming communities, and hunters were employed to &quot;wage warfare&quot; on the birds to save grain, as shown in another newspaper illustration from 1867 captioned as &quot;Shooting wild pigeons in Iowa&quot;. When comparing these &quot;pests&quot; to the bison of the Great Plains, the valuable resource needed was not the species of animals but the agriculture which was consumed by said animal. The crops that were eaten were seen as marketable calories, proteins, and nutrients all grown for the wrong species.

===Decline and conservation attempts===
The notion that the species could be driven to extinction was alien to the early colonists, because the number of birds did not appear to diminish, and also because the concept of extinction was yet to be defined. The bird seems to have been slowly pushed westward after the arrival of Europeans, becoming scarce or absent in the east, though there were still millions of birds in the 1850s. The population must have been decreasing in numbers for many years, though this went unnoticed due to the apparent vast number of birds, which clouded their decline. In 1856 Bénédict Henry Révoil may have been one of the first writers to voice concern about the fate of the passenger pigeon, after witnessing a hunt in 1847:

By the 1870s, the decrease in birds was noticeable, especially after the last large-scale nestings and subsequent slaughters of millions of birds in 1874 and 1878. By this time, large nestings only took place in the north, around the Great Lakes. The last large nesting was in Petoskey, Michigan, in 1878 (following one in Pennsylvania a few days earlier), where 50,000 birds were killed each day for nearly five months. The surviving adults attempted a second nesting at new sites, but were killed by professional hunters before they had a chance to raise any young. Scattered nestings were reported into the 1880s, but the birds were now wary, and commonly abandoned their nests if persecuted.

By the time of these last nestings, laws had already been enacted to protect the passenger pigeon, but these proved ineffective, as they were unclearly framed and hard to enforce. H. B. Roney, who witnessed the Petoskey slaughter, led campaigns to protect the pigeon, but was met with resistance, and accusations that he was exaggerating the severity of the situation. Few offenders were prosecuted, mainly some poor trappers, but the large enterprises were not affected. In 1857, a bill was brought forth to the Ohio State Legislature seeking protection for the passenger pigeon, yet a Select Committee of the Senate filed a report stating that the bird did not need protection, being &quot;wonderfully prolific&quot;, and dismissing the suggestion that the species could be destroyed. Public protests against trap-shooting erupted in the 1870s, as the birds were badly treated before and after such contests. Conservationists were ineffective in stopping the slaughter. A bill was passed in the Michigan legislature making it illegal to net pigeons within of a nesting area. In 1897, a bill was introduced in the Michigan legislature asking for a 10-year closed season on passenger pigeons. Similar legal measures were passed and then disregarded in Pennsylvania. The gestures proved futile and, by the mid-1890s, the passenger pigeon had almost completely disappeared, and was probably extinct as a breeding bird in the wild. Small flocks are known to have existed at this point, since large numbers of birds were still being sold at markets. Thereafter, only small groups or individual birds were reported, many of which were shot on sight.

===Last survivors===

The last recorded nest and egg in the wild were collected in 1895 near Minneapolis. The last wild individual in Louisiana was discovered among a flock of mourning doves in 1896, and subsequently shot. Many late sightings are thought to be false or due to confusion with mourning doves. The last fully authenticated record of a wild passenger pigeon was near Oakford, Illinois, on March 12, 1901, when a male bird was killed, stuffed, and placed in Millikin University in Decatur, Illinois, where it remains today. This was not discovered until 2014, when writer Joel Greenberg found out the date of the bird&#x27;s shooting while doing research for his book &quot;A Feathered River Across the Sky.&quot; Greenberg also pointed out a record of a male shot near Laurel, Indiana, on April 3, 1902, that was stuffed but later destroyed.

For many years, the last confirmed wild passenger pigeon was thought to have been shot near Sargents, Pike County, Ohio on March 24, 1900, when a boy named Press Clay Southworth killed a female bird with a BB gun. The boy did not recognize the bird as a passenger pigeon, but his parents identified it, and sent it to a taxidermist. The specimen, nicknamed &quot;Buttons&quot; due to the buttons used instead of glass eyes, was donated to the Ohio Historical Society by the family in 1915. The reliability of accounts after the Ohio, Illinois, and Indiana birds are in question. Ornithologist Alexander Wetmore claimed that he saw a pair flying near Independence, Kansas, in April 1905. On May 18, 1907, U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt claimed to have seen a &quot;flock of about a dozen two or three times on the wing&quot; while on retreat at his cabin in Pine Knot, Virginia, and that they lit on a dead tree &quot;in such a characteristically pigeon-like attitude&quot;; this sighting was corroborated by a local gentleman whom he had &quot;rambled around with in the woods a good deal&quot; and whom he found to be &quot;a singularly close observer.&quot; In 1910, the American Ornithologists&#x27; Union offered a reward of $3,000 for discovering a nest— .

Most captive passenger pigeons were kept for exploitative purposes, but some were housed in zoos and aviaries. Audubon alone claimed to have brought 350 birds to England in 1830, distributing them among various noblemen, and the species is also known to have been kept at London Zoo. Being common birds, these attracted little interest, until the species became rare in the 1890s. By the turn of the 20th century, the last known captive passenger pigeons were divided in three groups; one in Milwaukee, one in Chicago, and one in Cincinnati. There are claims of a few further individuals having been kept in various places, but these accounts are not considered reliable today. The Milwaukee group was kept by David Whittaker, who began his collection in 1888, and possessed fifteen birds some years later, all descended from a single pair.

The Chicago group was kept by Charles Otis Whitman, whose collection began with passenger pigeons bought from Whittaker beginning in 1896. He had an interest in studying pigeons, and kept his passenger pigeons with other pigeon species. Whitman brought his pigeons with him from Chicago to Massachusetts by railcar each summer. By 1897, Whitman had bought all of Whittaker&#x27;s birds, and upon reaching a maximum of 19 individuals, he gave seven back to Whittaker in 1898. Around this time, a series of photographs were taken of these birds; 24 of the photos survive. Some of these images have been reproduced in various media, copies of which are now kept at the Wisconsin Historical Society. It is unclear exactly where, when, and by whom these photos were taken, but some appear to have been taken in Chicago in 1896, others in Massachusetts in 1898, the latter by a J. G. Hubbard. By 1902, Whitman owned sixteen birds. His pigeons laid many eggs, but few hatched, and many hatchlings died. A newspaper inquiry was published that requested &quot;fresh blood&quot; to the flock which had now ceased breeding. By 1907, he was down to two female passenger pigeons that died that winter, and was left with two infertile male hybrids, whose subsequent fate is unknown. By this time, only four (all males) of the birds Whitman returned to Whittaker were alive, and these died between November 1908 and February 1909.
The Cincinnati Zoo, one of the oldest zoos in the United States, kept passenger pigeons from its beginning in 1875. The zoo kept more than twenty individuals in a cage. Passenger pigeons do not appear to have been kept at the zoo due to their rarity, but to enable guests to have a closer look at a native species. Recognizing the decline of the wild populations, Whitman and the Cincinnati Zoo consistently strove to breed the surviving birds, including attempts at making a rock dove foster passenger pigeon eggs. In 1902, Whitman gave a female passenger pigeon to the zoo; this was possibly the individual later known as Martha, which would become the last living member of the species. Other sources argue that Martha was hatched at the Cincinnati Zoo, lived there for 25 years, and was the descendant of three pairs of passenger pigeons purchased by the zoo in 1877. It is thought this individual was named Martha because her last cage mate was named George, thereby honoring George Washington and his wife Martha, though it has also been claimed she was named after the mother of a zookeeper&#x27;s friends.

In 1909, Martha and her two male companions at the Cincinnati Zoo became the only known surviving passenger pigeons. One of these males died around April that year, followed by George, the remaining male, on July 10, 1910. It is unknown whether the remains of George were preserved. Martha soon became a celebrity due to her status as an endling, and offers of a $1,000 reward () for finding a mate for her brought even more visitors to see her. During her last four years in solitude (her cage was ), Martha became steadily slower and more immobile; visitors would throw sand at her to make her move, and her cage was roped off in response. Martha died of old age on September 1, 1914, and was found lifeless on the floor of her cage. It was claimed that she died at 1 p.m., but other sources suggest she died some hours later. Depending on the source, Martha was between 17 and 29 years old at the time of her death, although 29 is the generally accepted figure. At the time, it was suggested that Martha might have died from an apoplectic stroke, as she had suffered one a few weeks before dying. Her body was frozen into a block of ice and sent to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, where it was skinned, dissected, photographed, and mounted. As she was molting when she died, she proved difficult to stuff, and previously shed feathers were added to the skin. Martha was on display for many years, but after a period in the museum vaults, she was put back on display at the Smithsonian&#x27;s National Museum of Natural History in 2015. A memorial statue of Martha stands on the grounds of the Cincinnati Zoo, in front of the &quot;Passenger Pigeon Memorial Hut&quot;, formerly the aviary wherein Martha lived, now a National Historic Landmark. Incidentally, the last specimen of the extinct Carolina parakeet, named &quot;Incus,&quot; died in Martha&#x27;s cage in 1918; the stuffed remains of that bird are exhibited in the &quot;Memorial Hut&quot;.

===Extinction causes===
The main reasons for the extinction of the passenger pigeon were the massive scale of hunting, the rapid loss of habitat, and the extremely social lifestyle of the bird, which made it highly vulnerable to the former factors. Deforestation was driven by the need to free land for agriculture and expanding towns, but also due to the demand for lumber and fuel. About 728,000 km2 (180 million acres) were cleared for farming between 1850 and 1910. Though there are still large woodland areas in eastern North America, which support a variety of wildlife, it was not enough to support the vast number of passenger pigeons needed to sustain the population. In contrast, very small populations of nearly extinct birds, such as the kākāpō (&quot;Strigops habroptilus&quot;) and the takahē (&quot;Porphyrio hochstetteri&quot;), have been enough to keep those species extant to the present. The combined effects of intense hunting and deforestation has been referred to as a &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; against the passenger pigeon, and it has been labeled one of the greatest and most senseless human-induced extinctions in history. As the flocks dwindled in size, the passenger pigeon population decreased below the threshold necessary to propagate the species, an example of the Allee effect.
The 2014 genetic study that found natural fluctuations in population numbers prior to human arrival also concluded that the species routinely recovered from lows in the population, and suggested that one of these lows may have coincided with the intensified hunting by humans in the 1800s, a combination which would have led to the rapid extinction of the species. A similar scenario may also explain the rapid extinction of the Rocky Mountain locust (&quot;Melanoplus spretus&quot;) during the same period. It has also been suggested that after the population was thinned out, it would be harder for few or solitary birds to locate suitable feeding areas. In addition to the birds killed or driven away by hunting during breeding seasons, many nestlings were also orphaned before being able to fend for themselves. Other, less convincing contributing factors have been suggested at times, including mass drownings, Newcastle disease, and migrations to areas outside their original range.

The extinction of the passenger pigeon aroused public interest in the conservation movement, and resulted in new laws and practices which prevented many other species from becoming extinct. The rapid decline of the passenger pigeon has influenced later assessment methods of the extinction risk of endangered animal populations. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has used the passenger pigeon as an example in cases where a species was declared &quot;at risk&quot; for extinction even though population numbers are high.

Naturalist Aldo Leopold paid tribute to the vanished species in a monument dedication held by the Wisconsin Society for Ornithology at Wyalusing State Park, Wisconsin, which had been one of the species&#x27; social roost sites. Speaking on May 11, 1947, Leopold remarked:
===Potential resurrection of the species===

Today, at least 1,532 passenger pigeon skins (along with 16 skeletons) still exist, spread across many institutions all over the world. It has been suggested that the passenger pigeon should be revived when available technology allows it (a concept which has been termed &quot;de-extinction&quot;), using genetic material from such specimens. In 2003, the Pyrenean ibex (&quot;Capra pyrenaica pyrenaica&quot;, a subspecies of the Iberian ibex) was the first extinct animal to be cloned back to life; the clone lived for only seven minutes before dying of lung defects. A hindrance to cloning the passenger pigeon is the fact that the DNA of museum specimens has been contaminated and fragmented, due to exposure to heat and oxygen. American geneticist George M. Church has proposed that the passenger pigeon genome can be reconstructed by piecing together DNA fragments from different specimens. The next step would be to splice these genes into the stem cells of rock pigeons (or band-tailed pigeons), which would then be transformed into egg and sperm cells, and placed into the eggs of rock pigeons, resulting in rock pigeons bearing passenger pigeon sperm and eggs. The offspring of these would have passenger pigeon traits, and would be further bred to favor unique features of the extinct species. The American non-profit organization Revive &amp; Restore is currently pursuing the idea.

The general idea of re-creating extinct species has been criticized, since the large funds needed could be spent on conserving currently threatened species and habitats, and because conservation efforts might be viewed as less urgent. In the case of the passenger pigeon, since it was very social, it is unlikely that enough birds could be created for revival to be successful, and it is unclear whether there is enough appropriate habitat left for its reintroduction. Furthermore, the parent pigeons that would raise the cloned passenger pigeons would belong to a different species, with a different way of rearing young.

==Bibliography==

===Notes===
===References===
==External links==
* Project Passenger Pigeon: Lessons from the Past for a Sustainable Future
* The Demise of the Passenger Pigeon (as broadcast on National Public Radio&#x27;s &quot;Day to Day&quot;)
* 360-degree view of Martha, the last passenger pigeon (Smithsonian Institution)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191968" start="4" end="20" title="Passenger pigeon" label="passenger pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191968" start="24" end="35" title="Passenger pigeon" label="wild pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54484705" start="67" end="82" title="bird extinction" label="extinct species"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="86" end="92" title="Columbidae" label="pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="102" end="109" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="113" end="126" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q750027" start="368" end="381" title="mourning dove" label="mourning dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q468569" start="546" end="557" title="Patagioenas" label="Patagioenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q375342" start="603" end="628" title="Zenaida doves" label="&amp;quot;Zenaida&amp;quot; doves"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="656" end="674" title="sexually dimorphic" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q957208" start="786" end="796" title="iridescent" label="iridescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="1012" end="1029" title="deciduous forests" label="deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189650" start="1033" end="1054" title="Eastern United States" label="eastern North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="1118" end="1129" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907811" start="1433" end="1437" title="mast seeding" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153964" start="1487" end="1504" title="communal roosting" label="communal roosting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427332" start="1509" end="1526" title="communal breeding" label="communal breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239610" start="1608" end="1626" title="predator satiation" label="predator satiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="1829" end="1836" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="2088" end="2101" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="2123" end="2130" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536726" start="2423" end="2429" title="Martha (passenger pigeon)" label="Martha"/>
<link wikidata="Q623333" start="2506" end="2520" title="Cincinnati Zoo and Botanical Garden" label="Cincinnati Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="2577" end="2601" title="Holocene extinction" label="anthropogenic extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="2637" end="2650" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209239" start="2682" end="2689" title="Columba (genus)" label="Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q750027" start="2718" end="2731" title="mourning dove" label="mourning dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="2795" end="2810" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673092" start="2840" end="2863" title="biological nomenclature" label="biological nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q334914" start="3023" end="3035" title="Mark Catesby" label="Mark Catesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q257668" start="3428" end="3442" title="George Edwards (naturalist)" label="George Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q299547" start="4041" end="4065" title="Mathurin Jacques Brisson" label="Mathurin Jacques Brisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q444164" start="4177" end="4193" title="William Swainson" label="William Swainson"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="4267" end="4276" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q602234" start="4387" end="4399" title="Outram Bangs" label="Outram Bangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q39626" start="4592" end="4611" title="Harry C. Oberholser" label="Harry C. Oberholser"/>
<link wikidata="Q666955" start="4805" end="4820" title="Francis Hemming" label="Francis Hemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071346" start="4839" end="4890" title="International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature" label="International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204535" start="5173" end="5187" title="plenary powers" label="plenary powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="5330" end="5340" title="Columbidae" label="Columbidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077412" start="5494" end="5512" title="Yorktown Formation" label="Yorktown Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q146094" start="5528" end="5536" title="Zanclean" label="Zanclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="5550" end="5558" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q375342" start="5656" end="5681" title="Zenaida doves" label="&amp;quot;Zenaida&amp;quot; doves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525400" start="5959" end="5977" title="Thomas Mayo Brewer" label="Thomas Mayo Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="6261" end="6279" title="sexually dimorphic" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q957208" start="6292" end="6302" title="iridescent" label="iridescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750820" start="6331" end="6337" title="clutch (eggs)" label="clutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q831152" start="6378" end="6390" title="Beth Shapiro" label="Beth Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q290447" start="6460" end="6471" title="ancient DNA" label="ancient DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q43502" start="6535" end="6539" title="dodo" label="dodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="6569" end="6581" title="sister taxon" label="sister taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q908697" start="6613" end="6623" title="Macropygia" label="Macropygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q468560" start="6732" end="6741" title="Geotrygon" label="Geotrygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q930823" start="6762" end="6771" title="Leptotila" label="Leptotila"/>
<link wikidata="Q468569" start="6903" end="6914" title="Patagioenas" label="Patagioenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q512061" start="6944" end="6962" title="band-tailed pigeon" label="band-tailed pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767410" start="7084" end="7093" title="Turacoena" label="Turacoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q640782" start="7135" end="7148" title="Reinwardtoena" label="Reinwardtoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="7161" end="7166" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q30944" start="7220" end="7232" title="Streptopelia" label="Streptopelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="7480" end="7493" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="7513" end="7521" title="Beringia" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q769863" start="7558" end="7569" title="nuclear DNA" label="nuclear DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="7890" end="7908" title="Neotropical region" label="Neotropical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="7932" end="7941" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="8458" end="8471" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="Hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q731131" start="8518" end="8530" title="Barbary dove" label="Barbary dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733558" start="8583" end="8603" title="Charles Otis Whitman" label="Charles Otis Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="8944" end="8953" title="bird migration" label="migratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="9532" end="9542" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="9772" end="9792" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665761" start="9841" end="9847" title="Lenape language" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q33875" start="9863" end="9869" title="Anishinaabe language" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085692" start="9889" end="9898" title="Kaskaskia" label="Kaskaskia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56523" start="9899" end="9907" title="Miami-Illinois language" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="9924" end="9943" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous American"/>
<link wikidata="Q13339" start="9972" end="9978" title="Mohawk language" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979" start="10021" end="10028" title="Choctaw language" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q213422" start="10034" end="10047" title="Seneca people" label="Seneca people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519558" start="10156" end="10169" title="Simon Pokagon" label="Simon Pokagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="10177" end="10187" title="Potawatomi" label="Potawatomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="10497" end="10515" title="sexually dimorphic" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790261" start="10992" end="10996" title="rump (animal)" label="rump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178731" start="11063" end="11077" title="covert feather" label="covert feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377969" start="11579" end="11585" title="rufous" label="rufous"/>
<link wikidata="Q320617" start="11816" end="11823" title="carmine" label="carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059724" start="11941" end="11947" title="tarsus (skeleton)" label="tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q866214" start="12144" end="12152" title="scapular" label="scapular"/>
<link wikidata="Q957208" start="12206" end="12217" title="iridescence" label="iridescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="12933" end="12940" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q392655" start="13228" end="13244" title="tertial feathers" label="tertial feathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q316669" start="13638" end="13655" title="Walter Rothschild" label="Walter Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788142" start="13657" end="13688" title="Natural History Museum at Tring" label="Natural History Museum at Tring"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="14024" end="14032" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187526" start="14063" end="14072" title="eumelanin" label="eumelanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="14103" end="14112" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="14122" end="14129" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q42326" start="14521" end="14530" title="rock dove" label="rock dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159221" start="14968" end="14986" title="Robert W. Shufeldt" label="Robert W. Shufeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q819121" start="15033" end="15042" title="osteology" label="osteology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307451" start="15114" end="15128" title="Julian P. Hume" label="Julian P. Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q532798" start="15279" end="15304" title="musculus pectoralis major" label="musculus pectoralis major"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15336" end="15361" title="bird anatomy#Muscular system" label="musculus supracoracoideus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131838" start="15381" end="15389" title="coracoid" label="coracoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336" start="15415" end="15422" title="scapula" label="scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199010" start="15424" end="15431" title="furcula" label="furcula"/>
<link wikidata="Q8481" start="15437" end="15444" title="sternum" label="sternum"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="15706" end="15712" title="distal" label="distal"/>
<link wikidata="Q641692" start="15808" end="15812" title="keel (bird anatomy)" label="keel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406411" start="15839" end="15857" title="uncinate processes of ribs" label="uncinate processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q162595" start="15928" end="15935" title="humerus" label="humerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178492" start="15937" end="15943" title="radius (bone)" label="radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q199507" start="15945" end="15949" title="ulna" label="ulna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045860" start="15955" end="15970" title="carpometacarpus" label="carpometacarpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745023" start="16518" end="16529" title="alarm calls" label="alarm calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565452" start="16657" end="16670" title="Wallace Craig" label="Wallace Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="16767" end="16783" title="musical notation" label="musical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="18424" end="18439" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="18450" end="18462" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="18470" end="18484" title="East Coast of the United States" label="Atlantic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556311" start="18644" end="18661" title="temperate deciduous forest" label="deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="19115" end="19126" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="19168" end="19189" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331830" start="19364" end="19385" title="competitive exclusion" label="competitive exclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="19672" end="19677" title="alder" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="19749" end="19753" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="19903" end="19910" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="19912" end="19916" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="19922" end="19928" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147168" start="20505" end="20521" title="La Brea Tar Pits" label="La Brea Tar Pits"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="20596" end="20607" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="20857" end="20862" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q182882" start="21016" end="21034" title="John James Audubon" label="John James Audubon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861650" start="22242" end="22259" title="Arlie W. Schorger" label="Arlie W. Schorger"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="22638" end="22657" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Henry David Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q523240" start="22670" end="22692" title="Concord, Massachusetts" label="Concord, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="22845" end="22852" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112122" start="23215" end="23234" title="Christopher Cokinos" label="Christopher Cokinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698599" start="23370" end="23387" title="coalescent theory" label="coalescent theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="23428" end="23434" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907811" start="23635" end="23639" title="mast seeding" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295959" start="24286" end="24311" title="effective population size" label="effective population size"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="24515" end="24521" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="24585" end="24602" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295959" start="24963" end="24988" title="effective population size" label="effective population size"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="25312" end="25320" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698599" start="25321" end="25331" title="coalescent theory" label="coalescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295959" start="25517" end="25542" title="effective population size" label="effective population size"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="25943" end="25960" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115005" start="26203" end="26218" title="selective sweep" label="selective sweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839657" start="26235" end="26255" title="background selection" label="background selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="26310" end="26328" title="adaptation" label="adaptive evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q512061" start="26402" end="26420" title="band-tailed pigeon" label="band-tailed pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="26610" end="26631" title="genetic recombination" label="genetic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115005" start="26676" end="26691" title="selective sweep" label="selective sweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839657" start="26696" end="26716" title="background selection" label="background selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153964" start="27294" end="27313" title="communally roosting" label="communally roosting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536726" start="29054" end="29060" title="Martha (pigeon)" label="Martha"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="29296" end="29309" title="pre-Columbian era" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q469555" start="29423" end="29433" title="Quercus alba" label="white oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q147525" start="29572" end="29580" title="Quercus rubra" label="red oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="30052" end="30064" title="wildfire" label="forest fires"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30091" end="30112" title="fire ecology#Fire tolerance" label="fire-tolerant species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082365" start="30122" end="30130" title="Quercus macrocarpa" label="bur oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001011" start="30132" end="30142" title="Quercus velutina" label="black oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q469555" start="30148" end="30158" title="Quercus alba" label="white oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="31518" end="31527" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907811" start="31637" end="31641" title="mast seeding" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q518808" start="31873" end="31889" title="keystone species" label="keystone species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008355" start="31996" end="32015" title="forest dynamics" label="forest disturbances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134228" start="32292" end="32300" title="canopy (biology)" label="canopies"/>
<link wikidata="Q422666" start="32317" end="32327" title="understory" label="understory"/>
<link wikidata="Q468698" start="32340" end="32357" title="American chestnut" label="American chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907811" start="32390" end="32394" title="mast seeding" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010057" start="32497" end="32512" title="chestnut blight" label="chestnut blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q732863" start="32822" end="32840" title="white-footed mouse" label="white-footed mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="33063" end="33075" title="lyme disease" label="lyme disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361531" start="33121" end="33136" title="natural reservoir" label="reservoir hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723634" start="33146" end="33166" title="Borrelia burgdorferi" label="Borrelia burgdorferi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="33187" end="33192" title="Beech" label="Beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="33199" end="33202" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907811" start="33217" end="33221" title="mast seeding" label="mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914781" start="33390" end="33395" title="acorn" label="acorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="33467" end="33478" title="blueberry" label="blueberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="33480" end="33485" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q190545" start="33488" end="33496" title="Prunus" label="cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520764" start="33498" end="33508" title="Morus rubra" label="mulberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q157853" start="33510" end="33521" title="Phytolacca americana" label="pokeberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420828" start="33527" end="33537" title="Cornus canadensis" label="bunchberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q193006" start="33595" end="33600" title="Oligochaeta" label="worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="33602" end="33613" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="33616" end="33621" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="33731" end="33740" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="33788" end="33792" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35879" end="35883" title="crop (anatomy)#Birds" label="crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q477734" start="36511" end="36518" title="gizzard" label="gizzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q723673" start="36532" end="36548" title="gastrolith" label="contained gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q147525" start="37000" end="37008" title="Quercus rubra" label="red oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001011" start="37010" end="37020" title="Quercus velutina" label="black oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q468698" start="37030" end="37047" title="American chestnut" label="American chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q30597356" start="37554" end="37567" title="regurgitation (digestion)" label="regurgitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427332" start="37735" end="37754" title="communally breeding" label="communally breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q616914" start="39726" end="39733" title="social grooming" label="preened"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39777" end="39784" title="beak#Billing" label="billing"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="39819" end="39823" title="beak" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="41916" end="41926" title="monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q954226" start="42758" end="42767" title="egg incubation" label="incubated"/>
<link wikidata="Q953515" start="42999" end="43003" title="down feather" label="down"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914275" start="43258" end="43267" title="crop milk" label="crop milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q622563" start="43292" end="43296" title="curd" label="curd"/>
<link wikidata="Q160627" start="44043" end="44064" title="Alfred Russel Wallace" label="Alfred Russel Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801903" start="44093" end="44217" title="On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection" label="On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q27179" start="44439" end="44452" title="American mink" label="American mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q125749307" start="44483" end="44501" title="long-tailed weasel" label="long-tailed weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q322145" start="44534" end="44549" title="American marten" label="American marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="44587" end="44594" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="44659" end="44672" title="birds of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="44682" end="44685" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="44688" end="44692" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="44699" end="44704" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="44747" end="44753" title="gray wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="44781" end="44784" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q131907" start="44857" end="44863" title="bobcat" label="bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="44891" end="44910" title="American black bear" label="American black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="44948" end="44954" title="cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188737" start="45061" end="45070" title="Accipiter" label="Accipiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q862896" start="45195" end="45213" title="Cooper&amp;#x27;s hawk" label="Cooper&amp;#x27;s hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239610" start="45936" end="45954" title="predator satiation" label="predator satiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290992" start="46132" end="46144" title="Philopteridae" label="phtilopterid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481228" start="46145" end="46150" title="louse" label="louse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980889" start="46158" end="46179" title="Columbicola extinctus" label="Columbicola extinctus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981817" start="46269" end="46278" title="coextinct" label="coextinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q18095891" start="46638" end="46659" title="Campanulotes" label="Campanulotes defectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18095891" start="46850" end="46869" title="Campanulotes" label="Campanulotes flavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="47281" end="47289" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589818" start="47384" end="47399" title="prescribed burn" label="prescribed burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q623674" start="47405" end="47413" title="girdling" label="girdling"/>
<link wikidata="Q213396" start="48944" end="48958" title="Wyandot people" label="Wyandot people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741124" start="49014" end="49031" title="Feast of the Dead" label="Feast of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q943899" start="49196" end="49202" title="wampum" label="wampum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537653" start="49323" end="49331" title="Ho-Chunk" label="Ho-Chunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321" start="49790" end="49805" title="Jacques Cartier" label="Jacques Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q68529" start="49963" end="49982" title="Samuel de Champlain" label="Samuel de Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q380719" start="49987" end="50000" title="Cotton Mather" label="Cotton Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="50631" end="50640" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q141724" start="50933" end="50953" title="Saint-Jérôme, Quebec" label="Saint-Jérôme, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q115061" start="51042" end="51069" title="Chautauqua County, New York" label="Chautauqua County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q931286" start="51565" end="51581" title="Alexander Wilson (ornithologist)" label="Alexander Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q473236" start="51872" end="51880" title="aquatint" label="aquatint"/>
<link wikidata="Q377817" start="51900" end="51920" title="The Birds of America" label="The Birds of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871480" start="52431" end="52452" title="Louis Agassiz Fuertes" label="Louis Agassiz Fuertes"/>
<link wikidata="Q725877" start="52605" end="52622" title="Charles R. Knight" label="Charles R. Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q623333" start="52896" end="52910" title="Cincinnati Zoo" label="Cincinnati Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243449" start="53090" end="53101" title="Walton Ford" label="Walton Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789030" start="53154" end="53176" title="National Medal of Arts" label="National Medal of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256053" start="53184" end="53199" title="John A. Ruthven" label="John A. Ruthven"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="53569" end="53577" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="54369" end="54377" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="54450" end="54458" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q26844" start="54709" end="54720" title="wild turkey" label="wild turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q672682" start="55159" end="55175" title="René Goulaine de Laudonnière" label="René Laudonnière"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55224" end="55237" title="Fort Caroline#Fort Caroline (1564–1565)" label="Fort Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="55445" end="55456" title="sustainability" label="sustainable"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="55647" end="55662" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q29560" start="56465" end="56472" title="salting (food)" label="salting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="56476" end="56484" title="pickling" label="pickling"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="56587" end="56593" title="smoking (cooking)" label="smoked"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="56727" end="56733" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="57871" end="57886" title="sports shooting" label="sports shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489425" start="57976" end="57989" title="trap-shooting" label="trap-shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545649" start="58846" end="58851" title="Decoy" label="Decoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="60055" end="60061" title="Sulfur" label="Sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="60206" end="60214" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="60427" end="60436" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q998669" start="60659" end="60680" title="Plattsburgh (city), New York" label="Plattsburgh, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q219174" start="62119" end="62137" title="agricultural pests" label="agricultural pests"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="62512" end="62517" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="62859" end="62869" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415663" start="63807" end="63825" title="Petoskey, Michigan" label="Petoskey, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080820" start="64740" end="64762" title="Ohio State Legislature" label="Ohio State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446959" start="66253" end="66270" title="Oakford, Illinois" label="Oakford, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893320" start="66343" end="66362" title="Millikin University" label="Millikin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q506325" start="66366" end="66383" title="Decatur, Illinois" label="Decatur, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293473" start="66655" end="66670" title="Laurel, Indiana" label="Laurel, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716800" start="66821" end="66829" title="Sargents, Ohio" label="Sargents"/>
<link wikidata="Q489919" start="66831" end="66848" title="Pike County, Ohio" label="Pike County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273295" start="66935" end="66941" title="BB gun" label="BB gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349886" start="67172" end="67195" title="Ohio Historical Society" label="Ohio Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q34558" start="67322" end="67339" title="Alexander Wetmore" label="Alexander Wetmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904322" start="67379" end="67399" title="Independence, Kansas" label="Independence, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="67448" end="67466" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q465985" start="67905" end="67940" title="American Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union" label="American Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q270263" start="68267" end="68277" title="London Zoo" label="London Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733558" start="68867" end="68887" title="Charles Otis Whitman" label="Charles Otis Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q321717" start="69503" end="69531" title="Wisconsin Historical Society" label="Wisconsin Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="71234" end="71251" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q191789" start="71265" end="71271" title="Martha Washington" label="Martha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376203" start="71706" end="71713" title="endling" label="endling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8264724" start="72399" end="72416" title="apoplexy" label="apoplectic stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="72524" end="72547" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="72634" end="72641" title="molting" label="molting"/>
<link wikidata="Q148554" start="72874" end="72908" title="National Museum of Natural History" label="National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="73098" end="73124" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q629204" start="73173" end="73190" title="Carolina parakeet" label="Carolina parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="73583" end="73596" title="Deforestation" label="Deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179959" start="74084" end="74090" title="kākāpō" label="kākāpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q212302" start="74134" end="74140" title="takahē" label="takahē"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="74331" end="74341" title="Blitzkrieg" label="Blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301505" start="74627" end="74639" title="Allee effect" label="Allee effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q634550" start="75070" end="75091" title="Rocky Mountain locust" label="Rocky Mountain locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903425" start="75557" end="75574" title="Newcastle disease" label="Newcastle disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="75701" end="75722" title="conservation movement" label="conservation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="75964" end="76010" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q971382" start="76188" end="76200" title="Aldo Leopold" label="Aldo Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q989464" start="76312" end="76332" title="Wyalusing State Park" label="Wyalusing State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="76334" end="76343" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14630565" start="76771" end="76784" title="de-extinction" label="de-extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941059" start="76850" end="76863" title="Pyrenean ibex" label="Pyrenean ibex"/>
<link wikidata="Q549108" start="76924" end="76936" title="Iberian ibex" label="Iberian ibex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298995" start="77246" end="77262" title="George M. Church" label="George M. Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q48196" start="77444" end="77453" title="stem cell" label="stem cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q512061" start="77475" end="77493" title="band-tailed pigeon" label="band-tailed pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107723068" start="77835" end="77855" title="Revive &amp;amp; Restore" label="Revive &amp;amp; Restore"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="78708" end="78729" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242987" start="78743" end="78753" title="Day to Day" label="Day to Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="78817" end="78840" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23929" wikidata="Q954662" url="?curid=23929" title="PHP-Nuke">
<text>PHP-Nuke is a web-based automated news publishing and content management system based on PHP and MySQL originally written by Francisco Burzi. The system is controlled using a web-based user interface. PHP-Nuke was originally a fork of the Thatware news portal system by David Norman.

PHP-Nuke was originally released under the GNU General Public License as free software. Versions after 7.5 required a license fee; from version 8.3 it became free again. This is permitted under the GPL (providing the source code is included), and the purchaser of the software has the right to freely distribute the source code of the product. Burzi no longer owns the PHP-Nuke site.

As of version 5.6, the display of a copyright message on webpages is required in accordance with the GPL section 2(c).

PHP-Nuke requires a web server which supports the PHP extension, as well as an SQL database.

==Features==
PHP-Nuke is a content management system allowing webmasters to create community-based portals (websites), allowing users and editors to post news items (user-submitted news items are selected by editors) or other types of articles. Registered users can then comment on these articles.

Modules can be added to the PHP-Nuke system allowing additional features such as an Internet forum, Calendar, News Feed, FAQs, Private Messaging and others. The site is maintained through an administration interface.

PHP-Nuke includes the following standard modules:

* Advertising—Manages ads on the page layout (theme). Supports images/links, JavaScript/HTML, and Flash
* Avantgo—Provides mobile versions of the last 10 news articles
* Content—Manages the main content &quot;pages&quot;
* Downloads—Manages file downloads. There are no uploads—it stores links to files on other servers
* Encyclopedia—Manages phrases/words and definitions
* FAQ—Manages Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
* Feedback—Communicate to the webmaster. It is an online form, but provides feedback via email.
* Forums—Manages discussion forums for the site. It is based on bb2nuke, which is a PHP-Nuke port of the popular open-source phpBB discussion board.
* Journal—Maintain public and/or private notes
* Members List—Displays site members
* News—Manages news stories, including future-dated news to be released at a specific date and time. Each article can be assigned to a single category.
* Private Messages—Allows members to send private messages to others on the site. Members can prevent messages from other members.
* Recommend Us—Send an email message recommending the site to others.
* Search—Allows users to search your site.
* Statistics—Displays summary and detailed site statistics, including page views.
* Stories (News) Archives—Provides access to older news articles.
* Submit News—Allow visitors to submit news. Email notification is sent, but the submission is stored in the administrator control panel. Administrator can delete, edit, and/or post the article without re-keying.
* Surveys (Polls)—Create visitor surveys
* Top—Displays the most-visited articles, downloads, etc.
* Topics—Displays news by topic. The administrator defines the topics and assigns topics to content.
* Web Links—Manages a hierarchical directory of links to selected websites
* Your Account—Manages members &quot;profile&quot; information, including their preferred theme, the number of news articles to display on their home page, etc.

PHP-Nuke supports many languages and its look and feel can be customized using the &quot;Themes&quot; system, but major changes requires knowledge of PHP, HTML and CSS.

==Issues==
Several security holes have been discovered in PHP-Nuke, including SQL injection via unchecked PHP code. PHP-Nuke may have issues with some search engine indexes. PHP-Nuke does not use simple URLs or unique titles for pages.

==License==
PHP-Nuke is distributed for free and licensed under the GNU/GPL license; however, current versions must be purchased and can then be distributed for free.

==Questionable website ownership change==
The PHP-Nuke website is now owned by Bibado Investments S.L. which is also a distributor of unwanted programs (adware).

== Notes ==
==Further reading==
* 305 pages.

==External links==

* Repository of Php Nuke</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131093" start="54" end="79" title="content management system" label="content management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="89" end="92" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q850" start="97" end="102" title="MySQL" label="MySQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q332903" start="227" end="231" title="fork (software)" label="fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="328" end="354" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q341" start="358" end="371" title="free software" label="free software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="483" end="486" title="GNU General Public License" label="GPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="502" end="513" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="706" end="715" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="810" end="820" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="840" end="843" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="869" end="872" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="1267" end="1281" title="Internet forum" label="Internet forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189293" start="1304" end="1307" title="FAQ" label="FAQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="1529" end="1539" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="1540" end="1544" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="1550" end="1555" title="Adobe Flash" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q506059" start="3643" end="3656" title="SQL injection" label="SQL injection"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23931" wikidata="Q16560" url="?curid=23931" title="Palace">
<text>A palace is a large residence, often serving as a royal residence or the home for a head of state or another high-ranking dignitary, such as a bishop or archbishop. The word is derived from the Latin name palātium, for Palatine Hill in Rome which housed the Imperial residences.

Most European languages have a version of the term (&quot;palats&quot;, &quot;palais&quot;, &quot;palazzo&quot;, &quot;palacio&quot;, etc.) and many use it to describe a broader range of buildings than English. In many parts of Europe, the equivalent term is also applied to large private houses in cities, especially of the aristocracy. It is also used for some large official buildings that have never had a residential function; for example in French-speaking countries &quot;Palais de Justice&quot; is the usual name of important courthouses. Many historic palaces such as parliaments, museums, hotels, or office buildings are now put to other uses. The word is also sometimes used to describe an elaborate building used for public entertainment or exhibitions such as a movie palace.

A palace is typically distinguished from a castle in that the latter is fortified or has the style of a fortification, whereas a palace does not.

==Etymology==

The word &quot;palace&quot; comes from Old French &quot;palais&quot; (imperial residence), from Latin &quot;Palātium&quot;, the name of one of the seven hills of Rome. The original &quot;palaces&quot; on the Palatine Hill were the seat of the imperial power. At the same time, the &quot;capitol&quot; on the Capitoline Hill was the religious nucleus of Rome. Long after the city grew to the seven hills, the Palatine remained a desirable residential area. Roman emperor Caesar Augustus lived there in a purposely modest house only set apart from his neighbours by the two laurel trees planted to flank the front door as a sign of triumph granted by the Senate. His descendants, especially Nero with his &quot;Domus Aurea&quot; (the Golden House), enlarged the building and its grounds over and over until it took up the hilltop. The word &quot;Palātium&quot; came to mean the residence of the emperor rather than the neighbourhood on top of the hill.

&quot;Palace&quot;, meaning &quot;government&quot;, can be recognized in a remark of Paul the Deacon, writing and describing events of the 660s: &quot;When Grimuald set out for Beneventum, he entrusted his palace to Lupus&quot; (&quot;Historia Langobardorum&quot;, V.xvii). At the same time, Charlemagne was consciously reviving the Roman expression in his &quot;palace&quot; at Aachen, of which only his chapel remains. In the 9th century, the &quot;palace&quot; indicated the government&#x27;s housing too, and Charlemagne constantly traveled, building fourteen. In the early Middle Ages, the &quot;palas&quot; was usually that part of an imperial palace (or &quot;Kaiserpfalz&quot;) that housed the Great Hall, where affairs of state were conducted; continued to be used as the seat of government in some German cities. In the Holy Roman Empire, the powerful independent Electors came to be housed in palaces (&quot;Paläste&quot;). This has been used as evidence that power was widely distributed in the Empire; as in more centralized monarchies, only the monarch&#x27;s residence would be a &quot;palace&quot;.

In modern times, archaeologists and historians have applied the term to large structures that housed combined rulers, courts, and bureaucracy in &quot;palace cultures&quot;. In informal usage, the term &quot;palace&quot; can be extended to a grand residence.

==Ancient palaces==

Early ancient palaces include the Assyrian palaces at Nimrud and Nineveh and the Persian palaces at Persepolis and Susa. The Minoans built complexes referred to in modern times as Minoan palaces, though scholars now generally do not think they functioned as royal residences (or that there was royalty for them to house).
The best examples of the Bronze Age Greece palace are seen in the excavations at Mycenae, Tiryns and Pylos. The fact that these were administrative centers is shown by the records found there. They were ranged around a group of courtyards, each opening upon several rooms of different dimensions, such as storerooms and workshops, as well as reception halls and living quarters, each opening upon several rooms of different dimensions, such as storerooms, workshops, and reception halls. The heart of the palace was the megaron. This was the throne room, laid around a circular hearth surrounded by four columns, the throne generally found on the right-hand side upon entering the room. The staircases in the palace of Pylos indicate palaces had two stories. Located on the top floor were the private quarters of the royal family and some storerooms. These palaces have yielded a wealth of artifacts and fragmentary frescoes.

The Palace of Domitian in Rome is the overall name given to the complex of palaces that were the primary residence in Rome of the Roman emperors from the late 1st century to the 5th. Some sculptures and decorative elements have been excavated. The Domus Aurea was a different palace, begun by Nero, where excavations from the Renaissance onwards have discovered remarkably well-preserved paintings in levels now below ground.

Diocletian&#x27;s Palace in Split, Croatia was ready for occupation in 305 AD and is much the most significant ancient survival, having been turned in the Middle Ages into a fortified town; it still houses many people and businesses.

Palaces in East Asia, such as the imperial palaces of Japan, Korea, Vietnam, Thailand, and Indonesia, and large wooden structures in China&#x27;s Forbidden City, consist of many low pavilions surrounded by vast, walled gardens in contrast to the single building palaces of Medieval Western Europe. Palaces were also built by post-classical African kingdoms such as the Ashanti Empire. Before its destruction during the Third Anglo-Ashanti War, the Ashanti royal palace at Kumasi, Ghana was described by English explorers Thomas Edward Bowdich and Winwood Reade as &quot;an immense building of a variety of oblong courts and regular squares.&quot;

== Medieval palaces ==
European palaces belonging to rulers were often large and grand, however, very few have survived to represent anything like their original medieval condition; many having been abandoned, burned down, demolished, or rebuilt. The Palais des Papes in Avignon, France, is probably the best prominent example, essentially a creation of 1252 to 1379, and little has changed since 1433, which marked the end of the Avignon Papacy and subsequent schisms.

Very little of the medieval Louvre Palace, one of the most magnificent, has survived above ground. Similar fates befell the main palaces of the Byzantine Empire in Constantinople: the Great Palace of Constantinople, Boukoleon Palace, and Palace of Blachernae. The Palace of the Porphyrogenitus, a part of the Palace of Blachernae, has significant remains and now houses a museum.

==Americas==

===Brazil===

The Brazilian new capital, Brasília, hosts modern palaces, most designed by the city&#x27;s architect Oscar Niemeyer. The Alvorada Palace is the official residence of Brazil&#x27;s president. The Planalto Palace is the official workplace. The Jaburu Palace is the official residence of Brazil&#x27;s vice-president. Also Rio de Janeiro, the former capital of the Portuguese Empire and the Empire of Brazil, houses numerous royal and imperial palaces as the Imperial Palace of São Cristóvão, former official residence of the Brazil&#x27;s emperors, the Paço Imperial, its official workplace and the Guanabara Palace, former residence of Isabel, Princess Imperial of Brazil besides palaces of the nobility and aristocracy. The city of Petropolis, in the state of Rio de Janeiro, is mainly known for its palaces of the imperial period, such as the Petrópolis Palace and the Grão-Pará Palace.

===Canada===
In Canada, Government House is a title given to the official residences of the Canadian monarchy and various viceroys (the governors general and the lieutenant governors). Though not universal, in most cases, the title is also the building&#x27;s sole name; for example, the sovereign&#x27;s and governor general&#x27;s principal residence in Ottawa is known as Government House only in formal contexts, being more generally referred to as Rideau Hall. Government House is an inherited custom from the British Empire, where there were and are many government houses.

Rideau Hall is, since 1867, the official residence in Ottawa of both the Canadian monarch and his or her representative, the governor general of Canada, and has been described as &quot;Canada&#x27;s house&quot;. It stands in Canada&#x27;s capital on a estate at 1 Sussex Drive, with the main building consisting of approximately 175 rooms across , and 27 outbuildings around the grounds. While the equivalent structure in many countries has a prominent, central place in the national capital, Rideau Hall&#x27;s site is relatively unobtrusive within Ottawa, giving it more of the character of a private home.

Along with Rideau Hall, the Citadelle of Quebec, also known as La Citadelle, is an active military installation and official residence of the Canadian monarch and the governor general. It is located atop Cap Diamant, adjoining the Plains of Abraham in Quebec City, Quebec. The citadel is the oldest military building in Canada and forms part of the fortifications of Quebec City, which is one of only two cities in North America still surrounded by fortifications. The fortress is located within the historic district of Old Québec, designated a World Heritage Site in 1985.

In addition to the federal residences, most provinces maintain a place for the Canadian monarch and their provincial viceroys and lieutenant governors. There is no government house for the lieutenant governors of Ontario (repurposed in 1937 and demolished in 1961), Quebec (destroyed by fire in 1966), or Alberta (closed in 1938 and repurchased and repurposed in 1964).

===Mexico===

The capital of Mexico, Mexico City, is traditionally nicknamed the &quot;City of Palaces&quot;; a nickname usually attributed to Alexander von Humboldt after he visited the city in the late 18th century and early 19th century, but initially coined by Charles Latrobe, an English traveler who visited Mexico City in 1834 and &quot;got the feeling of living a dream&quot;.

In Central Mexico, the Aztec emperors built many palaces in the capital of their empire, Tenochtitlan (modern-day Mexico City), some of which may still be seen. On observing the great city Hernán Cortés wrote, &quot;There are, in all districts of this great city, many temples or palaces... They are all magnificent buildings. Amongst these temples is one, the principal one, whose great size and magnificence no human tongue could describe... All around this wall are exquisite quarters with huge rooms and corridors. There are as many as forty towers, all of which are so high that in the case of the largest, there are fifty steps leading up to the main part of it, and the most important of these towers is higher than that of the cathedral of Seville...&quot;

In the Yucatan, a well-preserved Mayan palace with a unique four-storey observation tower stands at the Palenque site, from where Pakal reigned over the city-state.

The National Palace, or &quot;Palacio Nacional&quot;, located in Mexico City&#x27;s main square, the Plaza de la Constitución (El Zócalo), first built in 1563, is in the heart of the Mexican capital. In 1821, the palace was given its current name, and the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government were housed in the palace; the latter two branches would eventually reside elsewhere. During the Second Mexican Empire, its name was changed, for a time, to the Imperial Palace. The National Palace continues to be the official seat of the executive authority, though it is no longer the president&#x27;s official residence.

Also in Mexico City is the &quot;Castillo de Chapultepec&quot;, or Chapultepec Castle, located in the middle of Chapultepec Park, which currently houses the Mexican National Museum of History. It is the only castle, or palace, in North America that was occupied by sovereigns – Emperor Maximilian I of Mexico, a member of the House of Habsburg and his consort, Empress Carlota of Mexico, daughter of Leopold I of Belgium. The palace features many &quot;objets d&#x27;art&quot; ranging from gifts of Napoleon III to paintings by Franz Xaver Winterhalter and Mexican painter Santiago Rebull.

===United States===
Palaces in the United States include the White House, the official residence of the president, and the official residences of many governors and Roman Catholic bishops. Some palaces of former heads of state or their representatives, such as English and Spanish royal governors and the Hawaiian royal family, still exist.

Examples include: ʻIolani Palace and Hānaiakamalama, the former homes of the Hawaiian monarchs in Honolulu; Hulihee Palace in Kailua-Kona, Hawaii; The Governor&#x27;s Palace in Williamsburg, a modern reconstruction of the official residence of the royal governors of the Colony of Virginia; Tryon Palace in New Bern, a modern reconstruction of the historical colonial governors&#x27; palace of the Province of North Carolina; and the Palace of the Governors in Santa Fe, New Mexico as well as the Spanish Governor&#x27;s Palace in San Antonio, Texas, which were residences of both Spanish and Mexican governors.

There are many private buildings or mansions in the United States, which, though not called &quot;palaces&quot;, have the grandeur typical of a palace, and have been used as residences. Hearst Castle and the Biltmore Estate are examples.

===Uruguay===
The Palacio Legislativo (Legislative Palace) is the house of the Uruguayan Parliament.

===Venezuela===
The Palacio de Miraflores is the setting for the offices of the president of the country.

==Africa==

===Ethiopia===
Located in Addis Ababa, the Menelik Palace is a palatial compound that is currently serving as the residence of the prime minister of Ethiopia. The compound, while containing palaces and residences also contains a few churches, tombs and monasteries. Previously, it served as the seat of the emperors of Ethiopia. After a 2018 renovation, the compound opened to the public in 2019 as a part of Unity Park.

===Nigeria===

The Palace of the Olowo, ruler of the Yoruba Owo clan of Nigeria, is acknowledged to be the largest palace in all of Africa. It consists of more than 100 courtyards, each with a unique traditional usage.

In the Kano State of Nigeria, the Gidan Rumfa acts as the seat of the Emir of Kano since the late 15th century when it was constructed.

In Benin City, the capital of the Edo State, lies the current Royal Palace of the Oba of Benin. It currently houses the Oba of Benin, who is the traditional ruler of the Edo people, alongside some other royals. The current palace is a reconstruction by Eweka II after the original was destroyed in 1897 by the British.

=== Rwanda ===

Rwanda is host to three palaces, although one of them is currently repurposed. In Nyanza, the former royal capital of the Kingdom of Rwanda, are two existing palaces. The first, the traditional King&#x27;s Palace, is constructed in the vernacular style and housed the traditional ruler of Rwanda, the Mwami. A second palace for the king exists in Nyanza, although it is constructed in the Art Deco style as opposed to the local construction style. A third palace, the Rwesero Palace, was originally constructed for Mutara III, but he died before its completion, and the building was converted into the Rwesero Art Museum.

===Uganda===
The Kabakas Palace belonged to the Kingdom of Buganda and is a known landmark of the present capital Kampala.

==Asia==
===Afghanistan===

Afghanistan&#x27;s capital Kabul is well known for its sheer number of palaces. Many had been built in the 19th century but perhaps the most famous is the Darul Aman Palace. Many palaces were damaged by the civil war, including Darul Aman, but others have survived or have been rebuilt.

===Armenia===


Armenia has many palaces from its various historical periods. The Erebuni fortress in Yerevan has a grand royal palace constructed in 782 B.C. by King Argisthi. The palace at Erebuni is one of the earliest examples of an Urartian palace.

During the Kingdom of Armenia (antiquity), many palaces were constructed for the successive kings. Ruins of a royal palace can be found in the early Armenian capital of Yervandashat, which was built to serve as the seat of Orontid Armenian Kings by Orontes IV. During the period of the Artaxiad dynasty of Armenia, emperor king Tigranes the great constructed a grand persianate palace in the newly built city of Tigranocerta. The purpose of the Armenian Temple of Garni is still up for debate, however, certain scholars attest that following the Christianization of Armenia in the 4th century BC, the temple was converted into a summer palace for Khosrovidukht (sister of Tiridates III of Armenia) by the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia.
After the fall of the Arsacids, Armenia was ruled by a succession of aristocratic families who held the title &quot;Nakharar&quot;. One of these Nakharar princes, Grigor Mamikonian, built a palace in the citadel of Aruch near the Aruchavank cathedral; some walls of this palace and a unique Armenian throne made of tufa still survive today.

The medieval capital of the Bagratid kingdom of Armenia, Ani, also hosted many palaces. The first palace of Ani, constructed by the princely Armenian Kamsarakan dynasty in the seventh century, served as the most important structure of the city. Located in the main citadel, the Kamsarakan palace was used by the successive Bagratid kingdom as their headquarters. In addition, Ani hosted several other palaces such as the Merchant&#x27;s(Tigran Honents) Palace, one of the best surviving examples of secular Armenian architecture of that time, the Seljuk palace, and the Manuchir Mosque, which is said by some historians to have been a residence of Bagratid kings before being converted to a mosque.

After the Bagratid state was conquered by the Byzantines and then the Seljuks, Armenia was once again liberated by the royal Zakarian family under Georgian Queen Tamar. This period of Zakarid Armenia brought forth many palaces as well, the most notable of which being Amberd Fortress and the 12th-century palace in Dashtadem Fortress. The Zakarids became vassals of the Mongols, however, following their collapse, a succession of nomadic Turkic empires came to rule the region.

During the various periods of Ottoman and Iranian occupation following the Timurid Empire, Armenia was governed by several local principalities known as Melikdoms. Each Melik had their own princely palace. The most notable of which is the Palace of the Dizak Melikdom constructed by Melik Yeganyan in Togh (1737). Other notable melik palaces are the Melik Ahnazar palace in Khnatsakh (16th century), the Melik Haykaz Palace in Melikashen (15th century), the Melik Kasu palace, the palace of the Melik-Barkhudaryans in Tegh (1783) and Halidzor Fortress (17th century), which served as a palace for the Melik Parsadanian family.

===Azerbaijan===

Azerbaijan has a number of palaces which belong to different ages. For example, there are palaces from the BC era and from the 12th century, like the &quot;Goyalp&quot; Palace of Eldiguzids Empire Atabeg— located in Nakhchivan city and built in the 1130s.

Baku Khans&#x27; Palace is a complex of several houses that belonged to members of ruling family of the Baku Khanate in the 17th century. The palace complex was in ruins but has now been reconstructed as of 2018. Official Administration of State Historical-Architectural Reserve Icheri Sheher has opened the complex as a palace-museum.

The Palace of Happiness (Azerbaijani: Səadət Sarayı), currently also called Palace of Marriage Registrations and previously called Mukhtarov Palace, is a historic building in the center of Baku, Azerbaijan, built in Neo-Gothic style in the early 19th century.

Shahbulag Castle Palace (Azerbaijani: Şahbulaq qalası &quot;Spring of the Shah&quot;) is an 18th-century fortress near Aghdam. After the death of Turkic ruler Nadir Shah, the territory that is today Azerbaijan split into several Caucasian khanates, one of which was the Karabakh Khanate founded by Panah Ali Khan. The first capital of the khanate was the Bayat Castle, built in 1748

Haji Gayib&#x27;s Palace is an ancient fortress construction near a coastal side of Icheri Sheher. It is located in the Baku quarter of Icheri Sheher, opposite the Maiden Tower. The history of the palace dates back to the 15th century. The Intake portal of the bathhouse is rectangular shaped

The Palace of Shaki Khans (Azerbaijani: Şəki xanlarının sarayı) in Shaki, Azerbaijan, was a summer residence of Shaki Khans. It was built in 1797 by Muhammed Hasan Khan. Along with its pool and plane trees, the summer residence is the only remaining structure from the larger palatial complex inside the Sheki Khans&#x27; Fortress, which once included a winter palace, residences for the khan&#x27;s family and servants&#x27; quarters. It features decorative tiles, fountains and several stained-glass windows. The exterior was decorated with dark blue, turquoise and ochre tiles in geometric patterns and the murals were coloured with tempera and were inspired by the works of Nizami Ganjavi.

These are located in various regions and capital of Azerbaijan – the palace of government:
* Residence of Zagulba (510s) is the world&#x27;s oldest presidential house and full-time residence of the president of Azerbaijan in Baku.
* Bika Khanum Saray (1390–1394) Full-time residence of the president of Azerbaijan in Baku.
* Bullur Palace (1740) residence of the president of Azerbaijan, and chairmen of the Supreme Majlis of Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic in Sharur District.
* Asena Palace (1804) Full-time residence of the president of Azerbaijan in Baku.
* Göy Saray (Blue) (1810s) Rest residence of the president of Azerbaijan in Baku
* Palace of White Horse (1933) was the old rest palace for members of Political Bureau in Shamkir
* Government House (1936) is a government building palace housing various state ministries of Azerbaijan
* Administrational Palace (1970s)
* Gulustan Palace (1973) Full-time and feast residence of the president of Azerbaijan in Baku.
* Ghazan Khan Palace (2006) Residence of the president of Azerbaijan in Baku.
* Vahdat Presidential Summer Palace (2007) in Shamakhi
* Presidential Mountain Palace (2013) Rest residence of the president of Azerbaijan in Qabala

===Brunei===
Istana Nurul Iman is the world&#x27;s largest residential palace and is the official residence of the sultan of Brunei, Hassanal Bolkiah, and the seat of the Brunei government. The palace is located on a leafy sprawl of hills on the banks of the Brunei River, a few kilometres south of Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei&#x27;s capital.

=== Bangladesh ===

Most of the palaces in Bangladesh were built by the Zamindars and Nawabs of British Bengal. Many magnificent palaces can be found across the country. Among the notable palaces are Ahsan Manzil (also known as Pink Palace), built by the Nawabs of Dhaka; Tajhat Palace of Rangpur; Natore Palace; Puthia Rajbari of Rajshahi; Rose Garden Palace of Old Dhaka; Baliati Palace of Manikganj; Shashi Lodge of Mymensingh; and Bangabhaban (Presidential Palace).

===China===



A famed example of Chinese palaces is the Forbidden City, the imperial palace of the Chinese Empire from the Ming dynasty (since the Yongle Emperor) to the end of the Qing dynasty. Located in Beijing, it is the largest palace complex currently in existence in the world. The palace complex exemplifies traditional Chinese palatial architecture. Another example is the Summer Palace located in the northern suburb of Beijing and the Mukden Palace in Shenyang. The Presidential Palace in Nanjing and Imperial Palace of Manchukuo in Changchun display European architectural influences.

The Weiyang Palace built during the Han dynasty was the largest palace complex ever built in the world, but it was destroyed during the Tang dynasty.

Chinese palaces are designed in regular square grids and arranged in a formal layout consisting of main buildings and a number of pavilions enclosed within walls. Unlike massive single-structured European palaces or castles, Chinese palaces are a multitude of complexes containing several larger and smaller structures with parks and courtyards.

===India===

India is home to many palaces and vast empires. Its history is full of numerous dynasties that have ruled over various parts of the country. While most monuments of the ancient period have been destroyed or lie in ruins, some medieval buildings have been maintained or restored to good condition. Several medieval forts and palaces still stand all over India. These are examples of the achievements of the architects and engineers of that age. The palaces of India offer an insight into the life of the royalty of the country. While some royal palaces have been maintained as museums or hotels over the last decades, some are still homes for the members of the erstwhile royal families. These forts and palaces are the largest illustrations and legacy of the princely states of India. They feature floats of flowers in grand fountains, shimmering blue water of magnificent baths and private pools, doric pillars, ornamental brackets, decorative staircases, and light streaming in through large windows. India possesses some of the most fascinating forts and palaces, a true royal retreat. It is not just a romantic longing for a royal experience, but also the search for the truly authentic Indian experience that brings thousands of heritage lovers to India&#x27;s palaces.

Rajasthan has many forts and palaces that are major tourist destinations in North India. (See List of palaces in Rajasthan.) The Rajputs (collective term for the rulers of the region) were known as brave soldiers who preferred to die than be taken prisoners. They were also great connoisseurs of art and brilliant builders. The most famous forts and palaces in Rajasthan are located in Chittor, Jodhpur, Jaipur, Udaipur, Saphieree, Amber and Nahargarh. Taj Hotels Resorts and Palaces manages some of the most iconic palaces of the region, Lake Palace, Udaipur; Umaid Bhawan Palace, Jodhpur; Fort Madhogarh, Jaipur and Rambagh Palace, Jaipur; and offer authentic royal retreats to the guests in all its grandeur, splendour and magnificence.

Kolkata is known as the City of Palaces within the Indian context, referring to the numerous grand residential buildings that dotted the city from the end of the 18th century onwards, as it grew to become one of the largest cities of the British Raj.

Karnataka is famous for the Amba Vilas Palace (commonly known as Mysore Palace) in Mysuru / Mysore, which was the palace of the Wodeyar kings. It was said to have been built of wood until it had to be rebuilt after a fire that burned down the entire palace complex.

===Indonesia===

In Indonesia, palaces are known as &quot;istana&quot; (Malay and Indonesian), or &quot;kraton&quot; (Javanese and Sundanese). In Bali the royal palace compound is called &quot;puri&quot;. The palaces reflect the long history and diverse culture of the Indonesian archipelago.

Although Indonesia is now a republic, some of its parts and provinces still retain and preserve their traditional royal heritage, for example the Sultanate of Yogyakarta, Surakarta, Mangkunegaran princedom, Kasepuhan palace in Cirebon, and Kutai in East Kalimantan. Remnants of palaces and royal houses still can be found in Banten, Medan, Ternate, Bima, Bali and Sumenep. The layout of traditional Balinese and Javanese &quot;kratons&quot; is similar to the Chinese concept of walled compounds of royal pavilions, squares and gardens. Most of these &quot;kratons&quot; took the form of wooden pavilions called &quot;pendopo&quot;, while the &quot;istana&quot; of Sumatra usually consist of a single large structure. Typical Minangkabau vernacular architecture can be found in Pagaruyung Palace, West Sumatra. An example of Malay palace is Istana Maimun in Medan.

During the VOC and colonial era of the Dutch East Indies, the colonial government built several European stately palaces as the residence of the governor-general. Most of these European palaces have now become the state palace of the Republic of Indonesia. Indonesian state palaces are the neoclassic Merdeka Palace and Bogor Palace.

===Iran===

The Niavarān Palace Complex is a historical complex situated in the northern part of Tehran, Iran. It consists of several buildings and a museum. The Sahebqraniyeh Palace, from the time of Naser al-Din Shah of the Qajar dynasty, is also inside this complex. The main Niavaran Palace, completed in 1968, was the primary residence of the last shah, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, and the imperial family, until the Iranian Revolution. The main palace was designed by the Iranian architect Mohsen Foroughi.

===Israel/Palestine===

The pre-Israelite Canaanite site of Tel Kabri, destroyed in c. 1600 BCE, was built around a palace core. A palace culture of ancient Israel and Judah can be inferred from the Hebrew Bible, and the Iron Age Omride palace at Samaria has been excavated by archaeologists; no palace of David has been securely identified, and the historicity of Solomon is yet to be proven.

From the Late Hellenistic or Hasmonean and the Early Roman or Herodian period, there are many historical palaces like the two at Masada. Palaces of Herod the Great and his line of client kings and rulers have been further identified at several sites, including Herod&#x27;s royal palace at Jerusalem, the Hasmonean and Herodian winter palaces at Jericho, and Herod&#x27;s fortified palace and second administrative seat at Herodium in the Judean desert. Herod&#x27;s palace at Caesarea Maritima preserved its palatial function as the official residence of the Roman procurators and governors of In Judaea.

There are other much later palaces in the Old City of Jerusalem, such as the Mamluk Lady Tunshuk Palace.

There are a number of magnificent 19th-century buildings that are not considered &quot;palaces&quot;, but have the grandeur of a typical palace, such as the Yehudayoff-Hefetz residence, and the Sergei Courtyard in Jerusalem.

===Japan===
Of the palaces in Japan, many are located in Tokyo, such as the Tokyo Imperial Palace, which houses Japan&#x27;s royal family. The imperial palace was built on the site of Edo Castle. Other Japanese palaces are located in Kyoto, the former capital of Japan. Most Japanese palaces are built in a &quot;castle&quot; style formation, as a large pagoda. This helps reinforce the palace from earthquakes.

===Korea===
Korea has used many palaces since ancient times, although many have been destroyed. Palaces were built within, but not limited to Seoul, Kaeseong, Pyeongyang, Gyeongju, and Buyeo, as well as in various cities located outside of modern Korea. Today, only Joseon dynasty palaces are still intact, even then, very downsized due to years of colonialism, war, and neglect. The most emblematic of these surviving palaces is the Gyeongbokgung, the primary palace of the Joseon Dynasty. Other examples include the Changdeokgung, Changgyeonggung, Deoksugung, and Gyeonghuigung. All of these are from the Joseon dynasty and survive to this day, though many had to be reconstructed during the recent decades following their destruction during the colonial period. Other famous examples include the Manwoldae, the palace of the Goryeo dynasty located in Kaeseong, the Banwolseong, the palace of Silla located in Gyeongju, and Anhak Palace, the palace of Goguryeo located in Pyeongyang.

===Lebanon===

Palaces have existed in Lebanon since the time of the Phoenicians. Almost all of the palaces of ancient Phoenicia have been destroyed.

During the Renaissance palaces were built in Lebanon, especially in the Chouf region of Mount Lebanon. Lebanese palaces are very diverse architecturally, being influenced by Arabs, Italians, French, Persians, Turkish and East Asians. This is seen in the Beiteddine Palace, which is a mixture of traditional Lebanese, Italian, Arabic and Persian architecture.

Today in Lebanon there are at least ten buildings that can be classified as palaces, including the Beiteddine Palace, Grand Serail (one of the largest in the world), Baabda Palace, Sursock Museum, and Fakhreddine Palace.

===Malaysia===
Malaysia, a constituent of nine states, is ruled by hereditary sultans. Every five years, one sultan is elected as Yang di-Pertuan Agong (Supreme King), the head of state of Malaysia. The Yang di-Pertuan Agong has a palace, referred to as an &quot;istana&quot;. Each of the other sultans has their own &quot;istana&quot;, located in their state. Throughout the country they are sometimes called &quot;Istana Hinggap&quot;.

The Yang di-Pertuan Agong&#x27;s official residences are the Istana Negara, Jalan Duta; the Royal Museum; and Istana Melawati, a palace and retreat, located in Putrajaya. Some of the other official palaces are the Istana Besar, Istana Anak Bukit, Istana Pekan, Istana Maziah, Istana Alam Shah, Istana Balai Besar, Istana Besar Seri Menanti, Istana Iskandariah and Istana Arau. Several appointed governors, or Yang di-Pertua Negeri, are also assigned to have their official seat and residence such as The Astana, Istana Negeri Sabah and Seri Mutiara.

===Nepal===
Singha Durbar (literally, &quot;Lion Palace&quot;) in Kathmandu is the official seat of government of Nepal.
Narayanhiti Palace Museum was a residence and principal workplace of the reigning monarch of the Kingdom of Nepal. It was built by King Mahendra in 1961 under the design of Californian architect Benjamin Polk. After the 2006 revolution that overthrew the monarchy, this royal palace was turned into a public museum.

Older palaces include the Durbar Squares, which are enlisted as UNESCO World Heritage Sites. They are located in Kathmandu Valley in districts of Kathmandu, Bhaktapur and Lalitpur. In Kathmandu is Kathmandu Durbar Square, Bhaktapur Durbar Square in Bhaktapur, Patan Durbar Square in Lalitpur.
Kathmandu Durbar Square (Basantapur Darbar Kshetra) in front of the old royal palace of the former Kathmandu Kingdom is one of three durbar (royal palace) squares in the Kathmandu Valley in Nepal, all of which are UNESCO World Heritage Sites.

Several buildings in the Square collapsed due to a major earthquake on 25 April 2015. Durbar Square was surrounded with spectacular architecture and vividly showcases the skills of the Newar artists and craftsmen over several centuries. The Royal Palace was originally at Dattaraya square and was later moved to Durbar square.

The Kathmandu Durbar Square held the palaces of the Malla and Shah kings who ruled over the city. Along with these palaces, the square surrounds quadrangles, revealing courtyards and temples. It is known as Hanuman Dhoka Durbar Square, a name derived from a statue of Hanuman, the monkey devotee of Lord Ram, at the entrance of the palace.

Bhaktapur Durbar Square is the plaza in front of the royal palace of the old Bhaktapur Kingdom. It is also a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

The Bhaktapur Durbar Square is located in the current town of Bhaktapur, also known as Bhadgaon, which lies 13 km east of Kathmandu. While the complex consists of at least four distinct squares (Durbar Square, Taumadhi Square, Dattatreya Square and Pottery Square), the whole area is informally known as the Bhakapur Durbar Square and is a highly visited site in the Kathmandu Valley. This palace consists of 55 windows so it is also known as &#x27;55 Windowed Palace&#x27;.

Patan Durbar Square is situated at the centre of the city of Lalitpur in Nepal. It is also one of the three durbar squares in the Kathmandu Valley, all of which are UNESCO World Heritage Sites. One of its attraction is the ancient royal palace where the Malla kings of Lalitpur resided.

The Durbar Square is a marvel of Newa architecture. The floor of the square is tiled with red bricks. There are many temples and idols in the area. The main temples are aligned opposite of the western face of the palace. The entrance of the temples faces east, towards the palace. There is also a bell situated in the alignment beside the main temples. The Square also holds old Newari residential houses. There are various other temples and structures in and around Patan Durbar Square built by the Newa People.

===Philippines===
In pre-Hispanic Philippines, Filipinos built large wooden residences for the ancient nobility and royalty (such as lakans, wangs, rajahs and datus) called &quot;torogan&quot; or &quot;bahay lakan&quot; (&quot;king&#x27;s house&quot;). The windows of the &quot;torogan&quot; are slits and richly framed in wood panels with &quot;okir&quot; designs located in front of the house. The communal kitchen is half a meter lower than the main house and is both used for cooking and eating. The distinct high gable roof of the &quot;torogan&quot;, thin at the apex and gracefully flaring out to the eaves, sits on a huge structures enclosed by slabs of timber and lifted more than two meters above the ground by a huge trunk of a tree that was set on a rock. The end floor beams lengthen as panolongs the seemed to lift up the whole house. The torogan is suffused with decorations. There were diongal at the apex of the roof, also an intricately carved tinai a walai, &quot;okir&quot; designs in the floor, on windows and on panolongs.

The people in the southern part of Philippines built the same wooden palaces such as the &quot;langgal&quot; of the Tausug. In the Sultanate of Sulu, a palace was built for the sultans and was named Astana Darul Jambangan (white adobe), which was destroyed by a typhoon in 1912. A replica of the royal palace has been rebuilt as an attraction in Mt. Bayug Eco-Cultural Park in the town of Talipao, Sulu.

During the Spanish era, the government of the Spanish East Indies built a succession of palaces in and around Manila for high colonial officials and religious authorities. The most famous of these is the 18th-century Malacañang Palace, which originally housed Spanish and American governors-general and, since the Commonwealth, the president of the Philippines.

Former president and strongman Ferdinand Marcos had Coconut Palace constructed in 1978 to showcase the country&#x27;s varied uses for the coconut. It serves as the home and office of the vice-president. In 2004, President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo converted the former &quot;Aduana&quot; (customs house) in Cebu City into a small palace, called Malacañang sa Sugbo.

===Thailand===
===Turkey===

The enormous Topkapı Palace complex in Istanbul was begun in 1459, and with its many additions survived almost completely intact until it was turned into a museum in 1923. It was the centre of government as well as the residence of the Ottoman Caliphs. It combined aspects of the typical Asian form of a group of pavilions set in a large walled garden (part is now Gülhane Park) with the European style of a single massive building with courtyards. Visitors passed through a series of courtyards, originally lined with hundreds of soldiers along the arcades, with only the most important or favoured reaching the Fourth Courtyard and the imperial residential quarters.

By the 19th century Topkapı was largely abandoned as a residence in favour of the new Dolmabahçe Palace and Yıldız Palace, as well as smaller Ottoman palaces in Istanbul, some summer retreats and the like. These were in essentially European architectural styles.

===Vietnam===


==Europe==
===Belgium===
The city of Bruges:
The Gruuthusemuseum is a museum of applied arts in Bruges, located in the late medieval Gruuthuse, the Palace of Louis de Gruuthuse. The collection ranges from the 15th to the 19th century.

Presumably in the 13th century, a rich family from Bruges received the monopoly to levy taxes on gruit, and built storage for it. The building was changed in the early fifteenth century by Jan IV van der Aa to a luxury house for his family, which subsequently changed its name to &quot;Van Gruuthuse&quot; (&quot;From the Gruit house&quot;). His son Louis de Gruuthuse added a second wing to the house, and in 1472 a &quot;chapel&quot;. This is in a bridge which connects the house to the adjacent Church of Our Lady, Bruges, so that members of the household could see the high altar from wide windows in the room. However the building was very heavily restored in the 19th century.

The city of Mechelen houses several palaces:

&quot;Hof van Kamerijk&quot; or &quot;Palace of Margaret of York&quot;, 15th-century building. Also called &quot;Keizershof&quot; (English; literally &quot;Emperor&#x27;s Court&quot;) because several royal children resided here and received education at this court, including Charles V (Holy Roman Emperor and Archduke of Austria, King of Spain and Duke of Burgundy)

&quot;Hof van Savoye&quot; or &quot;Palace of Margaret of Austria&quot;, early 16th-century building and one of the first Renaissance buildings in northern Europe.

The &quot;Hof van Busleyden&quot;, early 16th-century Renaissance palace of Hieronymus van Busleyden; The &quot;Archbishop &#x27;s palace&quot;, 18th-century building and the official seat of the Archbishop of the Roman Catholic province Belgium; The &quot;Hof van Palermo&quot;, 15th-century palace of Jan I Carondelet; The &quot;Hof van Hoogstraten&quot;, 16th-century palace of Antoon I van Lalaing; The &quot;Hof van Nassau&quot;, 15th-century building which served as temporary court of Margaret of York when she arrived in Mechelen after her marriage with Charles the Bold; The &quot;Hof van Cortenbach&quot;, 16th-century building; The &quot;Hof van Coloma&quot;, 18th-century palace of Jean Ernest Coloma, Baron of St-Pieters Leeuw and member of the Coloma family

The city of Brussels has also several remaining and notable palaces: &quot;The Royal Palace of Brussels&quot;, the official palace of the King and Queen of the Belgians, The Egmont palace, The Palace of Prince Charles Alexander Emanuel of Lorraine and Hotel Errera. The Palace of Coudenberg, the main Renaissance palace and seat of government power, burnt down completely in 1731.

===France===
In France there has been a clear distinction between a château and a &quot;palais&quot;. The palace has always been urban, like the &quot;Palais de la Cité&quot; in Paris, which was the royal palace of France and is now the supreme court of justice of France, or the palace of the Popes at Avignon.

The château, by contrast, has always been in rural settings, supported by its demesne, even when it was no longer actually fortified. Speakers of English think of the &quot;Palace of Versailles&quot; because it was the residence of the king of France, and the king was the source of power, though the building has always remained the &quot;Château de Versailles&quot; for the French, and the seat of government under the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot; remained the Palais du Louvre. The Louvre had begun as a fortified &quot;Château du Louvre&quot; on the edge of Paris, but as the seat of government and shorn of its fortified architecture and then completely surrounded by the city, it developed into the &quot;Palais du Louvre&quot;.

The &quot;hôtel particulier&quot; remains the term for an urban residence sited &quot;entre cour et jardin&quot;, behind a forecourt and opening onto a garden; when fronting directly on streets, they are &quot;maisons&quot;, &quot;houses&quot;. Bishops always had a &quot;palais&quot; in the town of their diocese, an &quot;hôtel&quot; in other towns, though they might possess &quot;chateaux&quot;.

The usage is essentially the same in Italy, Spain and Portugal, as well as the former Austrian Empire. In Vienna, Austria, all large mansions belonging to aristocratic or very wealthy families were traditionally called &quot;palais&quot;, but this never applied to imperial palaces themselves which were called &quot;Burg&quot; within the city and &quot;Schloss&quot; when outside it. In Germany, the wider term was a relatively recent importation and was used rather more restrictively.

===Germany===
The German term for &quot;palace&quot; is &quot;Palast&quot;, which is used especially for large palatial complexes and gardens. Large country houses are typically called &quot;schloss&quot; (&quot;chateaux&quot; or &quot;castle&quot; in English).

Germany offers a variety of more than 25,000 castles and palaces and thousands of manor houses. The country is known for its fairy tale-like scenery palatial buildings, such as Sanssouci, Linderhof Palace, Herrenchiemsee, Schwetzingen, Nordkirchen and Schwerin Palace. Many of these buildings have a history of over 1000 years, ranging from fortifications to royal residences. Many German castles after the Middle Ages were mainly built as royal or ducal palaces rather than as a fortified building.

===Hungary===

In Hungary distinction is made between urban and rural residencies. Only the urban residencies of the higher aristocracy were called &quot;palota&quot; (palace); rural stately homes were named &quot;kastély&quot; (mansion), or in case of smaller country houses, &quot;kúria&quot;. Noble landowner families, like the House of Esterházy, often had several mansions in the countryside and palaces in towns. The office of the president of the Republic of Hungary, Sándor Palace, was the residence of the Sándor family in the 19th century. Royal residencies were also called palaces, for example, the Early Renaissance summer palace of King Matthias Corvinus in Visegrád or Buda Castle which was called &quot;Királyi-palota&quot; (Royal Palace). In the second half of the 19th century, splendid new townhouses of the bourgeoisie on Andrássy út and elsewhere in Budapest were named palaces. A typical example is the Art Nouveau Gresham Palace, which was built by an insurance company. Grand public buildings and even blocks of flats of higher standard were regularly called palaces (the contemporary term of the latter were &quot;bérpalota&quot; meaning rent palace). For contemporary buildings the term is seldom used with the notable exemption of the Palace of Arts.

===Ireland===
In Ireland, the term &quot;palace&quot; () is rarely used. The main royal residence in Ireland, Dublin Castle, was never called a palace, nor is Hillsborough Castle, the main royal residence of Northern Ireland.

The word &quot;palace&quot; is largely restricted to large official dwellings for Church of Ireland bishops:
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace at Achadh Úr (modern Freshford), home of the medieval Bishop of Freshford
*Braganza, Carlow, home of the Bishops of Kildare and Leighlin
*Archbishop&#x27;s Palace, Cashel, County Tipperary, home of the Archbishop of Cashel and Emly; built in 1732, now the Cashel Palace Hotel.
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Cork, home of the Bishop of Cork, Cloyne and Ross
*The Palace, Cobh, former home of the Bishop of Cloyne
*Palace of the Archbishop of Dublin at Saint Sepulchre&#x27;s, former home of the Archbishop of Dublin
* Bishop&#x27;s Palace at Elphin, former home of the Bishop of Elphin
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Ennis, also called Westbourne, home of the Bishop of Killaloe.
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace of Kilkenny, a summer house for the Bishops of Ossory, built by Richard Pococke
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Killarney, former home of the Bishop of Ardfert and Aghadoe
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Kilmore, County Cavan, also called the &quot;See House&quot;, home of the Bishop of Kilmore.
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Limerick, former home of the Bishop of Limerick
*Church of Ireland Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Raphoe
*Archbishop&#x27;s Palace, Tuam, built in 1678 and burnt in 1691; Grove House now stands on the site. Saint Jarlath&#x27;s, built , later served as archbishop&#x27;s palace.
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace Waterford, formerly home of the Bishop of Waterford and Lismore 
*Archbishop&#x27;s Palace, Armagh, formerly home of Archbishop of Armagh

There are also some Catholic bishops&#x27; palaces:
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Ballina, County Mayo, home of the Catholic Bishop of Killala.
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Cork, on Redemption Road, home of the Roman Catholic Bishop of Cork and Ross.
*Archbishop&#x27;s Palace, Drumcondra, home of the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Dublin. It is today referred to as simply the Archbishop&#x27;s House.
*Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Longford, home of the Bishop of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise.
*Roman Catholic Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Mullingar, dwelling of the Roman Catholic Bishop of Meath
*Roman Catholic Bishop&#x27;s Palace, Raphoe
*Archbishop&#x27;s Palace, Thurles, dwelling of the Catholic Archbishop of Cashel and Emly.

===Italy===

In Italy, any urban building built as a grand residence is a &quot;palazzo&quot;; these are often no larger than a Victorian townhouse. It was not necessary to be a nobleman for one&#x27;s house to be considered a &quot;palazzo&quot;; the hundreds of &quot;palazzi&quot; in Venice nearly all belonged to the patrician class of the city. In the Middle Ages these also functioned as warehouses and places of business, as well as homes. Each family&#x27;s &quot;palazzo&quot; was a hive that contained all the family members, though it might not always show a grand architectural public front. In the 20th century, &quot;palazzo&quot; in Italian came to apply by extension to any large fine apartment building, as many old &quot;palazzi&quot; were converted to this use.

Bishop&#x27;s townhouses were always &quot;palazzi&quot;, and the seat of a localized regime would also be so called. Many former capitals display a Ducal Palace, the seat of the local duke or lord. In Florence (just as for other strong communal governments), the seat of government was known as Palazzo della Signoria. When the Medici were made Grand Dukes of Tuscany, however, the centre of power shifted to their new residence in Palazzo Pitti, and the old centre of power began to be referred to as the Palazzo Vecchio.

Shops on the ground floor and flats at the top of a modern &quot;palazzo&quot; are not at all incongruous: historically, the ground floors of even a great family&#x27;s &quot;palazzo&quot; could be trade and domestic offices often open to servants, tradesmen, customers and the public, while the smartest and most prestigious floor (known as the &quot;piano nobile&quot;) was kept for the family along with the upper floors and apartments, all of which were considered cleaner and safer than those on the ground floor. There were (and are) often separate, sometimes external, stairs to the humblest attic rooms and roofs used by the staff.

The most important royal &quot;palazzi&quot; in Italy are those in Caserta, Milan, Naples, Palermo, Turin, as well as the Quirinale Palace in Rome.

===Malta===

Until the sixteenth century, Malta was part of the Kingdom of Sicily, and the capital Mdina housed many palaces for the nobility, such as Palazzo Falson and Palazzo Santa Sofia. After the arrival of the Order of Saint John in 1530, the knights settled in Birgu, where part of Fort St Angelo was used as a palace for the Grand Master. The knights themselves lived in auberges, but these were more large houses rather than palaces.

When the Order began to build a new capital Valletta in 1566, a new Grandmaster&#x27;s Palace and a series of new auberges were built. The auberges in Valletta are much larger than their counterparts in Birgu, and can be considered as palaces. The most important auberge still standing is Auberge de Castille, which currently houses the Office of the Prime Minister of Malta. Over the years, the Grand Masters also built a number of large residences in the countryside, such as Verdala Palace and San Anton Palace. Both of these now serve as official residences of the president of Malta.

The Archbishop of Malta has a palace in Mdina. The inquisitor also had a palace in Birgu and another in Girgenti until the abolition of the inquisition in 1798. The nobility, upper classes and individual knights of the Order built a number of private palaces, especially in Valletta, but also in the countryside. There are other palaces built by the nobility, such as, most notably Palazzo Parisio in Valletta and Palazzo Dragonara in St Julians.

===Poland===

The former Kingdom of Poland, known as the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, once spanned over , which allowed the nobles to construct their residences anywhere from modern-day Poland to as far as southern Estonia. The Polish aristocracy (szlachta) greatly favoured Baroque and Rococo architecture of the period. Most notable architect specializing in those styles was Dutch-born Tylman van Gameren (also Tylman Gamerski), who designed several renowned palaces, for both kings and nobles, throughout the Commonwealth. Tylman also left behind a lifelong legacy of buildings that are regarded as gems of Polish Baroque architecture. His most famous works include Krasiński Palace and Łazienki Palace, both in Warsaw, and Branicki Palace in Białystok. Other palatial architects in Poland at the time were Chrystian Piotr Aigner, Szymon Bogumił Zug, Domenico Merlini and Johann Christian Schuch.

At present, Poland possesses hundreds of varied-style palaces and residences designed by architects from all over the world. Some best examples are Wilanów Palace, Presidential Palace, Oliwa Abbot&#x27;s Palace, Copper-Roof Palace, Palace of the Ministry of Revenues and Treasury, Rogalin, Jabłonowski Palace, Zamoyski Palace in Kozłówka, Lanckoroński Palace in Kurozwęki, Nieborów Palace and the Palace in Otwock Wielki. There are also several palaces resembling castles or medieval Gothic residences, most notably Moszna Castle, Książ Castle and the Warsaw Royal Castle.

===Portugal===

Due to its relatively small geography, most of Portugal&#x27;s palaces are former royal residences. Some examples of Portuguese palaces are Mafra National Palace, Pena National Palace, Belém Palace, Ajuda National Palace, Palácio das Necessidades, Mateus Palace, Palace Hotel of Bussaco, Palácio da Regaleira, and Palácio da Brejoeira.
===Romania===

Palaces in Romania, as elsewhere in Europe, were originally built for royalty, nobles and bishops. Three former royal palaces in Romania are the Cotroceni Palace (now the presidential residence); the Royal Palace in Bucharest, which now houses the National Museum of Art of Romania; and the Elisabeta Palace. Although Romania is no longer a constitutional monarchy, the current head of the former Romanian royal family, Princess Margareta of Romania, continues to reside at Elisabeta Palace in Bucharest.

Other palaces include the Crețulescu Palace in Bucharest, built for the Crețulescu family, and Peles palace, built by King Carol I of Romania as a royal residence. 

The Palace of the Parliament (Casa Poporului) from Bucharest and the Palace of Culture in Iași (Palatul Culturii) are large government buildings, both purpose-built solely for government and public use.

===Russia===
The first palaces in Russia were built about a thousand years ago for the Grand Dukes of Kiev. These are not preserved, having been destroyed. Classical palaces were built during the reign of Tsar Peter the Great and his immediate successors. Examples of Russian palaces include:
* the Winter Palace (1732–1917) in Saint Petersburg, was the official residence of the Russian monarchs
* the Mariinsky Palace (1710–1727) in Saint Petersburg
* the Grand Kremlin Palace (1837–1849) of the Moscow Kremlin in Moscow
* the Peterhof Palace (1709–1755) in Petergof
* the Catherine Palace (1857–1862) in Tsarskoye Selo
* the Gatchina Palace (1766–1781) in Gatchina
===Scandinavia===

The three Scandinavian countries of Denmark, Norway and Sweden all have long monarchic histories and possess several palaces. In Denmark Christiansborg Palace in Copenhagen was built as a royal palace, but is now only used for royal receptions; Amalienborg Palace has been the Danish royal residence since 1794. In Norway the Royal Palace in Oslo has been used as the royal residence since 1849. In Sweden the large Stockholm Palace was built in 1760, and remains the official royal residence, but at the current time is only used for official purposes while the Swedish royal family resides in the more modest Drottningholm Palace.

===Serbia===
The two dynasties of post-Ottoman Serbia, Karađorđević and Obrenović, built numerous royal residences throughout the country. The most prominent are to be found in the capital, Belgrade: the Stari Dvor and Novi Dvor (Old Palace and New Palace, respectively) in the downtown, and the Dedinje Royal Compound which includes the Kraljevski Dvor the Beli Dvor (Royal Palace and White Palace, respectively) in the suburb of Dedinje.

===Spain===
With over a thousand years of monarchic history, Spain has many palaces of its own that were built for different monarchs or nobles. Among these palaces is the Royal Palace of Madrid, also referred to as the Palacio Real. The palace is the largest palace in Europe with over 2,800 rooms but at the current time is of use for only governmental business while the royal family resides in the smaller Palacio de la Zarzuela.

In addition to the Royal Palace of Madrid, Alcázar of Seville (which mixes, with the delicate Moorish filigree, European Christian architectural styles), the Alhambra, the Monastery of San Lorenzo de El Escorial and the Royal Palace of Aranjuez, fine baroque palace is surrounded by gardens. Currently, the royal family and prime minister live in the more modest Palace of Zarzuela and Palace of Moncloa, respectively.

===United Kingdom===
Although many English country houses can be called &quot;palatial&quot; in size and the richness of their contents, in the United Kingdom, by tacit agreement, the word &quot;palace&quot; is reserved for official residences (present or former) of the royal family or bishops, regardless of whether located in town or country. However, not all palaces use the term in their name – see Windsor Castle. Thus the Palace of Beaulieu gained its name precisely when Thomas Boleyn sold it to Henry VIII in 1517. Previously, it had been known as Walkfares, but like several other palaces including Hampton Court Palace, the name stuck even once the royal connection ended.

Blenheim Palace was built, on a different site, in the grounds of the disused royal Palace of Woodstock, and the name was also part of the extraordinary honour when the house was given by a grateful nation to a great general, the Duke of Marlborough. Along with several royal and episcopal palaces in the countryside, Blenheim does demonstrate that &quot;palace&quot; has no specific urban connotation in English. On the use of the term &quot;palace&quot; in the UK, Buckingham Palace was known as Buckingham House before it was acquired by the monarchy.

Blenheim Palace (in England) and Hamilton Palace (in Scotland, demolished in 1927) are the only non-royal and non-episcopal residences to have the word &quot;palace&quot; in their name, other than Dalkeith Palace in Scotland, which used to be the seat of the Dukes of Buccleuch (who descend from Charles II of England).

===Other===

In continental Europe royal and episcopal palaces were not merely residences; the clerks who administered the realm or the diocese laboured there as well. (To this day many bishops&#x27; palaces house both their family apartments and their official offices.) However, unlike the &quot;Palais du Justice&quot; which is often encountered in the French-speaking world, modern British public administration buildings are never called &quot;palaces&quot;; although the formal name for the &quot;Houses of Parliament&quot; is the Palace of Westminster, this reflects Westminster&#x27;s former role as a royal residence and centre of administration.

In more recent years, the word has been used in a more informal sense for other large, impressive buildings, such as The Crystal Palace of 1851 (an immensely large, glazed hall erected for The Great Exhibition) and modern arenas-convention centers like Alexandra Palace.

The largest in the world is the Palace of the Parliament in Bucharest, Romania. Built during the socialist regime, no effort or expense was spared to raise this colossal neo-classic building.

== See also ==

* Archbishop&#x27;s Palace (disambiguation)
* Castle
* Great house
* Imperial castle (&quot;Reichsburg&quot;)
* &quot;Kaiserpfalz&quot; (or &quot;Königspfalz&quot;)
* List of palaces
* Manor house
* Official residence
* &quot;Palas&quot;
* Palatine Hill
* Real estate
* World&#x27;s largest palace

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="2" end="8" title="Palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="84" end="97" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="143" end="149" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="153" end="163" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="194" end="199" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="219" end="232" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="258" end="266" title="Roman Empire" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="605" end="616" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926878" start="1055" end="1067" title="movie palace" label="movie palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="1113" end="1119" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="1271" end="1281" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1328" end="1333" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="1340" end="1348" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palātium"/>
<link wikidata="Q185158" start="1379" end="1398" title="seven hills of Rome" label="seven hills of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="1540" end="1555" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q674950" start="1670" end="1686" title="residential area" label="residential area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1709" end="1717" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="1862" end="1869" title="Roman triumph" label="triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="1885" end="1891" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="1921" end="1925" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q622438" start="1941" end="1952" title="Domus Aurea" label="Domus Aurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="2149" end="2162" title="neighbourhood" label="neighbourhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q160424" start="2269" end="2284" title="Paul the Deacon" label="Paul the Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q660642" start="2419" end="2441" title="Historia Langobardorum" label="Historia Langobardorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="2476" end="2487" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q300739" start="2547" end="2553" title="Palace of Aachen" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="2563" end="2569" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="2589" end="2595" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q829300" start="2785" end="2790" title="palas" label="palas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796442" start="2851" end="2862" title="Kaiserpfalz" label="Kaiserpfalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q256915" start="2886" end="2896" title="Great Hall" label="Great Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2992" end="2998" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="3014" end="3031" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="3058" end="3066" title="Prince-elector" label="Electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="3222" end="3232" title="monarchy" label="monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="3615" end="3622" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q237614" start="3635" end="3641" title="Nimrud" label="Nimrud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680" start="3646" end="3653" title="Nineveh" label="Nineveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q28926" start="3662" end="3669" title="History of Iran" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="3681" end="3691" title="Persepolis" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180773" start="3696" end="3700" title="Susa" label="Susa"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="3706" end="3713" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q61059595" start="3761" end="3775" title="Minoan palaces" label="Minoan palaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="3984" end="3991" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q217379" start="3993" end="3999" title="Tiryns" label="Tiryns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263152" start="4004" end="4009" title="Pylos" label="Pylos"/>
<link wikidata="Q657117" start="4423" end="4430" title="megaron" label="megaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263152" start="4622" end="4627" title="Pylos" label="Pylos"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907580" start="4834" end="4852" title="Palace of Domitian" label="Palace of Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q622438" start="5078" end="5089" title="Domus Aurea" label="Domus Aurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="5123" end="5127" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q322287" start="5257" end="5281" title="Diocletian&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Diocletian&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663" start="5285" end="5299" title="Split, Croatia" label="Split, Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5412" end="5423" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="5638" end="5652" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5765" end="5773" title="Medieval" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="5817" end="5831" title="post-classical" label="post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="5861" end="5875" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Ashanti Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q722051" start="5911" end="5934" title="Anglo-Ashanti wars" label="Third Anglo-Ashanti War"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="5940" end="5947" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Ashanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="5964" end="5970" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q490961" start="6013" end="6034" title="Thomas Edward Bowdich" label="Thomas Edward Bowdich"/>
<link wikidata="Q951262" start="6039" end="6052" title="Winwood Reade" label="Winwood Reade"/>
<link wikidata="Q143463" start="6391" end="6407" title="Palais des Papes" label="Palais des Papes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="6411" end="6418" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="6571" end="6585" title="Avignon Papacy" label="Avignon Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075988" start="6639" end="6652" title="Louvre Palace" label="Louvre Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6755" end="6771" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="6775" end="6789" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q475338" start="6795" end="6825" title="Great Palace of Constantinople" label="Great Palace of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003322" start="6827" end="6843" title="Boukoleon Palace" label="Boukoleon Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q879941" start="6849" end="6869" title="Palace of Blachernae" label="Palace of Blachernae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472490" start="6875" end="6904" title="Palace of the Porphyrogenitus" label="Palace of the Porphyrogenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="7047" end="7055" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q134165" start="7122" end="7136" title="Oscar Niemeyer" label="Oscar Niemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330391" start="7142" end="7157" title="Palácio da Alvorada" label="Alvorada Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="7165" end="7183" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176750" start="7187" end="7210" title="President of Brazil" label="Brazil&amp;#x27;s president"/>
<link wikidata="Q496950" start="7216" end="7231" title="Palácio do Planalto" label="Planalto Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917430" start="7263" end="7276" title="Palácio do Jaburu" label="Jaburu Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978540" start="7306" end="7334" title="Vice President of Brazil" label="Brazil&amp;#x27;s vice-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="7341" end="7355" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="7383" end="7400" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="7409" end="7425" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749982" start="7477" end="7509" title="Palácio de São Cristóvão" label="Imperial Palace of São Cristóvão"/>
<link wikidata="Q617457" start="7544" end="7566" title="Emperor of Brazil" label="Brazil&amp;#x27;s emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361206" start="7572" end="7585" title="Paço Imperial" label="Paço Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813706" start="7618" end="7634" title="Guanabara Palace" label="Guanabara Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q464449" start="7656" end="7691" title="Isabel, Princess Imperial of Brazil" label="Isabel, Princess Imperial of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q189043" start="7753" end="7763" title="Petropolis" label="Petropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887049" start="7865" end="7882" title="Museu Imperial" label="Petrópolis Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128890" start="7891" end="7907" title="Palácio do Grão-Pará" label="Grão-Pará Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="7926" end="7932" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q494360" start="7934" end="7950" title="Government House" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="8002" end="8019" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="Canadian monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8032" end="8040" title="Viceroy#Commonwealth realms" label="viceroys"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="8046" end="8063" title="Governor General of Canada" label="governors general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970061" start="8072" end="8092" title="Lieutenant governor (Canada)" label="lieutenant governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151874" start="8363" end="8374" title="Rideau Hall" label="Rideau Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="8545" end="8551" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407372" start="8755" end="8767" title="Sussex Drive" label="Sussex Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093313" start="9129" end="9148" title="Citadelle of Quebec" label="Citadelle of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067355" start="9305" end="9316" title="Cap Diamant" label="Cap Diamant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726825" start="9332" end="9349" title="Plains of Abraham" label="Plains of Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="9353" end="9364" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="9366" end="9372" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114279" start="9622" end="9632" title="Old Québec" label="Old Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544432" start="9890" end="9897" title="Lieutenant Governor of Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9899" end="9940" title="Government House (Ontario)#Fourth Government House (Chorley Park)" label="repurposed in 1937 and demolished in 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238289" start="9943" end="9949" title="Lieutenant Governor of Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410305" start="9951" end="9976" title="Government House (Quebec)" label="destroyed by fire in 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176422" start="9982" end="9989" title="Lieutenant Governor of Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588889" start="9991" end="10044" title="Government House (Alberta)" label="closed in 1938 and repurchased and repurposed in 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="10077" end="10083" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="10085" end="10096" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="10191" end="10213" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="10457" end="10462" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13695" start="10523" end="10535" title="Tenochtitlan" label="Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="10623" end="10636" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q60176" start="11207" end="11214" title="Yucatan" label="Yucatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="11233" end="11238" title="Mayan civilization" label="Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181427" start="11304" end="11312" title="Palenque" label="Palenque"/>
<link wikidata="Q371384" start="11330" end="11335" title="Kʼinich Janaabʼ Pakal" label="Pakal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517884" start="11370" end="11385" title="National Palace (Mexico)" label="National Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348507" start="11467" end="11491" title="Plaza de la Constitución" label="Plaza de la Constitución"/>
<link wikidata="Q371334" start="11779" end="11800" title="Second Mexican Empire" label="Second Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072510" start="12074" end="12092" title="Chapultepec Castle" label="Chapultepec Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q523194" start="12119" end="12135" title="Chapultepec Park" label="Chapultepec Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940502" start="12172" end="12198" title="Museo Nacional de Historia" label="National Museum of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="12237" end="12250" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="12293" end="12315" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian I of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="12333" end="12350" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154971" start="12376" end="12393" title="Charlotte of Belgium" label="Carlota of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12971" start="12407" end="12427" title="Leopold I of Belgium" label="Leopold I of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="12506" end="12518" title="Napoleon III of France" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q168659" start="12535" end="12559" title="Franz Xaver Winterhalter" label="Franz Xaver Winterhalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="12659" end="12670" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="12676" end="12694" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="12702" end="12711" title="President of the United States" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12763" end="12777" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="12778" end="12785" title="bishops" label="bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="12903" end="12924" title="Hawaiian Kingdom" label="Hawaiian royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q423525" start="12958" end="12972" title="ʻIolani Palace" label="ʻIolani Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965060" start="12977" end="12991" title="Hānaiakamalama" label="Hānaiakamalama"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="13017" end="13034" title="Hawaiian monarchy" label="Hawaiian monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="13038" end="13046" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333366" start="13048" end="13062" title="Hulihee Palace" label="Hulihee Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q627970" start="13066" end="13085" title="Kailua, Hawaii County, Hawaii" label="Kailua-Kona, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q378819" start="13091" end="13113" title="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace (Williamsburg, Virginia)" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="13117" end="13129" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112521" start="13188" end="13202" title="Colonial government in the Thirteen Colonies" label="royal governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="13211" end="13229" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331450" start="13231" end="13243" title="Tryon Palace" label="Tryon Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002490" start="13247" end="13255" title="New Bern, North Carolina" label="New Bern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334526" start="13338" end="13364" title="Province of North Carolina" label="Province of North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442235" start="13374" end="13397" title="Palace of the Governors" label="Palace of the Governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q38555" start="13401" end="13421" title="Santa Fe, New Mexico" label="Santa Fe, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6564718" start="13437" end="13467" title="Spanish Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Spanish Governor&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="13471" end="13482" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802963" start="13589" end="13596" title="mansion" label="mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q378143" start="13739" end="13752" title="Hearst Castle" label="Hearst Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q585521" start="13761" end="13776" title="Biltmore Estate" label="Biltmore Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q283417" start="13810" end="13829" title="Palacio Legislativo (Uruguay)" label="Palacio Legislativo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501988" start="13871" end="13891" title="General Assembly of Uruguay" label="Uruguayan Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q607224" start="13914" end="13935" title="Miraflores Palace" label="Palacio de Miraflores"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610474" start="14056" end="14070" title="Menelik Palace" label="Menelik Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788970" start="14144" end="14170" title="prime minister of Ethiopia" label="prime minister of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q829533" start="14320" end="14340" title="List of emperors of Ethiopia" label="emperors of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114056501" start="14422" end="14432" title="Unity Park" label="Unity Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q110235970" start="14454" end="14473" title="Palace of Olowo of Owo" label="Palace of the Olowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10290758" start="14475" end="14480" title="Nigerian traditional rulers" label="ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="14488" end="14494" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788128" start="14495" end="14498" title="Owo" label="Owo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="14507" end="14514" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q682571" start="14662" end="14672" title="Kano State" label="Kano State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457094" start="14689" end="14700" title="Gidan Rumfa" label="Gidan Rumfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123512" start="14725" end="14737" title="Kano Emirate" label="Emir of Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q320704" start="14795" end="14805" title="Benin City" label="Benin City"/>
<link wikidata="Q682704" start="14826" end="14835" title="Edo State" label="Edo State"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406792" start="14854" end="14886" title="Royal Palace of the Oba of Benin" label="Royal Palace of the Oba of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q887176" start="14912" end="14924" title="Oba of Benin" label="Oba of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935489" start="15045" end="15053" title="Eweka II" label="Eweka II"/>
<link wikidata="Q528679" start="15210" end="15216" title="Nyanza, Rwanda" label="Nyanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q888072" start="15396" end="15423" title="List of kings of Rwanda" label="traditional ruler of Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2203166" start="15643" end="15653" title="Mutara III Rudahigwa" label="Mutara III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110327" start="15730" end="15748" title="Rwesero Art Museum" label="Rwesero Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q473748" start="15810" end="15817" title="Buganda" label="Buganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894" start="15865" end="15872" title="Kampala" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="15903" end="15914" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="15930" end="15935" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q902222" start="16058" end="16075" title="Darul Aman Palace" label="Darul Aman Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="16207" end="16214" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q733610" start="16273" end="16289" title="Erebuni fortress" label="Erebuni fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="16293" end="16300" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q317030" start="16353" end="16366" title="Argishti I of Urartu" label="King Argisthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185068" start="16428" end="16436" title="Urartu" label="Urartian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208404" start="16457" end="16487" title="Kingdom of Armenia (antiquity)" label="Kingdom of Armenia (antiquity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639920" start="16615" end="16627" title="Yervandashat (ancient city)" label="Yervandashat"/>
<link wikidata="Q653865" start="16669" end="16676" title="Orontid" label="Orontid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382437" start="16695" end="16705" title="Orontes IV" label="Orontes IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q597494" start="16732" end="16748" title="Artaxiad dynasty" label="Artaxiad dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q201303" start="16774" end="16792" title="Tigranes the great" label="Tigranes the great"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170270" start="16813" end="16823" title="persianate" label="persianate"/>
<link wikidata="Q720583" start="16858" end="16870" title="Tigranocerta" label="Tigranocerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q684072" start="16900" end="16915" title="Temple of Garni" label="Temple of Garni"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399794" start="17093" end="17143" title="Khosrovidukht (sister of Tiridates III of Armenia)" label="Khosrovidukht (sister of Tiridates III of Armenia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q704151" start="17151" end="17177" title="Arsacid dynasty of Armenia" label="Arsacid dynasty of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q653734" start="17295" end="17303" title="Nakharar" label="Nakharar"/>
<link wikidata="Q678502" start="17342" end="17359" title="Grigor Mamikonian" label="Grigor Mamikonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144232" start="17394" end="17399" title="Aruch" label="Aruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42872017" start="17409" end="17419" title="Aruchavank" label="Aruchavank"/>
<link wikidata="Q193685" start="17494" end="17498" title="tufa" label="tufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622868" start="17549" end="17576" title="Bagratid Armenia" label="Bagratid kingdom of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q546010" start="17578" end="17581" title="Ani" label="Ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996516" start="17671" end="17681" title="Kamsarakan" label="Kamsarakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164435" start="17844" end="17852" title="Bagratuni dynasty" label="Bagratid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860299" start="18028" end="18049" title="Armenian architecture" label="Armenian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q195422" start="18091" end="18106" title="Menüçehr Mosque" label="Manuchir Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="18267" end="18277" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="18291" end="18298" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Seljuks"/>
<link wikidata="Q19818171" start="18346" end="18361" title="Zakarids–Mkhargrdzeli" label="Zakarian family"/>
<link wikidata="Q154667" start="18368" end="18376" title="Kingdom of Georgia" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q244007" start="18377" end="18388" title="Queen Tamar" label="Queen Tamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863018" start="18405" end="18420" title="Zakarid Armenia" label="Zakarid Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q457057" start="18489" end="18504" title="Amberd Fortress" label="Amberd Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623932" start="18536" end="18554" title="Dashtadem Fortress" label="Dashtadem Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="18591" end="18598" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="18659" end="18665" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q891146" start="18730" end="18737" title="Ottoman Armenia" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793338" start="18742" end="18749" title="Iranian Armenia (1502–1828)" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q484195" start="18775" end="18789" title="Timurid Empire" label="Timurid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197161" start="18853" end="18858" title="Melik" label="Melik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778131" start="18953" end="18967" title="Dizak" label="Dizak Melikdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636177" start="19001" end="19005" title="Tuğ" label="Togh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224276" start="19074" end="19083" title="Khnatsakh" label="Khnatsakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12840535" start="19104" end="19123" title="Melik Haykaz Palace" label="Melik Haykaz Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803288" start="19127" end="19137" title="Hüsülü, Lachin" label="Melikashen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670423" start="19218" end="19222" title="Tegh" label="Tegh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556110" start="19234" end="19251" title="Halidzor Fortress" label="Halidzor Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="19346" end="19356" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="19453" end="19459" title="Anno Domini" label="BC era"/>
<link wikidata="Q428400" start="19525" end="19535" title="Eldiguzids" label="Eldiguzids"/>
<link wikidata="Q174506" start="19543" end="19549" title="Atabeg" label="Atabeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837306" start="19603" end="19626" title="Baku Khans&amp;#x27; Palace" label="Baku Khans&amp;#x27; Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740533" start="19707" end="19719" title="Baku Khanate" label="Baku Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q344569" start="19882" end="19895" title="Icheri Sheher" label="Icheri Sheher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155891" start="19944" end="19963" title="Palace of Happiness" label="Palace of Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065395" start="20201" end="20224" title="Shahbulag Castle" label="Shahbulag Castle Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q540844" start="20320" end="20326" title="Aghdam" label="Aghdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q192868" start="20360" end="20370" title="Nadir Shah" label="Nadir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="20400" end="20410" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636212" start="20471" end="20487" title="Karabakh Khanate" label="Karabakh Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493381" start="20499" end="20513" title="Panah Ali Khan" label="Panah Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4080366" start="20556" end="20568" title="Bayat Castle" label="Bayat Castle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20585" end="20609" title="Haji Gayib&amp;#x27;s bathhouse" label="Haji Gayib&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q344569" start="20669" end="20682" title="Icheri Sheher" label="Icheri Sheher"/>
<link wikidata="Q344569" start="20721" end="20734" title="Icheri Sheher" label="Icheri Sheher"/>
<link wikidata="Q842822" start="20749" end="20761" title="Maiden Tower (Baku)" label="Maiden Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740560" start="20883" end="20904" title="Palace of Shaki Khans" label="Palace of Shaki Khans"/>
<link wikidata="Q234783" start="20946" end="20963" title="Shaki, Azerbaijan" label="Shaki, Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="21367" end="21380" title="stained-glass" label="stained-glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q175166" start="21515" end="21522" title="tempera" label="tempera"/>
<link wikidata="Q234908" start="21557" end="21571" title="Nizami Ganjavi" label="Nizami Ganjavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890707" start="21667" end="21687" title="Zagulba" label="Residence of Zagulba"/>
<link wikidata="Q205602" start="21772" end="21795" title="president of Azerbaijan" label="president of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="21799" end="21803" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q205602" start="21864" end="21887" title="president of Azerbaijan" label="president of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="21891" end="21895" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q205602" start="21937" end="21960" title="president of Azerbaijan" label="president of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644800" start="21966" end="22030" title="List of Chairmen of the Supreme Majlis of Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic" label="chairmen of the Supreme Majlis of Nakhchivan Autonomous Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q390820" start="22034" end="22049" title="Sharur District" label="Sharur District"/>
<link wikidata="Q205602" start="22100" end="22123" title="president of Azerbaijan" label="president of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="22127" end="22131" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q205602" start="22182" end="22205" title="president of Azerbaijan" label="president of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="22209" end="22213" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="22284" end="22300" title="Political Bureau" label="Political Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q390783" start="22304" end="22311" title="Şəmkir" label="Shamkir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347389" start="22314" end="22330" title="Government House, Baku" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754727" start="22419" end="22442" title="The Office of Azerbaijan President" label="Administrational Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617928" start="22453" end="22468" title="Gulustan Palace" label="Gulustan Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q205602" start="22513" end="22536" title="president of Azerbaijan" label="president of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="22540" end="22544" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026043" start="22548" end="22566" title="Mardakan" label="Ghazan Khan Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q205602" start="22591" end="22614" title="president of Azerbaijan" label="president of Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="22618" end="22622" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q388224" start="22670" end="22678" title="Shamakhi" label="Shamakhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q244236" start="22766" end="22772" title="Qabala" label="Qabala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323932" start="22787" end="22804" title="Istana Nurul Iman" label="Istana Nurul Iman"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="22863" end="22881" title="official residence" label="official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451936" start="22889" end="22905" title="sultan of Brunei" label="sultan of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q57327" start="22907" end="22923" title="Hassanal Bolkiah" label="Hassanal Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q407792" start="23033" end="23045" title="Brunei River" label="Brunei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q9279" start="23073" end="23092" title="Bandar Seri Begawan" label="Bandar Seri Begawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="23161" end="23171" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065866" start="23190" end="23199" title="Zamindars of Bengal" label="Zamindars"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017648" start="23204" end="23209" title="Nawab" label="Nawab"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="23214" end="23228" title="British Bengal" label="British Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q402937" start="23318" end="23330" title="Ahsan Manzil" label="Ahsan Manzil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661445" start="23390" end="23403" title="Tajhat Palace" label="Tajhat Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q994514" start="23407" end="23414" title="Rangpur, Bangladesh" label="Rangpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980210" start="23416" end="23429" title="Natore Palace" label="Natore Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069850" start="23431" end="23445" title="Puthia Rajbari" label="Puthia Rajbari"/>
<link wikidata="Q322155" start="23449" end="23457" title="Rajshahi" label="Rajshahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367729" start="23459" end="23477" title="Rose Garden Palace" label="Rose Garden Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083845" start="23481" end="23490" title="Old Dhaka" label="Old Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q13058948" start="23492" end="23506" title="Baliati Palace" label="Baliati Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925129" start="23510" end="23519" title="Manikganj" label="Manikganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q121738865" start="23521" end="23533" title="Shashi Lodge" label="Shashi Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006303" start="23537" end="23547" title="Mymensingh" label="Mymensingh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855010" start="23553" end="23586" title="Bangabhaban" label="Bangabhaban (Presidential Palace)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="23646" end="23660" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="23713" end="23725" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9965" start="23737" end="23751" title="Yongle Emperor" label="Yongle Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="23771" end="23783" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="23796" end="23803" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q957904" start="23918" end="23947" title="Chinese architecture" label="Chinese palatial architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132" start="23972" end="23985" title="Summer Palace" label="Summer Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q852429" start="24036" end="24049" title="Mukden Palace" label="Mukden Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="24053" end="24061" title="Shenyang" label="Shenyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065016" start="24067" end="24086" title="Presidential Palace (Nanjing)" label="Presidential Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="24090" end="24097" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83332" start="24102" end="24130" title="Museum of the Imperial Palace of Manchukuo" label="Imperial Palace of Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q92161" start="24134" end="24143" title="Changchun" label="Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051521" start="24192" end="24206" title="Weiyang Palace" label="Weiyang Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="24224" end="24235" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="24324" end="24336" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q276173" start="24469" end="24477" title="pavilion" label="pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="24699" end="24704" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="25975" end="25984" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631896" start="26069" end="26097" title="List of palaces in Rajasthan" label="List of palaces in Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521893" start="26428" end="26458" title="Taj Hotels Resorts and Palaces" label="Taj Hotels Resorts and Palaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187746" start="26514" end="26525" title="Lake Palace" label="Lake Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307382" start="26536" end="26555" title="Umaid Bhawan Palace" label="Umaid Bhawan Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471571" start="26566" end="26580" title="Fort Madhogarh" label="Fort Madhogarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289168" start="26593" end="26607" title="Rambagh Palace" label="Rambagh Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="26716" end="26723" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="26954" end="26965" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="26968" end="26977" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q456575" start="26996" end="27013" title="Amba Vilas Palace" label="Amba Vilas Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q456575" start="27033" end="27046" title="Mysore Palace" label="Mysore Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q10086" start="27060" end="27066" title="Mysore" label="Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349225" start="27096" end="27103" title="Wodeyar" label="Wodeyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="27185" end="27189" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="27255" end="27264" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225999" start="27293" end="27299" title="Istana (disambiguation)" label="istana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="27307" end="27312" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="27317" end="27327" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761679" start="27339" end="27345" title="Kraton (Indonesia)" label="kraton"/>
<link wikidata="Q33549" start="27353" end="27361" title="Javanese language" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34002" start="27366" end="27375" title="Sundanese language" label="Sundanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="27381" end="27385" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q331596" start="27469" end="27476" title="Indonesian history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717220" start="27489" end="27496" title="Culture of Indonesia" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114397" start="27688" end="27698" title="Yogyakarta Sultanate" label="Yogyakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122499" start="27700" end="27709" title="Surakarta Sunanate" label="Surakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853386" start="27711" end="27724" title="Mangkunegaran" label="Mangkunegaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q399336" start="27736" end="27745" title="Keraton Kasepuhan" label="Kasepuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077648" start="27756" end="27763" title="Cirebon Sultanate" label="Cirebon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794655" start="27769" end="27774" title="Kutai" label="Kutai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899" start="27778" end="27793" title="East Kalimantan" label="East Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540" start="27854" end="27860" title="Banten" label="Banten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972" start="27862" end="27867" title="Medan" label="Medan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19151" start="27869" end="27876" title="Ternate" label="Ternate"/>
<link wikidata="Q14128" start="27878" end="27882" title="Bima" label="Bima"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="27884" end="27888" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q11137" start="27893" end="27900" title="Sumenep" label="Sumenep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740745" start="28146" end="28153" title="pendopo" label="pendopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="28193" end="28200" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130350" start="28254" end="28265" title="Minangkabau people" label="Minangkabau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12486845" start="28306" end="28323" title="Pagaruyung Palace" label="Pagaruyung Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2772" start="28325" end="28337" title="West Sumatra" label="West Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741539" start="28353" end="28358" title="Malay Indonesian" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674833" start="28369" end="28382" title="Istana Maimun" label="Istana Maimun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972" start="28386" end="28391" title="Medan" label="Medan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="28405" end="28408" title="Dutch East India Company" label="VOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="28433" end="28450" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="28684" end="28694" title="neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139728" start="28695" end="28709" title="Merdeka Palace" label="Merdeka Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q911762" start="28714" end="28726" title="Bogor Palace" label="Bogor Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984633" start="28745" end="28768" title="Niavarān Palace Complex" label="Niavarān Palace Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q159416" start="28930" end="28947" title="Naser al-Din Shah" label="Naser al-Din Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="29088" end="29109" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="29270" end="29279" title="Israelite" label="Israelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="29280" end="29286" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895524" start="29298" end="29307" title="Tel Kabri" label="Tel Kabri"/>
<link wikidata="Q193748" start="29395" end="29411" title="History of ancient Israel and Judah" label="Israel and Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="29437" end="29449" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29459" end="29467" title="History of Israel#Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499949" start="29468" end="29474" title="Omride" label="Omride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757438" start="29485" end="29492" title="Samaria (ancient city)" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="29544" end="29549" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="29603" end="29610" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="29647" end="29658" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q496922" start="29662" end="29671" title="Hasmonean" label="Hasmonean"/>
<link wikidata="Q313056" start="29695" end="29703" title="Herodian" label="Herodian"/>
<link wikidata="Q186312" start="29762" end="29768" title="Masada" label="Masada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994790" start="29770" end="29796" title="Herod&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="Palaces of Herod the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932035" start="29813" end="29836" title="Client kingdoms in ancient Rome" label="client kings and rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661432" start="29907" end="29932" title="Herod&amp;#x27;s Palace (Jerusalem)" label="royal palace at Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460244" start="29979" end="29986" title="Tulul Abu el-&amp;#x27;Alayiq" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456855" start="30005" end="30064" title="Herod&amp;#x27;s Palace (Herodium)" label="fortified palace and second administrative seat at Herodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q319242" start="30110" end="30127" title="Caesarea Maritima" label="Caesarea Maritima"/>
<link wikidata="Q499165" start="30193" end="30209" title="Roman procurator" label="Roman procurator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190123" start="30215" end="30224" title="Roman governor" label="governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="30231" end="30237" title="Judaea (Roman province)" label="Judaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q213274" start="30282" end="30303" title="Old City of Jerusalem" label="Old City of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="30317" end="30323" title="Mamluk Egypt" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30324" end="30343" title="Lady Tunshuk Palace" label="Lady Tunshuk Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30503" end="30530" title="Bukharan Quarter#Yehudayoff Palace (&amp;quot;Armon&amp;quot;)" label="Yehudayoff-Hefetz residence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30540" end="30556" title="Russian Compound#Sergei Courtyard" label="Sergei Courtyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="30560" end="30569" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="30629" end="30634" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q500681" start="30648" end="30669" title="Tokyo Imperial Palace" label="Tokyo Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q865913" start="30756" end="30766" title="Edo Castle" label="Edo Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="31251" end="31265" title="Joseon" label="Joseon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q482485" start="31419" end="31432" title="Gyeongbokgung" label="Gyeongbokgung"/>
<link wikidata="Q477157" start="31503" end="31516" title="Changdeokgung" label="Changdeokgung"/>
<link wikidata="Q482852" start="31518" end="31533" title="Changgyeonggung" label="Changgyeonggung"/>
<link wikidata="Q482631" start="31535" end="31545" title="Deoksugung" label="Deoksugung"/>
<link wikidata="Q483291" start="31551" end="31564" title="Gyeonghuigung" label="Gyeonghuigung"/>
<link wikidata="Q503585" start="31733" end="31748" title="Korea under Japanese rule" label="colonial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369516" start="31784" end="31793" title="Manwoldae" label="Manwoldae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="31813" end="31827" title="Goryeo dynasty" label="Goryeo dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q109079" start="31839" end="31847" title="Kaeseong" label="Kaeseong"/>
<link wikidata="Q471292" start="31853" end="31864" title="Banwolseong" label="Banwolseong"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456" start="31880" end="31885" title="Silla" label="Silla"/>
<link wikidata="Q42097" start="31897" end="31905" title="Gyeongju" label="Gyeongju"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361202" start="31911" end="31923" title="Anhak Palace" label="Anhak Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q28370" start="31939" end="31947" title="Goguryeo" label="Goguryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="31959" end="31969" title="Pyeongyang" label="Pyeongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="32041" end="32052" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q246999" start="32195" end="32200" title="Chouf" label="Chouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q814899" start="32377" end="32394" title="Beiteddine Palace" label="Beiteddine Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q814899" start="32582" end="32599" title="Beiteddine Palace" label="Beiteddine Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920431" start="32601" end="32613" title="Grand Serail" label="Grand Serail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361217" start="32649" end="32662" title="Baabda Palace" label="Baabda Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q287360" start="32664" end="32678" title="Sursock Museum" label="Sursock Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431557" start="32684" end="32702" title="Fakhreddine Palace" label="Fakhreddine Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="32720" end="32728" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="32835" end="32856" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088543" start="32968" end="32974" title="Istana Negara, Jalan Duta" label="istana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088543" start="33205" end="33230" title="Istana Negara, Jalan Duta" label="Istana Negara, Jalan Duta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674825" start="33254" end="33269" title="Istana Melawati" label="Istana Melawati"/>
<link wikidata="Q182378" start="33304" end="33313" title="Putrajaya" label="Putrajaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065071" start="33358" end="33370" title="Istana Besar" label="Istana Besar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750958" start="33372" end="33389" title="Anak Bukit" label="Istana Anak Bukit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353966" start="33405" end="33418" title="Istana Maziah" label="Istana Maziah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088504" start="33420" end="33436" title="Istana Alam Shah" label="Istana Alam Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132595" start="33458" end="33483" title="Seri Menanti" label="Istana Besar Seri Menanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088526" start="33485" end="33503" title="Istana Iskandariah" label="Istana Iskandariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331164" start="33553" end="33574" title="Yang di-Pertua Negeri" label="Yang di-Pertua Negeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204300" start="33644" end="33654" title="The Astana, Sarawak" label="The Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434987" start="33680" end="33692" title="The Residency, Penang" label="Seri Mutiara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457358" start="33707" end="33720" title="Singha Durbar" label="Singha Durbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="33761" end="33770" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901835" start="33787" end="33805" title="seat of government" label="seat of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="33809" end="33814" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050042" start="33816" end="33834" title="Narayanhiti Palace" label="Narayanhiti Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996861" start="34036" end="34051" title="2006 Nepalese revolution" label="2006 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="34197" end="34224" title="UNESCO World Heritage Sites" label="UNESCO World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="34246" end="34262" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Kathmandu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="34279" end="34288" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q843138" start="34290" end="34299" title="Bhaktapur" label="Bhaktapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647" start="34304" end="34312" title="Lalitpur, Nepal" label="Lalitpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122177" start="34426" end="34449" title="Kathmandu Durbar Square" label="Kathmandu Durbar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900869" start="35339" end="35362" title="Bhaktapur Durbar Square" label="Bhaktapur Durbar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144236" start="35953" end="35972" title="Patan Durbar Square" label="Patan Durbar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="36482" end="36489" title="temples" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q16738664" start="36776" end="36800" title="History of the Philippines (900–1521)" label="pre-Hispanic Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="36802" end="36810" title="Filipino people" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6474543" start="36888" end="36893" title="lakan" label="lakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="36903" end="36908" title="rajah" label="rajah"/>
<link wikidata="Q768995" start="36914" end="36918" title="datu" label="datu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211168" start="36934" end="36941" title="torogan" label="torogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655283" start="37917" end="37923" title="Tausug people" label="Tausug"/>
<link wikidata="Q422065" start="37932" end="37949" title="Sultanate of Sulu" label="Sultanate of Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q86752806" start="38000" end="38022" title="Darul Jambangan" label="Astana Darul Jambangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156285" start="38190" end="38203" title="Talipao, Sulu" label="Talipao, Sulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199818" start="38217" end="38228" title="History of the Philippines (1565–1898)" label="Spanish era"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="38252" end="38271" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Spanish East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="38316" end="38322" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q942688" start="38423" end="38440" title="Malacañang Palace" label="Malacañang Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542521" start="38487" end="38504" title="Governor-General of the Philippines" label="governors-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q146328" start="38520" end="38532" title="Commonwealth of the Philippines" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="38538" end="38566" title="president of the Philippines" label="president of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="38600" end="38616" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384923" start="38621" end="38635" title="Coconut Palace" label="Coconut Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="38707" end="38714" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723485" start="38756" end="38770" title="Vice-President of the Philippines" label="vice-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q123665" start="38791" end="38814" title="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo" label="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467" start="38874" end="38883" title="Cebu City" label="Cebu City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385100" start="38912" end="38931" title="Malacañang sa Sugbo" label="Malacañang sa Sugbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="38976" end="38990" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="39002" end="39010" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034358" start="39199" end="39214" title="Ottoman Caliphs" label="Ottoman Caliphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560106" start="39328" end="39340" title="Gülhane Park" label="Gülhane Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q274141" start="39719" end="39736" title="Dolmabahçe Palace" label="Dolmabahçe Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q911734" start="39741" end="39754" title="Yıldız Palace" label="Yıldız Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109968" start="39775" end="39802" title="Ottoman palaces in Istanbul" label="Ottoman palaces in Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="39950" end="39956" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="40009" end="40015" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q981450" start="40071" end="40089" title="Louis de Gruuthuse" label="Louis de Gruuthuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="40220" end="40228" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432348" start="40246" end="40251" title="gruit" label="gruit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40338" end="40355" title="Jan IV van der Aa" label="Jan IV van der Aa"/>
<link wikidata="Q917183" start="40647" end="40673" title="Church of Our Lady, Bruges" label="Church of Our Lady, Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="40845" end="40853" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q465991" start="40927" end="40943" title="Margaret of York" label="Margaret of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="41155" end="41164" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803442" start="41253" end="41267" title="Hof van Savoye" label="Hof van Savoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q157100" start="41293" end="41312" title="Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Savoy" label="Margaret of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="41369" end="41380" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891679" start="41422" end="41439" title="Hof van Busleyden" label="Hof van Busleyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316345" start="41488" end="41512" title="Hieronymus van Busleyden" label="Hieronymus van Busleyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="41608" end="41618" title="Archbishop" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092186" start="41622" end="41657" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Mechelen–Brussels" label="the Roman Catholic province Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786" start="41715" end="41731" title="Jan I Carondelet" label="Jan I Carondelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190692" start="41793" end="41813" title="Antoon I van Lalaing" label="Antoon I van Lalaing"/>
<link wikidata="Q465991" start="41904" end="41920" title="Margaret of York" label="Margaret of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="41974" end="41990" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles the Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q30596056" start="42170" end="42183" title="Coloma family" label="Coloma family"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="42197" end="42205" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q635307" start="42260" end="42288" title="Royal Palace of Brussels" label="The Royal Palace of Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429651" start="42355" end="42372" title="Egmont Palace" label="The Egmont palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q158232" start="42388" end="42432" title="Prince Charles Alexander of Lorraine" label="Prince Charles Alexander Emanuel of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131821" start="42455" end="42475" title="Palace of Coudenberg" label="Palace of Coudenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q751876" start="42635" end="42642" title="château" label="château"/>
<link wikidata="Q138101" start="42718" end="42735" title="Conciergerie" label="Palais de la Cité"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="42745" end="42750" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="42861" end="42865" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="42870" end="42877" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="42958" end="42965" title="demesne" label="demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="43053" end="43073" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="43307" end="43320" title="Ancien Régime" label="Ancien Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="43350" end="43356" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365179" start="43623" end="43640" title="hôtel particulier" label="hôtel particulier"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="44100" end="44115" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="44120" end="44126" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16823155" start="44694" end="44701" title="schloss" label="schloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="44848" end="44859" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="44891" end="44901" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q151330" start="44943" end="44952" title="Sanssouci" label="Sanssouci"/>
<link wikidata="Q162052" start="44954" end="44970" title="Linderhof Palace" label="Linderhof Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q118618" start="44972" end="44986" title="Herrenchiemsee" label="Herrenchiemsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q702551" start="44988" end="45000" title="Schwetzingen Palace" label="Schwetzingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q677420" start="45002" end="45013" title="Schloss Nordkirchen" label="Nordkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q573656" start="45018" end="45033" title="Schwerin Palace" label="Schwerin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="45173" end="45184" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="45285" end="45292" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369980" start="45598" end="45616" title="House of Esterházy" label="House of Esterházy"/>
<link wikidata="Q520765" start="45704" end="45740" title="president of the Republic of Hungary" label="president of the Republic of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q927806" start="45742" end="45755" title="Sándor Palace, Budapest" label="Sándor Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="45918" end="45935" title="Matthias Corvinus of Hungary" label="Matthias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q548097" start="45939" end="45947" title="Visegrád" label="Visegrád"/>
<link wikidata="Q46313" start="45951" end="45962" title="Buda Castle" label="Buda Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q367395" start="46109" end="46120" title="Andrássy út" label="Andrássy út"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="46138" end="46146" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q854317" start="46204" end="46218" title="Gresham Palace" label="Gresham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q897556" start="46529" end="46543" title="Palace of Arts (Budapest)" label="Palace of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q742767" start="46656" end="46669" title="Dublin Castle" label="Dublin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275686" start="46705" end="46724" title="Hillsborough Castle" label="Hillsborough Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589444" start="46883" end="46916" title="St. Lachtain&amp;#x27;s Church, Freshford" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Palace at Achadh Úr"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221129" start="46925" end="46934" title="Freshford, County Kilkenny" label="Freshford"/>
<link wikidata="Q211703" start="46989" end="46995" title="Carlow" label="Carlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917876" start="47009" end="47040" title="Bishops of Kildare and Leighlin" label="Bishops of Kildare and Leighlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002183" start="47068" end="47092" title="Cashel, County Tipperary" label="Cashel, County Tipperary"/>
<link wikidata="Q181411" start="47106" end="47135" title="Archbishop of Cashel and Emly" label="Archbishop of Cashel and Emly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592340" start="47160" end="47179" title="Cashel Palace Hotel" label="Cashel Palace Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="47204" end="47208" title="Cork City" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917811" start="47222" end="47253" title="Bishop of Cork, Cloyne and Ross" label="Bishop of Cork, Cloyne and Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q733093" start="47267" end="47271" title="Cobh" label="Cobh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246744" start="47292" end="47308" title="Bishop of Cloyne" label="Bishop of Cloyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103848" start="47310" end="47370" title="Manor of St. Sepulchre" label="Palace of the Archbishop of Dublin at Saint Sepulchre&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727389" start="47391" end="47411" title="Archbishop of Dublin" label="Archbishop of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917840" start="47465" end="47481" title="Bishop of Elphin" label="Bishop of Elphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209128" start="47505" end="47510" title="Ennis" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540873" start="47548" end="47566" title="Bishop of Killaloe" label="Bishop of Killaloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917944" start="47626" end="47643" title="Bishops of Ossory" label="Bishops of Ossory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291915" start="47654" end="47669" title="Richard Pococke" label="Richard Pococke"/>
<link wikidata="Q623382" start="47693" end="47702" title="Killarney" label="Killarney"/>
<link wikidata="Q161954" start="47723" end="47752" title="Bishop of Ardfert and Aghadoe" label="Bishop of Ardfert and Aghadoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781826" start="47776" end="47797" title="Kilmore, County Cavan" label="Kilmore, County Cavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722494" start="47850" end="47867" title="Bishop of Kilmore" label="Bishop of Kilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="47892" end="47900" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168549" start="47921" end="47939" title="Bishop of Limerick" label="Bishop of Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025561" start="47981" end="47987" title="Raphoe" label="Raphoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q996691" start="48015" end="48019" title="Tuam" label="Tuam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909716" start="48163" end="48193" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Palace Waterford" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Palace Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721275" start="48216" end="48247" title="Bishop of Waterford and Lismore" label="Bishop of Waterford and Lismore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17779263" start="48250" end="48282" title="Archbishop&amp;#x27;s Palace, Armagh" label="Archbishop&amp;#x27;s Palace, Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146456" start="48301" end="48321" title="Archbishop of Armagh" label="Archbishop of Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q384721" start="48398" end="48418" title="Ballina, County Mayo" label="Ballina, County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917879" start="48441" end="48458" title="Bishop of Killala" label="Bishop of Killala"/>
<link wikidata="Q868157" start="48521" end="48559" title="Roman Catholic Bishop of Cork and Ross" label="Roman Catholic Bishop of Cork and Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261255" start="48588" end="48598" title="Drumcondra, Dublin" label="Drumcondra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785668" start="48612" end="48647" title="Roman Catholic Archbishop of Dublin" label="Roman Catholic Archbishop of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q645623" start="48735" end="48743" title="Longford" label="Longford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792688" start="48757" end="48790" title="Bishop of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise" label="Bishop of Ardagh and Clonmacnoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q55308" start="48830" end="48839" title="Mullingar" label="Mullingar"/>
<link wikidata="Q872241" start="48857" end="48887" title="Roman Catholic Bishop of Meath" label="Roman Catholic Bishop of Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025561" start="48926" end="48932" title="Raphoe" label="Raphoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q383188" start="48960" end="48967" title="Thurles" label="Thurles"/>
<link wikidata="Q181411" start="48994" end="49023" title="Archbishop of Cashel and Emly" label="Archbishop of Cashel and Emly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202402" start="49164" end="49173" title="townhouse" label="townhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="49204" end="49212" title="nobleman" label="nobleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="49313" end="49319" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095374" start="49347" end="49356" title="Patrician (post-Roman Europe)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="49383" end="49394" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q181623" start="49420" end="49429" title="warehouse" label="warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q359998" start="49957" end="49969" title="Ducal Palace" label="Ducal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="50010" end="50018" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107861" start="50045" end="50065" title="Medieval commune" label="communal governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q29286" start="50241" end="50254" title="Palazzo Pitti" label="Palazzo Pitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q271928" start="50315" end="50330" title="Palazzo Vecchio" label="Palazzo Vecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q815421" start="50685" end="50697" title="piano nobile" label="piano nobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q327983" start="51041" end="51048" title="Royal Palace of Caserta" label="Caserta"/>
<link wikidata="Q51105" start="51050" end="51055" title="Royal Palace of Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q426339" start="51057" end="51063" title="Royal Palace of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473825" start="51065" end="51072" title="Royal Palace of Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19824" start="51074" end="51079" title="Royal Palace of Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223079" start="51096" end="51112" title="Quirinale Palace" label="Quirinale Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="51116" end="51120" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="51165" end="51170" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="51187" end="51204" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q207277" start="51222" end="51227" title="Mdina" label="Mdina"/>
<link wikidata="Q22116621" start="51274" end="51288" title="Palazzo Falson" label="Palazzo Falson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115540" start="51293" end="51312" title="Palazzo Santa Sofia" label="Palazzo Santa Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355522" start="51324" end="51358" title="History of Malta under the Order of Saint John" label="arrival of the Order of Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q752346" start="51391" end="51396" title="Birgu" label="Birgu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207146" start="51412" end="51426" title="Fort St Angelo" label="Fort St Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q952136" start="51456" end="51468" title="List of Grand Masters of the Knights Hospitaller" label="Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51502" end="51510" title="Langue (Knights Hospitaller)#Birgu" label="auberges"/>
<link wikidata="Q23800" start="51611" end="51619" title="Valletta" label="Valletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368885" start="51635" end="51660" title="Grandmaster&amp;#x27;s Palace (Valletta)" label="Grandmaster&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51677" end="51689" title="Langue (Knights Hospitaller)#Birgu" label="new auberges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499012" start="51856" end="51875" title="Auberge de Castille" label="Auberge de Castille"/>
<link wikidata="Q991665" start="52045" end="52059" title="Verdala Palace" label="Verdala Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549852" start="52064" end="52080" title="San Anton Palace" label="San Anton Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q796593" start="52136" end="52154" title="president of Malta" label="president of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q664066" start="52161" end="52180" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Malta" label="Archbishop of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361044" start="52230" end="52245" title="Inquisitor&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="palace in Birgu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949411" start="52250" end="52269" title="Girgenti Palace" label="another in Girgenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949685" start="52539" end="52554" title="Palazzo Parisio (Valletta)" label="Palazzo Parisio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20949272" start="52571" end="52588" title="Dragonara Palace" label="Palazzo Dragonara"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="52662" end="52692" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="52823" end="52830" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="52836" end="52854" title="Szlachta" label="Polish aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="52883" end="52890" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="52895" end="52901" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="52986" end="52991" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348665" start="52997" end="53015" title="Tylman van Gameren" label="Tylman van Gameren"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="53088" end="53093" title="Kings of Poland" label="kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863053" start="53219" end="53246" title="Baroque in Poland" label="Polish Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760658" start="53278" end="53294" title="Krasiński Palace" label="Krasiński Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q345276" start="53299" end="53314" title="Łazienki Palace" label="Łazienki Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="53324" end="53330" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376970" start="53336" end="53351" title="Branicki Palace, Białystok" label="Branicki Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="53355" end="53364" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q327193" start="53419" end="53441" title="Chrystian Piotr Aigner" label="Chrystian Piotr Aigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q86122" start="53443" end="53461" title="Szymon Bogumił Zug" label="Szymon Bogumił Zug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237207" start="53463" end="53479" title="Domenico Merlini" label="Domenico Merlini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692977" start="53484" end="53507" title="Johann Christian Schuch" label="Johann Christian Schuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q47473" start="53658" end="53672" title="Wilanów Palace" label="Wilanów Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q608932" start="53674" end="53693" title="Presidential Palace, Warsaw" label="Presidential Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q252800" start="53695" end="53720" title="Abbot&amp;#x27;s Palace (Oliwa)" label="Oliwa Abbot&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720684" start="53722" end="53740" title="Copper-Roof Palace" label="Copper-Roof Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386064" start="53742" end="53789" title="Palace of the Ministry of Revenues and Treasury" label="Palace of the Ministry of Revenues and Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161540" start="53791" end="53798" title="Rogalin" label="Rogalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630149" start="53800" end="53818" title="Jabłonowski Palace" label="Jabłonowski Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435449" start="53820" end="53847" title="Kozłówka Palace" label="Zamoyski Palace in Kozłówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446458" start="53849" end="53881" title="Kurozwęki Palace" label="Lanckoroński Palace in Kurozwęki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562906" start="53883" end="53898" title="Nieborów Palace" label="Nieborów Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680361" start="53907" end="53930" title="Palace in Otwock Wielki" label="Palace in Otwock Wielki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133188" start="54026" end="54039" title="Moszna Castle" label="Moszna Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q738109" start="54041" end="54053" title="Książ Castle" label="Książ Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q756098" start="54062" end="54081" title="Royal Castle, Warsaw" label="Warsaw Royal Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="54147" end="54155" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q599223" start="54240" end="54261" title="Mafra National Palace" label="Mafra National Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q69513" start="54263" end="54283" title="Pena National Palace" label="Pena National Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144592" start="54285" end="54297" title="Belém Palace" label="Belém Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478288" start="54299" end="54320" title="Ajuda National Palace" label="Ajuda National Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336481" start="54322" end="54346" title="Palácio das Necessidades" label="Palácio das Necessidades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410441" start="54348" end="54361" title="Mateus Palace" label="Mateus Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q66813051" start="54363" end="54386" title="Palace Hotel of Bussaco" label="Palace Hotel of Bussaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630165" start="54388" end="54408" title="Palácio da Regaleira" label="Palácio da Regaleira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064721" start="54414" end="54434" title="Palácio da Brejoeira" label="Palácio da Brejoeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="54462" end="54469" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q733838" start="54596" end="54612" title="Cotroceni Palace" label="Cotroceni Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361220" start="54651" end="54676" title="The Royal Palace (Bucharest)" label="Royal Palace in Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319192" start="54699" end="54732" title="National Museum of Art of Romania" label="National Museum of Art of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356931" start="54742" end="54758" title="Elisabeta Palace" label="Elisabeta Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q663875" start="54871" end="54900" title="Princess Margareta of Romania" label="Princess Margareta of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356931" start="54925" end="54941" title="Elisabeta Palace" label="Elisabeta Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684173" start="54983" end="55000" title="Crețulescu Palace" label="Crețulescu Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q917702" start="55052" end="55064" title="Peleș Castle" label="Peles palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="55080" end="55098" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q164150" start="55127" end="55151" title="Palace of the Parliament" label="Palace of the Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="55174" end="55183" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522104" start="55192" end="55209" title="Palace of Culture (Iași)" label="Palace of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="55213" end="55217" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="55537" end="55552" title="Peter I of Russia" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q182147" start="55626" end="55639" title="Winter Palace" label="Winter Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="55655" end="55671" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229016" start="55730" end="55746" title="Mariinsky Palace" label="Mariinsky Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370087" start="55785" end="55805" title="Grand Kremlin Palace" label="Grand Kremlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="55825" end="55839" title="Moscow Kremlin" label="Moscow Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="55843" end="55849" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258473" start="55856" end="55871" title="Peterhof Palace" label="Peterhof Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q178310" start="55887" end="55895" title="Petergof" label="Petergof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854543" start="55902" end="55918" title="Catherine Palace" label="Catherine Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621200" start="55934" end="55948" title="Tsarskoye Selo" label="Tsarskoye Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461" start="55955" end="55970" title="Gatchina Palace" label="Gatchina Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436" start="55986" end="55994" title="Gatchina" label="Gatchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="56050" end="56057" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="56059" end="56065" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="56070" end="56076" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q940733" start="56151" end="56172" title="Christiansborg Palace" label="Christiansborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q211053" start="56259" end="56277" title="Amalienborg" label="Amalienborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q863932" start="56340" end="56352" title="Royal Palace, Oslo" label="Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q750444" start="56430" end="56446" title="Stockholm Palace" label="Stockholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q208559" start="56625" end="56645" title="Drottningholm Palace" label="Drottningholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q220641" start="56703" end="56715" title="House of Karađorđević" label="Karađorđević"/>
<link wikidata="Q638926" start="56720" end="56729" title="House of Obrenović" label="Obrenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="56838" end="56846" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288132" start="56852" end="56862" title="Stari dvor" label="Stari Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810542" start="56867" end="56876" title="Novi dvor" label="Novi Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990524" start="56944" end="56966" title="Dedinje Royal Compound" label="Dedinje Royal Compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520647" start="56986" end="57001" title="Kraljevski dvor" label="Kraljevski Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q815579" start="57006" end="57015" title="Beli dvor" label="Beli Dvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q646175" start="57079" end="57086" title="Dedinje" label="Dedinje"/>
<link wikidata="Q171517" start="57261" end="57283" title="Royal Palace of Madrid" label="Royal Palace of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q498261" start="57567" end="57585" title="Alcázar of Seville" label="Alcázar of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q47476" start="57682" end="57690" title="Alhambra" label="Alhambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q28471" start="57696" end="57735" title="El Escorial" label="Monastery of San Lorenzo de El Escorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q530129" start="57744" end="57768" title="Royal Palace of Aranjuez" label="Royal Palace of Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q604921" start="57887" end="57905" title="Palace of Zarzuela" label="Palace of Zarzuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367970" start="57910" end="57927" title="Palace of Moncloa" label="Palace of Moncloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="57979" end="58000" title="English country house" label="English country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006518" start="58215" end="58227" title="royal family" label="royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="58231" end="58237" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="58348" end="58362" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714774" start="58373" end="58391" title="Palace of Beaulieu" label="Palace of Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q312398" start="58423" end="58436" title="Thomas Boleyn, 1st Earl of Wiltshire" label="Thomas Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="58448" end="58458" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q205666" start="58553" end="58573" title="Hampton Court Palace" label="Hampton Court Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q208181" start="58629" end="58644" title="Blenheim Palace" label="Blenheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743089" start="58713" end="58732" title="Woodstock Palace" label="Palace of Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="58859" end="58878" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="Duke of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="58909" end="58918" title="bishop" label="episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="59096" end="59113" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q208181" start="59185" end="59200" title="Blenheim Palace" label="Blenheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441680" start="59218" end="59233" title="Hamilton Palace" label="Hamilton Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q10655962" start="59248" end="59266" title="Destruction of country houses in 20th-century Britain" label="demolished in 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="59299" end="59308" title="bishop" label="episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211070" start="59382" end="59397" title="Dalkeith Palace" label="Dalkeith Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264482" start="59444" end="59462" title="Dukes of Buccleuch" label="Dukes of Buccleuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="59481" end="59502" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="59522" end="59540" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="60019" end="60029" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="60043" end="60064" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="60280" end="60298" title="The Crystal Palace" label="The Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="60352" end="60372" title="The Great Exhibition" label="The Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q254650" start="60416" end="60432" title="Alexandra Palace" label="Alexandra Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q164150" start="60467" end="60491" title="Palace of the Parliament" label="Palace of the Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="60495" end="60504" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360942" start="60646" end="60687" title="Archbishop&amp;#x27;s Palace (disambiguation)" label="Archbishop&amp;#x27;s Palace (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="60690" end="60696" title="Castle" label="Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399487" start="60699" end="60710" title="Great house" label="Great house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277269" start="60713" end="60728" title="Imperial castle" label="Imperial castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796442" start="60762" end="60773" title="Kaiserpfalz" label="Kaiserpfalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796442" start="60790" end="60801" title="Königspfalz" label="Königspfalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q861564" start="60811" end="60826" title="List of palaces" label="List of palaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="60829" end="60840" title="Manor house" label="Manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q481289" start="60843" end="60861" title="Official residence" label="Official residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q829300" start="60870" end="60875" title="Palas" label="Palas"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="60884" end="60897" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="60900" end="60911" title="Real estate" label="Real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035265" start="60914" end="60941" title="World&amp;#x27;s largest palace" label="World&amp;#x27;s largest palace"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23932" wikidata="Q129187" url="?curid=23932" title="Patrick White">
<text>Patrick Victor Martindale White (28 May 1912 – 30 September 1990) was an Australian novelist and playwright who explored themes of religious experience, personal identity and the conflict between visionary individuals and a materialistic, conformist society. Influenced by the modernism of James Joyce, D. H. Lawrence and Virginia Woolf, he developed a complex literary style and a body of work which challenged the dominant realist prose tradition of his home country, was satirical of Australian society, and sharply divided local critics. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1973, the only Australian to have been awarded the literary prize. 

Born in London to affluent Australian parents, White spent his childhood in Sydney and on his family&#x27;s rural properties. He was sent to an English public school at the age of 13, and went on to read modern languages at Cambridge. On his graduation in 1935, he embarked on a literary career. His first published novel, &quot;Happy Valley&quot; (1939), was awarded the Gold Medal of the Australian Literature Society. In World War Two, he served as an intelligence officer in the Royal Air Force. While stationed in Alexandria, Egypt, in 1941, he met Manoly Lascaris who was to become his life companion and, as White later wrote, &quot;the central mandala in my life&#x27;s hitherto messy design.&quot;

White returned to Australia in 1948 where he bought a small farm on the outskirts of Sydney. There he wrote the two novels, &quot;The Tree of Man&quot; (1955) and &quot;Voss&quot; (1957), that brought him critical acclaim in the United States and the United Kingdom. In the 1960s he wrote the novels &quot;Riders in the Chariot&quot; (1961) and &quot;The Solid Mandala&quot; (1966), and a series of plays including &quot;The Season at Sarsaparilla&quot; and &quot;A Cheery Soul&quot; which had a major impact on Australian theatre.

White and Lascaris moved to Sydney&#x27;s Centennial Park in 1964. From the late 1960s, White became increasingly involved in public affairs, opposing the Vietnam war and supporting Aboriginal self-determination, nuclear disarmament and various environmental causes. His later work includes the novels &quot;The Eye of the Storm&quot; (1973) and &quot;The Twyborn Affair&quot; (1979) and the memoir &quot;Flaws in the Glass&quot; (1981)&quot;.&quot;

==Childhood and adolescence==
White was born in Knightsbridge, London, on 28 May 1912. His Australian parents, Victor Martindale White, a wealthy sheep grazier, and Ruth (née Withycombe) were in England on an extended honeymoon. The family returned to Sydney, Australia, when he was six months old. As a child he lived in a flat with his sister, a nanny, and a maid while his parents lived in an adjoining flat. In 1916 they moved to a large house, &quot;Lulworth&quot;, in Elizabeth Bay. At the age of four White developed asthma, a condition that had taken the life of his maternal grandfather, and his health was fragile throughout his childhood.

At the age of five he attended kindergarten at Sandtoft in Woollahra, close to their home. His mother often took him to plays and pantomimes and White developed a life long love of the theatre. Nevertheless, White felt closer to his nurse, Lizzie Clark, who taught him to tell the truth and &quot;not blow his own trumpet&quot;.

In 1920, he attended Cranbrook School but his asthma worsened. Two years later he was sent to Tudor House School, a boarding school in the Southern Highlands of New South Wales, where it was thought the climate would help his lungs. White enjoyed the freedom provided by the school where discipline was lax. He read widely from the school library, wrote a play and excelled at English. In 1924 the boarding school ran into financial trouble, and the headmaster suggested that White be sent to a public school in England.

In April 1925, his parents took White to England to enrol in Cheltenham College in Gloucestershire. In his first years at Cheltenham he was withdrawn and had few friends. He found his housemaster to be sadistic and puritanical, and White&#x27;s certitude of his own homosexuality increased his sense of isolation. He later wrote of Cheltenham, &quot;When the gates of my expensive prison closed I lost confidence in my mother, and [I] never forgave.&quot;

One of White&#x27;s few pleasures was the time spent at the Sommerset home of his cousin, the painter Jack Withycombe. Jack&#x27;s daughter Elizabeth Withycombe became a mentor to him while he was completing his first, privately-published, volume of verse, &quot;Thirteen Poems&quot;, written between 1927 and 1929.&quot;&quot; White also became friends with Ronald Waterall who was two years his senior at Cheltenham and shared his passion for the theatre. He and White would spend their holidays in London seeing as many shows as they could.

White asked his parents if he could leave school to become an actor. His parents compromised and allowed him to leave school without taking his final examinations if he came home to Australia to try life on the land. But their son had already changed his mind on his future profession and was determined to become a writer.

In December 1929, White left Cheltenham and sailed to Sydney. He spent two years working as a jackaroo on sheep stations at Bolaro in the Monaro district of New South Wales and at Barwon Vale in northern New South Wales. The landscapes impressed White and he wrote two unpublished novels during this time: &quot;The Immigrants&quot; and &quot;Sullen Moon&quot;.

White&#x27;s uncle, who owned Barwon Vale, convinced White&#x27;s parents that their son was not suited to the life of a grazier. White&#x27;s mother was happy for him to become a writer but she wanted him to have a career as a diplomat as well. On this basis his parents agreed to send him to Cambridge. While studying for the entrance examinations, White completed a third unpublished novel, &quot;Finding Heaven&quot;.

==Europe, America and war==
From 1932, White lived in England, studying French and German literature at King&#x27;s College, Cambridge. There he began a love affair with a fellow student that lasted until White graduated. White wrote poems, some of which were published in the &quot;London&quot; &quot;Mercury&quot;. He spent his holidays in France and Germany to improve his languages and read Joyce, Lawrence, Proust, Flaubert, Stendhal and Thomas Mann with admiration. He made a pilgrimage to Zennor in Cornwall where Lawrence wrote &quot;Women in Love&quot; and the visit inspired further poems. A collection was published as &quot;The Ploughman and Other Poems&quot; in an edition of 300 in Sydney in 1935 but received little critical attention and was later suppressed by White. A play, &quot;Bread and Butter Women,&quot; was given an amateur production in Sydney the same year.

On White&#x27;s graduation in 1935, his mother wanted him to embark on a diplomatic career but he was determined to stay in England and become a writer. His mother relented and his father granted him an allowance of £400 a year. He moved to London&#x27;s Pimlico district where, in 1936, he met the Australian painter Roy de Maistre. De Maistre briefly became White&#x27;s lover and remained a mentor and friend. White later said that de Maistre had encouraged him to break from naturalistic prose and write &quot;from the inside out.&quot;

White began work on the novel &quot;Happy Valley,&quot; partly based on his experience working as a jackaroo. In 1937, his story &quot;The Twitching Colonel&quot; was published in the &quot;London Mercury&quot;. His father died in December, leaving him a legacy of £10,000 that enabled him to write full-time in relative comfort. He started work on a play, &quot;Return to Abyssinia&quot;, and wrote skits for revues which were produced with moderate success. He completed &quot;Happy Valley&quot; and the novel was accepted by the British publisher George G. Harrap and Company in 1938.

&quot;Happy Valley&quot; was published in early 1939 to generally favourable reviews which encouraged White to go to America to find a publisher there. White arrived in New York in April and travelled across the country. He visited Taos, New Mexico, where he viewed Lawrence&#x27;s ashes and met Frieda Lawrence. He then moved to Cape Cod where he worked on a novel, &quot;The Living and the Dead&quot;, partly based on his life in London. When the Second World War broke out in September, White took the first available ship back to England where he continued to work on his new novel.

In early 1940, White heard that Ben Huebsch, the head of the American publisher Viking, had accepted &quot;Happy Valley&quot;. Huebsch had published Lawrence and Joyce in America and White was delighted with the connection to these writers. Huebsch was to become one of White&#x27;s main literary supporters. White decided to travel back to New York for the publication of &quot;Happy Valley&quot; and to complete the new novel. Happy Valley was published in June to favourable reviews. Huebsch also accepted the now completed novel &quot;The Living and the Dead&quot; for publication.

White returned to London where, in November, he was called up to an intelligence unit of the Royal Air Force. He was stationed at Bentley Priory during the Blitz before being transferred to North Africa in April 1941. He subsequently served in Egypt, Palestine and Greece. While stationed near Alexandria in July 1941 he met Manoly Lascaris, who was waiting to be recruited to the Royal Greek Army. Lascaris was to become White&#x27;s life partner.

Following the war, White was determined to leave England to avoid &quot;the prospect of ceasing to be an artist and turning instead into that most sterile of beings, a London intellectual.&quot; White&#x27;s preference was to live in Greece but Lascaris wanted to start a new life in Australia. White relented because, &quot;It was his illusion. I suppose I sensed it was better than mine.&quot;

Before leaving for Australia, White began work on a novel &quot;The Aunt&#x27;s Story&quot;, inspired by a painting by Roy de Maistre. He sent the completed typescript to his American publisher in January 1947. In March, his play &quot;Return to Abyssinia&quot; opened in London to polite reviews. White missed its short season because he was in Australia making preparations for his permanent return. He returned to London and began a new play, &quot;The Ham Funeral,&quot; inspired by the William Dobell painting &quot;The Dead Landlord&quot;.

White sailed back to Australia in December 1947, and during his voyage &quot;The Aunt&#x27;s Story&quot; was published in the United States to very favourable reviews and strong sales. Critic James Stern&#x27;s review in the &quot;New York Times Book Review&quot; was enthusiastic and Stern would go on to be one of White&#x27;s major champions in America.

==Return to Australia==

White arrived back in Australia in February 1948. He and Lascaris moved to a small farm purchased by White at Castle Hill, now a Sydney suburb but then semi-rural. He named the house &quot;Dogwoods&quot;, after trees he planted there. He and Lascaris worked the farm and sold flowers, vegetables, milk and cream as well as pedigree schnauzer puppies. 

The reviews of &quot;The Aunt&#x27;s Story&quot; in the British and Australian press were less enthusiastic than those in America, and White was unable to interest theatres in Australia or overseas in producing &quot;The Ham Funeral.&quot; He was making slow progress on the novel which was to become &quot;The Tree of Man&quot; and was discouraged at his prospects of success as a writer. He also questioned his decision to return to Australia.

In late 1951, White had a religious experience that gave him a belief in God and the inspiration to recommence work on &quot;The Tree of Man&quot; (published in 1955). He described the novel as an attempt to suggest &quot;every possible aspect of life, through the lives of an ordinary man and woman.&quot; &quot;The Tree of Man&quot; and his following work &quot;Voss&quot; (1957) established White&#x27;s favourable critical reputation in Britain and America. White, however, was embittered by what he considered a hostile critical response in Australia.

Following his international success, White continued to live and work on his farm in Castle Hill. He gave few interviews and usually declined requests for public appearances, promotion of his work, and invitations for his membership of literary and cultural organisations. He entertained a close circle of friends at his home but always felt himself to be an outsider: &quot;first as a child with what kind of strange gift no one quite knew; then a despised colonial in an English public school; finally an artist in horrified Australia.&quot;

In 1961, his novel &quot;Riders in the Chariot&quot; was published, and was his first to receive almost universal critical praise in Australia. Meanwhile, White&#x27;s interest had returned to the theatre. The Drama Committee of the Adelaide Festival had recommended &quot;The Ham Funeral&quot; as the festival&#x27;s main theatrical production for 1962. The festival governors, however, rejected the play citing concerns about &quot;a piece of work which quite fails to reconcile poetry with social realism&quot; and a scene involving an aborted foetus in a dustbin. The controversy led to a successful amateur production of the play in Adelaide followed by a professional production in Sydney. White was inspired to write three further plays which were given professional productions: &quot;The Season at Sarsaparilla&quot; (1962), &quot;A Cheery Soul&quot; (1963) and &quot;Night on Bald Mountain&quot; (1964).

In 1963, White&#x27;s mother died in London and his share of the estate allowed him to buy a house in Centennial Park, near the centre of Sydney, the following year. Before leaving Dogwoods, White had bought up every copy of his early published poems he could find and burnt them along with most of his manuscripts, papers, letters and journals.

White was working on &quot;The Solid Mandala&quot;, a novel about twins, Waldo and Arthur Brown, who represent contrary aspects of his own character. He was becoming interested in Tarot, astrology, the &quot;I Ching&quot; and Jungian psychology, and these interests are reflected in the novel. Following its publication in 1966, White declined the Britannica Award for Literature and Miles Franklin Award for the novel and stated he no longer wanted his works considered for awards.

White had long had an interest in art and music, describing himself as &quot;something of a frustrated painter, and a composer manqué.&quot; The core of his art collection was works by his friends Sidney Nolan and de Maistre but he collected works by emerging Australian artists such as James Clifford, Erica McGilchrist, and Lawrence Daws and some established artists like Brett Whiteley. In early 1967 he began work on &quot;The Vivisector&quot;, a novel about a painter, Hurtle Duffield, who exploits human relationships for his art. After the novel was published in 1970, Nolan believed Duffield was based on him, but White denied this, stating that Duffield was a composite of his own character and the working life of the artists John Passmore and Godfrey Miller.

White was becoming more politically engaged at this time. He was opposed to Australia&#x27;s involvement in the Vietnam war, and in December 1969 he participated in his first political demonstration, breaking the law by publicly inciting young men not to register for military conscription. The following year, he campaigned against censorship and gave evidence in favour of the publication of Philip Roth&#x27;s novel &quot;Portnoy&#x27;s Complaint&quot; at obscenity trials in Melbourne and Sydney. In 1972, the New South Wales government announced a plan to build an Olympic stadium near Centennial Park. White participated in the anti-development protests, giving speeches at a rally in June.

White had been on the shortlist for the Nobel Prize in Literature since 1969. In 1971, after the prize was awarded to Pablo Neruda, he wrote to a friend: &quot;That Nobel Prize! I hope I never hear it mentioned again. I certainly don&#x27;t want it; the machinery behind it seems a bit dirty, when we thought that only applied to Australian awards. In my case to win the prize would upset my life far too much, and it would embarrass me to be held up to the world as an Australian writer when, apart from the accident of blood, I feel I am temperamentally a cosmopolitan Londoner&quot;.

== Nobel laureate ==
In 1970, White had begun working on a new novel, &quot;The Eye of the Storm&quot;, about the meaning of his mother&#x27;s death. He sent the completed work to his British publishers in December 1972. He delayed sending it to his American publishers, Viking, because &quot;The Vivisector&quot; had sold poorly in America and he hoped positive reviews of the new work in Britain would increase interest in the United States.

The novel was published in August 1973 and White was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in October. The Nobel citation praised him &quot;for an epic and psychological narrative art, which has introduced a new continent into literature&quot;. White, pleading delicate health, declined to travel to Sweden to accept the award. Nolan attended the ceremony on his behalf.

The Nobel prize increased worldwide interest in White&#x27;s work. &quot;Eye of the Storm&quot; was widely reviewed in the United States and sold 25,000 copies by March 1974. New editions of his previous novels were published and translation rights sold well. White, however, refused to have &quot;Happy Valley&quot; republished as he considered it an inferior early work and he was afraid that some of the people on whom characters were based might sue for defamation.

According to David Marr, White&#x27;s biographer, &quot;From the time of the prize his work became saturated with a late, relaxed sensuality.&quot; White himself was less relaxed about the effects of the award, telling a supporter: &quot;the Nobel Prize is a terrifying and destructive experience.&quot;

White was made Australian of the Year for 1973. In his acceptance speech, he said that Australia Day should be &quot;a day of self-searching rather than trumpet blowing&quot; and that historian Manning Clark, comedian Barry Humphries and communist trade union leader Jack Mundey were more worthy of the award.

In May 1974, White gave a speech in support of the re-election of the Whitlam Labor government, stating that it was necessary for Australia to create: &quot;an intellectual climate from which artists would no longer feel the need to flee.&quot; Following a trip to Fraser Island to do research for a new novel &quot;A Fringe of Leaves&quot;, he became a supporter of the campaign to stop sand mining on the island. He wrote to the re-elected prime minister Gough Whitlam on the issue and the campaign eventually forced the government to suspend its approval of mining and hold an inquiry on the matter.

White was among the first group of the Companions of the Order of Australia in 1975 but resigned in June 1976 in protest against the dismissal of the Whitlam government in November 1975 by the Governor-General Sir John Kerr and the subsequent reintroduction of knighthoods as part of the order. White later wrote that Kerr&#x27;s behaviour &quot;moved me farther to the Left and made me a convinced Republican.&quot; Over the following years, he would break with numerous long-term friends because he thought they supported the conservative establishment or had compromised their personal or artistic integrity.

In November 1975, the young theatre director Jim Sharman approached White to discuss a revival of &quot;The Season at Sarsaparilla.&quot; They also agreed to film his story &quot;The Night the Prowler&quot; and White began working on a script. The meeting sparked a revival in White&#x27;s interest in theatre and a long-term working relationship between the two men.

In 1976, White was working on a new novel, &quot;The Twyborn Affair,&quot; partly based on aspects of his own life and that of male Antarctic explorer Herbert Dyce-Murphy (18791971) who had lived as a woman for several years. In researching his novel, White revisited the regions of New South Wales where White had lived and worked as a youth, and significant locations in London, France and Greece. In October, &quot;A Fringe of Leaves&quot; was published to generally favourable reviews and sold well. Sharman&#x27;s production of &quot;A Season at Sarsaparilla&quot; in Sydney was also a critical success and attracted good audiences.

In 1977, a project to film &quot;Voss&quot; with Joseph Losey as director collapsed when the promoter Harry Miller failed to gain finance. Miller eventually sold the film rights to Nolan. The success of &quot;The Season at Sarsaparilla&quot; had inspired White to write his first play in over 12 years, &quot;Big Toys&quot;, about plutocracy and corruption in Sydney. The play, directed by Sharman, premiered in Sydney in October but attracted generally unfavourable reviews and moderate audiences.The film of &quot;The Night the Prowler&quot;, directed by Sharman, premiered at the &quot;Sydney Film Festival&quot; in June 1978. Reviews were generally unfavourable and the film failed at the box office. However, Sharman&#x27;s 1979 production of &quot;A Cheery Soul&quot; for the Sydney Theatre Company broke box office records for the drama theatre of the Opera House despite mixed reviews. &quot;The Twyborn Affair&quot; was published in Britain in November, 1979 to very positive reviews and became a best seller. The response from critics and the public in the United States was more subdued.

In October 1979, White started work on a memoir, &quot;Flaws in the Glass&quot;, in which he planned to write publicly for the first time about his homosexuality and his relationship with Manoly Lascaris. The book was published in Britain in October 1981 to great publicity and became his biggest seller in his life time. Much of the publicity stemmed from his scathing character portraits of Nolan, Kerr and Joan Sutherland. Nolan considered suing White for defamation and their friendship ended.

The 1982 Adelaide Festival was directed by Sharman who had commissioned a new play by White, &quot;Signal Driver&quot;. The festival also featured a short excerpt from an opera based on &quot;Voss.&quot; The opera had been commissioned by Opera Australia with Richard Meale as composer and David Malouf the librettist. Critics were generally lukewarm towards &quot;Signal Driver&quot;, but encouraging towards the fragment of Voss. White, in contrast, disliked Meale&#x27;s approach to &quot;Voss&quot; but was enthusiastic about the production of &quot;Signal Driver&quot;. White was encouraged to write a new play for Sharman, &quot;Netherwood&quot;, &quot;about the sanity in insanity and the insanity in sanity&quot;. The play premiered in Adelaide in May 1983 but attracted hostile reviews which White considered a deliberate media campaign to sabotage his work.

By 1984, White had become disillusioned with the Hawke Labor government and publicly and financially supported the new Nuclear Disarmament Party. White had been publicly campaigning for nuclear disarmament since 1981, calling it: &quot;the most important moral issue in history.&quot;

===Late work and declining health===
In late 1984, White was hospitalised due to osteoporosis, crumbled vertebrae and glaucoma resulting from his long-term use of cortisone to treat his asthma and chest infections. Although he was still mentally agile, his physical health and mobility were declining.

He had recovered sufficiently by January 1985 to recommence work on a new novel, &quot;Memoirs of Many in One,&quot; which he described as a &quot;religious&quot; and &quot;bawdy&quot; novel about senility. Posing as the editor of the memoirs of Alex Xenophon Demirjian Gray, White felt free to explore various aspects of his own character. The novel was published in Britain on 1 April 1986 and sharply divided critics.

Salman Rushdie wrote to White in 1985, praising the novel &quot;Voss:&quot; &quot;I cannot think when last a book so moved me.&quot; By this time, however, White was tired of praise for the novel as he rated several of his other works more highly. The completed opera &quot;Voss&quot; opened at the Adelaide Festival in March 1986 to general critical acclaim. White, however, boycotted the premiere because the festival had invited the Queen to attend. He attended the Sydney premiere later that year and judged it: &quot;a stupendous occasion.&quot;

In April 1987, White&#x27;s new play, &quot;Shepherd on the Rocks,&quot; opened at Adelaide in a production directed by Neil Armfield. White attended and deemed it a success. He had also written three short prose poems which were published as &quot;Three Uneasy Pieces&quot; in late 1987&quot;.&quot; White was determined that none of his works would be published or performed in 1988 which was the bicentenary of British settlement in Australia. He also urged a boycott of all official celebrations of the event, stating: &quot;circuses don&#x27;t solve serious problems.&quot; 

White was hospitalised with pneumonia in August 1988. A nurse stayed at his home for the remainder of his life and he no longer had the strength to attend protest rallies. In June 1989, a selection of his public statements, speeches and interviews was published as &quot;Patrick White Speaks&quot;. In October, the Sydney Theatre Company staged a successful revival of &quot;The Ham Funeral&quot; directed by Neil Armfield. White attended the premiere in his last public appearance.

In July 1990, White contracted pleurisy and suffered a bronchial collapse. He refused to be hospitalised and died at home at dawn on 30 September.

== Religious and political views ==

=== Religion ===
White was raised an Anglican but stated, &quot;I… went through my youth believing in nothing but my own ego.&quot; In late 1951, he experienced a religious conversion:If I say I had no religious tendencies between adolescence and &quot;The Tree of Man&quot;, it&#x27;s because I was sufficiently vain and egotistical to feel one can ignore certain realities. (I think the turning point came during a season of unending rain at Castle Hill when I fell flat on my back one day in the mud and starting cursing a God I had convinced myself didn&#x27;t exist. My personal scheme of things until then at once seemed too foolish to continue holding.)As the 1950s progressed, White became disillusioned with the Anglican church and his religious beliefs became more eclectic. He once described himself as a &quot;lapsed Anglican egotist agnostic pantheist occultist existentialist would-be though failed Christian Australian.&quot; White stated in 1981 that he did not call himself a Christian because he could not follow Christ&#x27;s injunction to forgive. In 1969, however, he had affirmed the importance of religion in his work: &quot;Religion. Yes, that&#x27;s behind all my books. What I am interested in is the relationship between the blundering human being and God.&quot;

=== Politics ===
In the 1930s, White was not politically engaged, but was sympathetic to the Francoist cause in the Spanish Civil War and supported Britain&#x27;s policy of appeasing Hitler. He later expressed regret over his complacency regarding European fascism. On his return to Australia after the Second World War he had little interest in politics but routinely voted for the conservative coalition in elections. He became involved in politics in 1969 when he joined protests against the Vietnam war and conscription of Australian troops for the conflict. He also supported Trade Union Green Bans against development proposals which threatened the urban environment. He publicly supported the Australian Labor Party in the federal elections of 1972, 1974 and 1975 despite a falling out with the prime minister Gough Whitlam over sand mining on Fraser Island. Following the dismissal of the Whitlam government in November 1975, he became a prominent advocate for an Australian republic. He was a public supporter of Aboriginal self-determination and privately donated money towards Aboriginal education. From 1981, he became a leading public figure in campaigns for nuclear disarmament and continued his support for various environmental causes. Marr, states that a common thread running through his political interventions was his opposition to plutocracy. Academic Martin Thomas argues that White was acutely aware of his own privileged upbringing and this drove his later concern about social injustice.

== Critical reception ==
White&#x27;s first published novel, &quot;Happy Valley&quot; (1939), received favourable reviews in Britain and Australia, although some critics noted that it was too derivative of Joyce, Lawrence and Woolf. The novel was awarded the Gold Medal of the Australian Literature Society. &quot;The Living and the Dead&quot; (1941) and &quot;The Aunt&#x27;s Story&quot; (1948) attracted little critical attention in Australia, although the latter was favourably reviewed in the &quot;New York Times Review of Books&quot;.

&quot;The Tree of Man&quot; (1955) was White&#x27;s first major international success, attracting positive reviews in the United States and the United Kingdom. James Stern, writing in the &quot;New York Times Book Review,&quot; praised the novel as &quot;a timeless work of art.&quot; Australian reviewers were more divided, poet A. D. Hope calling White&#x27;s prose &quot;pretentious and illiterate verbal sludge.&quot; The novel sold eight thousand copies in Australia in the first three months and was awarded the Gold Medal of the Australian Literature Society.

&quot;Voss&quot; (1957) was reviewed favourably in the United Kingdom but critics in the United States and Australia were more ambivalent. A significant body of Australian critics continued to fault White&#x27;s prose style and some objected to his rejection of the realist prose tradition. The novel was a best seller in the United Kingdom and won the inaugural Australian Miles Franklin Award. &quot;Riders in the Chariot&quot; (1961) also achieved critical and commercial success in the United Kingdom, and won admiring reviews in Australia.

By 1963, White was widely accepted as the major Australian literary novelist. A. D. Hope called him &quot;unquestionably the best known and most discussed novelist of the day&quot; and thought his success was &quot;indicative of a break with the naturalistic tradition which has dominated Australian fiction since the turn of the century, and may well be a portent of a more imaginative and a more intellectual sort of fiction.&quot; White was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1973. Academic Elizabeth Webby states that many critics consider &quot;The Twyborn Affair&quot; the best of his subsequent work.

Katherine Brisbane states that the reception of White&#x27;s plays has been ambivalent as they mix realism, expressionism and poetic and vernacular dialogue in a way which has challenged audiences and directors. &quot;The Ham Funeral&quot; (1947) was successfully produced in 1962 after it was rejected by the Adelaide Festival for obscenity. It was successfully revived in 1989. The Season at Sarsaparilla (1962) has been his most produced play.

== Themes and style ==

=== Themes ===
According to critic Brian Kiernan, &quot;the basic situation in his [White&#x27;s] fiction is the attempt of individuals, most often individuals alienated from society, to grasp some higher, more essential reality that lies beyond or behind social existence.&quot; The search for a higher reality is most often presented as an exploration of various forms of religious or mystical experience and the &quot;seers&quot; are variously pioneer-settlers (&quot;The Tree of Man&quot;), explorers (&quot;Voss&quot;), artists (&quot;The Vivisector&quot;), the simple-minded (&quot;The Solid Mandala&quot;), those fleeing into the self (&quot;The Aunt&#x27;s Story&quot;) or those on the margins of society. Sexual ambivalence and the search for personal identity are also recurrent themes that becomes more prominent in the later novels.

Society, in particular Australian society, is mostly portrayed as materialistic, conformist and life-inhibiting. White satirises what he called, in 1958, &quot;The Great Australian Emptiness&quot;in which the mind is the least of possessions, in which the rich man is the important man, in which the schoolmaster and the journalist rule what intellectual roost there is, in which beautiful youths and girls stare at life through blind blue eyes, in which human teeth fall like autumn leaves, the buttocks of cars grow hourly glassier, food means cake and steak, muscles prevail, and the march of material ugliness does not raise a quiver from the average nerves.&quot;The academic Mark Williams argues that White places the religious impulse at the centre of the human condition and his work, adding that &quot;religion is one of the central values, along with art and love, which he considers to be denigrated in his homeland.&quot; Kiernan notes a division among critics over whether &quot;he is essentially a simple and traditional writer who affirms a religious, even mystical view of life, or one who is distinctively modern, sophisticated and ironic, continually exploring transcendent possibilities but with detachment and even scepticism.&quot; Greg Clarke argues that Christian discourse is central to White&#x27;s writing. Marr, Williams and Kiernan, however, state that White drew on various religious and mystical traditions in his work including Judaism, Jungian archetypes and gnosticism.

=== Style ===
White&#x27;s early novels were heavily influenced by the modernism of Eliot, Joyce, Lawrence and Woolf. Kiernan has called his mature work &quot;complex, ambiguous and ironic verbal structures&quot;. His narratives shift seamlessly between past and present, inner experience and outer awareness, and the point of view of different characters. According to Williams, &quot;the point of view of the narrative in any White novel changes continually, rapidly and disconcertingly. The narrative voice ... is a voice composed of many voices, a slippery, complex, fluent medium.&quot;

White frequently shifts between tones, styles and linguistic registers. According to Kiernan, &quot;A self-conscious play with conventions, a parodic playfulness, is apparent through White&#x27;s adoption of various modes in his work from the first.&quot; His transitions between realist, expressionist, symbolist and romantic modes were a conscious attempt to demonstrate that &quot;the Australian novel is not necessarily the dreary, dun-coloured offspring of journalistic realism.&quot; Kiernan states that in &quot;Voss&quot; the theme of the outsider as visionary explorer of the human condition is undercut by ironic comedy and parodies of the &quot;gothic excess&quot; of romantic literature. Williams argues that White&#x27;s tendency for parody and playfulness become more prominent in later works such as &quot;The Twyborn Affair&quot; and &quot;Memoirs of Many in One.&quot; The tone becomes less portentous and more relaxed, and the works more self-referential.

==Influence and legacy==
Critic Susan Lever considers White a pivotal figure in Australian literature, stating that he made the novel, rather than poetry, the pre-eminent literary form. He &quot;transformed the possibilities of the Australian novel by demonstrating that it was a place to test ideas against complex spiritual, psychological and emotional experience, not only an avenue for national storytelling.&quot;

Australian novelists influenced by White include Thomas Keneally, Thea Astley, Randolph Stow and Christopher Koch. Lever argues that the following generations of novelists were more influenced by recent trends in world literature. Novelist David Malouf states that White&#x27;s &quot;High Modernism&quot; is a literary form that has become unfashionable but that this could change. Writing in 2024, critic Martin Thomas noted that critical and public interest in White had declined.The Patrick White Award is an annual literary prize which White founded in 1975 with the prize money from his Nobel prize. It is awarded to writers who have made a significant contribution to Australian literature. The Patrick White Indigenous Writers Award is for Indigenous students in New South Wales from Kindergarten to year 12. It is run by the Aboriginal Education Council which was a beneficiary of Patrick White&#x27;s estate. The Sydney Theatre Company sponsors the Patrick White Playwrights Award and Fellowship in honour of White&#x27;s contribution to Australian theatre.

In 2006, the National Library of Australia acquired a large quantity of White&#x27;s manuscripts. These included an unfinished novel, &quot;The Hanging Garden,&quot; which was published in 2012. The Art Gallery of New South Wales owns a 1940 portrait of White by de Maistre, and Parliament House, Sydney, owns a 1980 portrait by Brett Whiteley. A portrait of White by Louis Kahan won the 1962 Archibald Prize. White donated much of his own collection of Australian art to the Art Gallery of New South Wales.

As at 2024, there is no museum or institution dedicated to White&#x27;s life and work. His former residence, &quot;Dogwoods&quot;, at Castle Hill is privately owned but has a commemorative plaque and the surrounding streets are named after him. His former Sydney residence at Centennial Park is privately owned but is heritage listed. White is commemorated by the Patrick White Lawns adjacent to the National Library of Australia in Canberra.

In 2006 a hoaxer submitted a chapter of White&#x27;s novel &quot;The Eye of the Storm&quot; to a dozen Australian publishers under the name Wraith Picket (an anagram of White&#x27;s name). All of the publishers rejected the manuscript and none recognised it as White&#x27;s work.

In 2010, White&#x27;s novel &quot;The Vivisector&quot; was shortlisted for the Lost Man Booker Prize for 1970. In 2011, Fred Schepisi&#x27;s film adaptation of the novel &quot;The Eye of the Storm&quot; won The Age Critics Award for the best Australian feature at the Melbourne International Film Festival.

==List of works==
Novels
*&quot;Happy Valley&quot; (1939)
*&quot;The Living and the Dead&quot; (1941)
*&quot;The Aunt&#x27;s Story&quot; (1948)
*&quot;The Tree of Man&quot; (1955)
*&quot;Voss&quot; (1957)
*&quot;Riders in the Chariot&quot; (1961)
*&quot;The Solid Mandala&quot; (1966)
*&quot;The Vivisector&quot; (1970)
*&quot;The Eye of the Storm&quot; (1973)
*&quot;A Fringe of Leaves&quot; (1976)
*&quot;The Twyborn Affair&quot; (1979)
*&quot;Memoirs of Many in One&quot; (1986)
*&quot;The Hanging Garden&quot; (2012) (Unfinished, posthumous)

Collections of short stories
*&quot;The Burnt Ones&quot; (1964)
*&quot;The Cockatoos&quot; (1974)
*&quot;Three Uneasy Pieces&quot; (1987)
Poetry
*&quot;Thirteen Poems&quot; / under the pseudonym Patrick Victor Martindale. – Sydney: Privately printed (c. 1929)
*&quot;The Ploughman and Other Poems&quot; – Sydney: Beacon Press (1935)

Plays
*&quot;Bread and Butter Women&quot; (1935) Unpublished.
*&quot;The School for Friends&quot; (1935) Unpublished.
*&quot;Return to Abyssinia&quot; (1948) Unpublished.
*&quot;The Ham Funeral&quot; (1947) &quot;prem.&quot; Union Theatre, Adelaide, 1961.
*&quot;The Season at Sarsaparilla&quot; (1962)
*&quot;A Cheery Soul&quot; (1963)
*&quot;Night on Bald Mountain&quot; (1964)
*&quot;Big Toys&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Signal Driver: a Morality Play for the Times&quot; (1982)
*&quot;Netherwood&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Shepherd on the Rocks&quot; (1987)

Screenplay
* &quot;The Night the Prowler&quot; (1978)

Autobiography
*&quot;Flaws in the Glass&quot; (1981)

==Honours and awards==
White&#x27;s numerous honours and awards include:

* 1941: Gold Medal of the Australian Literature Society for &quot;Happy Valley&quot;
* 1955: Gold Medal of the Australian Literature Society for &quot;The Tree of Man&quot;
* 1957: Miles Franklin Literary Award for &quot;Voss&quot;
* 1959: W. H. Smith Literary Award for &quot;Voss&quot;
* 1961: Miles Franklin Literary Award for &quot;Riders in the Chariot&quot;
* 1973: Nobel Prize in Literature
* 1973: Australian of the Year, National Australia Day Council
* 1975: Companion of the Order of Australia (AC, civil division). (Resigned in 1976)

White was offered a knighthood in 1970, but declined it.

==Notes==
&#x27;

==References==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

*&quot;A Conversation with Patrick White&quot;, Australian Writers in Profile, Southerly, No.3 1973
*Barry Argyle, &quot;Patrick White&quot;, Writers and Critics Series, Oliver and Boyd, London, 1967
*Peter Beatson, &quot;The Eye in the Mandala, Patrick White: A Vision of Man and God&quot;, Barnes &amp; Noble, London, 1976
*John Docker, &quot;Patrick White and Romanticism: The Vivisector&quot;, Southerly, No.1, 1973
*Simon During, &quot;Patrick White&quot;, Oxford University Press, Melbourne, VIC, 1996.
*Michael Wilding, Studies in Classic Australian Fiction, Sydney Studies in Society and Culture, 16, 1997
*Ian Henderson and Anouk Lang (eds.) &quot;Patrick White Beyond the Grave&quot;, Anthem Press, 2015
*Helen Verity Hewitt,&quot; Patrick White and the Influence of the Visual Arts in his Work&quot;, Doctoral Thesis, Dept. of English, University of Melbourne, 1995.
*Clayton Joyce (ed.) &quot;Patrick White: A Tribute&quot;, Angus &amp; Robertson, Harper Collins, North Ryde, 1991.
*Alan Lawson (ed.) &quot;Patrick White: Selected Writings&quot;, University of Queensland Press, St. Lucia, 1994
*Irmtraud Petersson, &quot;New &quot;Light&quot; on &quot;Voss&quot;: The Significance of its Title&quot;, &quot;World Literature Written in English&quot; 28.2 (Autumn 1988) 245-59.
*Laurence Steven, &quot;Dissociation and Wholeness in Patrick White&#x27;s Fiction&quot;, Wilfrid Laurier University Press, Ontario, 1989.
*Elizabeth McMahon, Brigitta Olubas. &quot;Remembering Patrick White : contemporary critical essays&quot;, Rodopi, Amsterdam, New York, 2010.
*Denise Varney, &quot;Patrick White&#x27;s Theatre: Australian Modernism on Stage&quot;, Sydney University Press, Sydney, 2021.
*Stephen Michael Sasse, &quot;Companion notes to the Aunt&#x27;s story by Patrick White&quot;, WriteLight, 2012.
*Cynthia Vanden Drissen, &quot;Writing the nation : Patrick White and the indigene&quot;, Rodopi, Amsterdam, New York, 2009.
*William Yang, &quot;Patrick White: The Late Years&quot;, PanMacmillan Australia, 1995
==External links==
*
*Patrick White – Existential Explorer—essay by Karin Hansson at the official Nobel Prize website.
*Why Bother With Patrick White?—excerpts from White&#x27;s novels, as well as a range of critical interpretations of his work and personal remembrances of White as a man, courtesy of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
*Patrick White reappraised from the &quot;Times Literary Supplement&quot;
*Online catalogue of the documents and manuscripts acquired by the NLA.
*Patrick White on Trove</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q129187" start="0" end="31" title="Patrick White" label="Patrick Victor Martindale White"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="290" end="301" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="303" end="317" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="322" end="336" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="561" end="586" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653129" start="988" end="1000" title="Happy Valley (novel)" label="Happy Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751251" start="1213" end="1228" title="Manoly Lascaris" label="Manoly Lascaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q191431" start="1311" end="1318" title="mandala" label="mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5839903" start="1497" end="1512" title="The Tree of Man" label="The Tree of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942045" start="1536" end="1540" title="Voss (novel)" label="Voss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332623" start="1673" end="1694" title="Riders in the Chariot" label="Riders in the Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765162" start="1718" end="1735" title="The Solid Mandala" label="The Solid Mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189962" start="1788" end="1814" title="The Season at Sarsaparilla" label="The Season at Sarsaparilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183876" start="1831" end="1844" title="A Cheery Soul" label="A Cheery Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138446" start="1942" end="1957" title="Centennial Park, New South Wales" label="Centennial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732929" start="2208" end="2228" title="The Eye of the Storm (novel)" label="The Eye of the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770984" start="2252" end="2270" title="The Twyborn Affair" label="The Twyborn Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458241" start="2305" end="2323" title="Flaws in the Glass" label="Flaws in the Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q26328" start="2399" end="2412" title="Knightsbridge" label="Knightsbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918794" start="2825" end="2838" title="Elizabeth Bay, New South Wales" label="Elizabeth Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918297" start="3061" end="3070" title="Woollahra, New South Wales" label="Woollahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181957" start="3353" end="3369" title="Cranbrook School, Sydney" label="Cranbrook School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851295" start="3426" end="3444" title="Tudor House School" label="Tudor House School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128623" start="3471" end="3489" title="Southern Highlands (New South Wales)" label="Southern Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418495" start="3827" end="3840" title="Independent school (United Kingdom)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q467269" start="3915" end="3933" title="Cheltenham College" label="Cheltenham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q42384063" start="4451" end="4471" title="Elizabeth Withycombe" label="Elizabeth Withycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116070" start="5275" end="5283" title="jackaroo" label="jackaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080172" start="5319" end="5334" title="Monaro (New South Wales)" label="Monaro district"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="6071" end="6101" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670580" start="6244" end="6282" title="London Mercury" label="&amp;quot;London&amp;quot; &amp;quot;Mercury&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="6379" end="6385" title="Marcel Proust" label="Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="6387" end="6395" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="6397" end="6405" title="Stendhal" label="Stendhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="6410" end="6421" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q189654" start="6463" end="6469" title="Zennor" label="Zennor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443714" start="6509" end="6522" title="Women in Love" label="Women in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q123306" start="7109" end="7116" title="Pimlico" label="Pimlico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372740" start="7172" end="7186" title="Roy De Maistre" label="Roy de Maistre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101600" start="7946" end="7974" title="George G. Harrap and Co." label="George G. Harrap and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="8217" end="8221" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos"/>
<link wikidata="Q69447" start="8281" end="8296" title="Frieda Lawrence" label="Frieda Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49152" start="8315" end="8323" title="Cape Cod" label="Cape Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q921536" start="8653" end="8659" title="Viking Press" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275171" start="9290" end="9304" title="RAF Bentley Priory" label="Bentley Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="9316" end="9321" title="The Blitz" label="Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751251" start="9485" end="9500" title="Manoly Lascaris" label="Manoly Lascaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="9541" end="9557" title="Hellenic Army" label="Royal Greek Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q629986" start="10071" end="10092" title="The Aunt&amp;#x27;s Story" label="The Aunt&amp;#x27;s Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738675" start="10459" end="10474" title="The Ham Funeral" label="The Ham Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354357" start="10498" end="10512" title="William Dobell" label="William Dobell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143588" start="10746" end="10757" title="James Stern (writer)" label="James Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413088" start="10785" end="10811" title="The New York Times Book Review" label="New York Times Book Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050133" start="11047" end="11058" title="Castle Hill, New South Wales" label="Castle Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q38421" start="11269" end="11278" title="schnauzer" label="schnauzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681709" start="13073" end="13090" title="Adelaide Festival" label="Adelaide Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q30609983" start="13717" end="13739" title="Night on Bald Mountain (play)" label="Night on Bald Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="14310" end="14317" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="14328" end="14346" title="Analytical psychology" label="Jungian psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q996" start="14486" end="14506" title="Miles Franklin Award" label="Miles Franklin Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q381031" start="14783" end="14795" title="Sidney Nolan" label="Sidney Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131465" start="14873" end="14887" title="James Clifford (artist)" label="James Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981197" start="14889" end="14906" title="Erica McGilchrist" label="Erica McGilchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503980" start="14912" end="14925" title="Lawrence Daws" label="Lawrence Daws"/>
<link wikidata="Q176409" start="14960" end="14974" title="Brett Whiteley" label="Brett Whiteley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17403662" start="15322" end="15335" title="John Passmore (artist)" label="John Passmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="15469" end="15480" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam war"/>
<link wikidata="Q187019" start="15751" end="15762" title="Philip Roth" label="Philip Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707531" start="15782" end="15806" title="Portnoy&amp;#x27;s Complaint" label="Portnoy&amp;#x27;s Complaint"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="16095" end="16120" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q34189" start="16173" end="16185" title="Pablo Neruda" label="Pablo Neruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237147" start="17944" end="17954" title="David Marr (journalist)" label="David Marr"/>
<link wikidata="Q782788" start="18251" end="18273" title="Australian of the Year" label="Australian of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q502375" start="18323" end="18336" title="Australia Day" label="Australia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890752" start="18430" end="18443" title="Manning Clark" label="Manning Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q734221" start="18454" end="18469" title="Barry Humphries" label="Barry Humphries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114227" start="18503" end="18514" title="Jack Mundey" label="Jack Mundey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996534" start="18617" end="18641" title="Whitlam government" label="Whitlam Labor government"/>
<link wikidata="Q134905" start="18812" end="18825" title="K&amp;#x27;gari" label="Fraser Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656873" start="18863" end="18881" title="A Fringe of Leaves" label="A Fringe of Leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="19004" end="19017" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="19208" end="19226" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="19284" end="19293" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="dismissal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354851" start="19365" end="19374" title="John Kerr (governor-general)" label="John Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689216" start="19809" end="19820" title="Jim Sharman" label="Jim Sharman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21539024" start="20284" end="20303" title="Herbert Dyce Murphy" label="Herbert Dyce-Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q269357" start="20821" end="20833" title="Joseph Losey" label="Joseph Losey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506845" start="21554" end="21576" title="Sydney Theatre Company" label="Sydney Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q207269" start="22281" end="22296" title="Joan Sutherland" label="Joan Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681709" start="22380" end="22397" title="Adelaide Festival" label="Adelaide Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916790" start="22610" end="22625" title="Opera Australia" label="Opera Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723728" start="22631" end="22644" title="Richard Meale" label="Richard Meale"/>
<link wikidata="Q506430" start="22661" end="22673" title="David Malouf" label="David Malouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684915" start="23289" end="23311" title="Hawke government" label="Hawke Labor government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067936" start="23359" end="23384" title="Nuclear Disarmament Party" label="Nuclear Disarmament Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q44306" start="24251" end="24265" title="Salman Rushdie" label="Salman Rushdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823888" start="25202" end="25213" title="Australian Bicentenary" label="bicentenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="27437" end="27446" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="27460" end="27477" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="27517" end="27526" title="Appeasement" label="appeasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="27727" end="27749" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="conservative coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603441" start="27937" end="27947" title="Green ban" label="Green Bans"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="28044" end="28066" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="28161" end="28174" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q134905" start="28195" end="28208" title="K&amp;#x27;gari" label="Fraser Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q131708" start="28696" end="28706" title="plutocracy" label="plutocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q325890" start="29730" end="29740" title="A. D. Hope" label="A. D. Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q785653" start="33915" end="33933" title="Jungian archetypes" label="Jungian archetypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="33938" end="33948" title="gnosticism" label="gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q286576" start="34605" end="34614" title="Register (sociolinguistics)" label="registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q298334" start="35988" end="36003" title="Thomas Keneally" label="Thomas Keneally"/>
<link wikidata="Q274730" start="36005" end="36016" title="Thea Astley" label="Thea Astley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130734" start="36018" end="36031" title="Randolph Stow" label="Randolph Stow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086776" start="36036" end="36052" title="Christopher Koch" label="Christopher Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q506430" start="36179" end="36191" title="David Malouf" label="David Malouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231052" start="36425" end="36444" title="Patrick White Award" label="Patrick White Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147835" start="36897" end="36928" title="Patrick White Playwrights&amp;#x27; Award" label="Patrick White Playwrights Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q176409" start="37336" end="37350" title="Brett Whiteley" label="Brett Whiteley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6687530" start="37375" end="37386" title="Louis Kahan" label="Louis Kahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q425596" start="37400" end="37415" title="Archibald Prize" label="Archibald Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q623578" start="37916" end="37945" title="National Library of Australia" label="National Library of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958155" start="37970" end="37976" title="Literary hoax" label="hoaxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q245821" start="38320" end="38341" title="Lost Man Booker Prize" label="Lost Man Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q703727" start="38361" end="38374" title="Fred Schepisi" label="Fred Schepisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520813" start="38417" end="38437" title="The Eye of the Storm (2011 film)" label="The Eye of the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653129" start="38581" end="38593" title="Happy Valley (Patrick White novel)" label="Happy Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747909" start="38614" end="38637" title="The Living and the Dead (White novel)" label="The Living and the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q629986" start="38658" end="38679" title="The Aunt&amp;#x27;s Story" label="The Aunt&amp;#x27;s Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q5839903" start="38700" end="38715" title="The Tree of Man" label="The Tree of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942045" start="38736" end="38740" title="Voss (novel)" label="Voss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332623" start="38761" end="38782" title="Riders in the Chariot" label="Riders in the Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765162" start="38803" end="38820" title="The Solid Mandala" label="The Solid Mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989889" start="38841" end="38855" title="The Vivisector" label="The Vivisector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732929" start="38876" end="38896" title="The Eye of the Storm (novel)" label="The Eye of the Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656873" start="38917" end="38935" title="A Fringe of Leaves" label="A Fringe of Leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770984" start="38956" end="38974" title="The Twyborn Affair" label="The Twyborn Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815267" start="38995" end="39017" title="Memoirs of Many in One" label="Memoirs of Many in One"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738754" start="39038" end="39056" title="The Hanging Garden (White novel)" label="The Hanging Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720699" start="39132" end="39146" title="The Burnt Ones" label="The Burnt Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726563" start="39167" end="39180" title="The Cockatoos" label="The Cockatoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797882" start="39201" end="39220" title="Three Uneasy Pieces" label="Three Uneasy Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738675" start="39608" end="39623" title="The Ham Funeral" label="The Ham Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q24189962" start="39693" end="39719" title="The Season at Sarsaparilla" label="The Season at Sarsaparilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q28183876" start="39740" end="39753" title="A Cheery Soul" label="A Cheery Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q30609983" start="39774" end="39796" title="Night on Bald Mountain (play)" label="Night on Bald Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039391" start="39817" end="39825" title="Big Toys" label="Big Toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415762" start="39997" end="40018" title="The Night the Prowler" label="The Night the Prowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458241" start="40054" end="40072" title="Flaws in the Glass" label="Flaws in the Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="43185" end="43220" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="43264" end="43289" title="Times Literary Supplement" label="Times Literary Supplement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23933" wikidata="Q172390" url="?curid=23933" title="Pope Martin I">
<text>Pope Martin I (, ; between 590 and 600 – 16 September 655), also known as Martin the Confessor, was the bishop of Rome from 21 July 649 to his death 16 September 655. He had served as Pope Theodore I&#x27;s ambassador to Constantinople, and was elected to succeed him as pope. He was the only pope when Constantinople controlled the papacy whose election had not awaited imperial mandate. For his strong opposition to Monothelitism, Pope Martin I was arrested by Emperor Constans II, carried off to Constantinople, and ultimately banished to Cherson. He is considered a saint by both the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church, as well as the last pope recognised as a martyr.

==Early life and career==
Martin was born near Todi, Umbria, in the place nowadays named after him: Pian di San Martino, close to Todi. According to his biographer Theodore, Martin was of noble birth, of commanding intelligence, and showed great charity to the poor.

Piazza states that Martin belonged to the order of St Basil. By 641, he was an abbot, and Pope John IV sent him to Dalmatia and Istria with large sums of money to alleviate the distress of the inhabitants, and redeem captives seized during the invasion of the Sclaveni (those parts mainly settled by Croats). As the ruined churches could not be rebuilt, the relics of some of the more important Dalmatian saints were brought to Rome. John, himself from Dalmatia, then had them venerated by building the Chapel of St Venantius at the Lateran Baptistery. As Mackie suggests in her article, referenced above, the St Venantius Chapel remains an important early example of a &quot;martyrium&quot;: a shrine specifically commissioned to venerate relics brought from afar. With regard to the martyr cult, such structures represented the pinnacle of devotional building. They often became sites of pilgrimage.

Martin acted as &quot;apocrisiarius&quot; or legate (&#x27;nuncio&#x27;) at Constantinople from the earliest years of Theodore I (642–49). He sent him as ambassador to Constantinople, seat of the empire in its eastern half. Albeit where the pope was based, Rome was by now second fiddle – economically, militarily and politically – to Constantinople. However, the eastern half of the Empire was suffering its own turbulence due to Arab expansion, Jerusalem&#x27;s conquest in 637, and theological disputes having polarised Christians (the major religion of the empire).

Being placed, for so much of Theodore&#x27;s papacy, in charge of diplomacy between the Lateran patriarchate and the Byzantine court speaks of Martin&#x27;s preeminence. It was as a deacon that he was elected to the papal throne after the pope died (13 May 649).

==Papacy (649–653)==
When Martin I was elected pope, the capital of the erstwhile Roman Empire was Constantinople. It sat amidst the eastern domains, where the most influential Church leader was the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople who was also guardian of Christendom&#x27;s holiest relics, such as the Crown of thorns and the True Cross. To bring teaching prevalent in Constantinople into line with that elsewhere, and hastening to heal fissures appearing within the Catholic Church, decisiveness distinguished Martin from the start. According to Piero Bargellini, he neither sought nor waited for the Byzantine emperor Constans II&#x27;s consent to his election. To emphasise the point, it was without the customary imperial ratification that Martin had himself consecrated.

In the previous year, the emperor had published the Typos of Constans. This document defended the heretical Monothelite thesis, which watered down the Catholic faith by claiming that Christ had not in fact had a human will. To silence this, and the confusion it caused, Pope Martin convened, within his first three months, the Lateran Council of 649, to which all the bishops of the West were invited. The Council met in the basilica of St. John Lateran in Rome. It was attended by 105 bishops (chiefly from Italy, Sicily, and Sardinia, with some from Africa and other quarters). Over five sessions or &quot;secretarii&quot; from 5 to 31 October 649, resulting in twenty canons, the Council censured Monothelitism, its authors, and the writings via which Monothelitism had spread and caused rifts within the Catholic Church. This condemnation embraced not only the latest emperor&#x27;s &quot;Typos&quot; but also the &quot;Ecthesis&quot; (the exposition of faith of Patriarch Sergius I of Constantinople, for which Emperor Heraclius had stood sponsor).

Imperial interference in matters theological had been soundly rejected. Condemnation of all Monothelite writings provoked an angry reaction from the Byzantine court. Martin, unabashed, hastened to publish the Lateran Council decrees in an encyclical. Constans responded by getting his exarch in Italy to arrest the pope should he persist, and to send him as a prisoner to Constantinople. Martin was also accused by Constans of unauthorised contact and collaboration with the Muslims of the Rashidun Caliphate—allegations which he remained unable to convince the infuriated imperial authorities to drop.

The arrest orders could not be carried out for more than three years. On 17 June 653, Martin was arrested in the Lateran, along with Maximus the Confessor. He was hurried out of Rome and conveyed first to Naxos, Greece, and subsequently to Constantinople, where he arrived on 17 September 653. He was saved from execution by the pleas of Patriarch Paul II of Constantinople, who was himself gravely ill. Martin hoped that a new pope would not be elected while he lived but the imperial Byzantine government forced the Romans to find a successor. Eugene I was elected on 10 August 654, and Martin apparently acquiesced. After suffering an exhausting imprisonment and reportedly many public indignities, Martin was banished to Cherson, where he arrived on 15 May 655. He died there on 16 September.

==Legacy==

A selection of documents recording the trial and exile of Pope Martin I was translated into Latin in Rome in the ninth century by Anastasius Bibliothecarius.

Since the 1969 revision of the General Roman Calendar, the memorial of Saint Martin I, which earlier versions of the calendar place on 12 November, is on 13 April, celebrated as the formal anniversary of his death. In the Byzantine-rite Churches, his feast day is 14 April (27 April New Style).
Pope Pius VII made an honourable reference to Martin in his 1800 encyclical &quot;Diu satis&quot;:

The breviary of the Byzantine Churches states: &quot;Glorious definer of the Orthodox Faith... sacred chief of divine dogmas, unstained by error... true reprover of heresy... foundation of bishops, pillar of the Orthodox faith, teacher of religion... Thou didst adorn the divine see of Peter, and since from this divine Rock, thou didst immovably defend the Church, so now thou art glorified with him.”

== References ==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
*West, Charles (2019), &#x27;“And how, if you are a Christian, can you hate the emperor?” Reading a Seventh-Century Scandal in Carolingian Francia&#x27;, ed. Karina Kellermann, Alheydis Plassmann and Christian Schwermann (Bonn, 2019), https://hcommons.org/deposits/item/hc:27953

==External links==
*
* Pope Saint Martin I in Patron Saints Index
* Pope Martin I (Archived) in Prof Salvador Miranda, &quot;The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church (604–701)&quot;
* Colonnade Saints in St Peter&#x27;s Square</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172390" start="0" end="13" title="Pope Martin I" label="Pope Martin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q172390" start="74" end="94" title="Pope Martin I" label="Martin the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="104" end="118" title="bishop of Rome" label="bishop of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q104244" start="184" end="199" title="Pope Theodore I" label="Pope Theodore I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="221" end="235" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132454" start="245" end="252" title="papal selection before 1059" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="271" end="275" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079213" start="303" end="339" title="Byzantine Papacy" label="Constantinople controlled the papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q238459" start="418" end="431" title="Monothelitism" label="Monothelitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41613" start="471" end="482" title="Constans II" label="Constans II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070397" start="542" end="549" title="Cherson (theme)" label="Cherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="588" end="603" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="612" end="635" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="662" end="684" title="List of popes who died violently#Martyr popes" label="recognised as a martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061186" start="997" end="1002" title="Religious order" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q44258" start="1006" end="1014" title="Basil of Caesarea" label="St Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q199491" start="1045" end="1057" title="Pope John IV" label="Pope John IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="1070" end="1078" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q639912" start="1083" end="1089" title="Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257426" start="1215" end="1223" title="Sclaveni" label="Sclaveni"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="1255" end="1261" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="1313" end="1318" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371947" start="1468" end="1480" title="Venantius of Salona" label="St Venantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519438" start="1488" end="1506" title="Lateran Baptistery" label="Lateran Baptistery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="1740" end="1746" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132430" start="1880" end="1893" title="papal apocrisiarius" label="apocrisiarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="1903" end="1909" title="Papal legate" label="legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="1934" end="1948" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q104244" start="1976" end="1986" title="Pope Theodore I" label="Theodore I"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="2289" end="2303" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Arab expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q815154" start="2305" end="2330" title="Siege of Jerusalem (636–637)" label="Jerusalem&amp;#x27;s conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q848394" start="2517" end="2537" title="Lateran Palace" label="Lateran patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q255081" start="2546" end="2561" title="Byzantine bureaucracy and aristocracy" label="Byzantine court"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="2611" end="2617" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132454" start="2630" end="2637" title="papal selection before 1059" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="2792" end="2806" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="2892" end="2930" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="2956" end="2974" title="Christendom" label="Christendom&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127583" start="3003" end="3018" title="Crown of thorns" label="Crown of thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="3027" end="3037" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3168" end="3183" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079213" start="3418" end="3439" title="Byzantine Papacy" label="imperial ratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="3464" end="3475" title="episcopal consecration" label="consecrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4457982" start="3530" end="3547" title="Typos of Constans" label="Typos of Constans"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="3661" end="3667" title="Jesus" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642234" start="3805" end="3827" title="Lateran Council of 649" label="Lateran Council of 649"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="3903" end="3939" title="Basilica di San Giovanni in Laterano" label="basilica of St. John Lateran in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3986" end="3991" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="3993" end="3999" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="4005" end="4013" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="4030" end="4036" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="4149" end="4154" title="canon law" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528618" start="4402" end="4410" title="Ecthesis" label="Ecthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142983" start="4455" end="4482" title="Sergius I of Constantinople" label="Sergius I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="4494" end="4511" title="Heraclius" label="Emperor Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="4772" end="4782" title="encyclical" label="encyclical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144428" start="4818" end="4824" title="exarch" label="exarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q887349" start="4825" end="4833" title="Olympius (exarch)" label="in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="5008" end="5015" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="5023" end="5041" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q848394" start="5250" end="5257" title="Lateran Palace" label="Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q206842" start="5270" end="5291" title="Maximus the Confessor" label="Maximus the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188527" start="5342" end="5355" title="Naxos, Greece" label="Naxos, Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273458" start="5485" end="5510" title="Paul II of Constantinople" label="Paul II of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q199498" start="5683" end="5691" title="Eugene I" label="Eugene I"/>
<link wikidata="Q638445" start="5862" end="5869" title="Chersonesus" label="Cherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q125984" start="6077" end="6103" title="Anastasius Bibliothecarius" label="Anastasius Bibliothecarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207301" start="6116" end="6129" title="Mysterii Paschalis" label="1969 revision"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="6137" end="6159" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417046" start="6165" end="6173" title="memorial (liturgy)" label="memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="6389" end="6398" title="New Style" label="New Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q124754" start="6401" end="6414" title="Pope Pius VII" label="Pope Pius VII"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23936" wikidata="Q227719" url="?curid=23936" title="Pope Martin IV">
<text>Pope Martin IV (; c. 1210/1220 – 28 March 1285), born Simon de Brion, was the head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 22 February 1281 to his death on 28 March 1285. He was the last French pope to have held court in Rome; all subsequent French popes held court in Avignon (the Avignon Papacy).

==Early life==
Simon de Brion, son of Jean, sieur de Brion, was born at the château of Meinpincien, Île-de-France, France, in the decade following 1210. He had a brother named Gilo, who was a knight in the Diocese of Sens. The seigneurial family of Brion, who took their name from Brion near Joigny, flourished in the &quot;Brie français&quot;. He spent time at the University of Paris, and is said to have then studied law at Padua and Bologna. Through papal favour he received a canonry at Saint-Quentin in 1238 and spent the period 1248–1259 as a canon of the cathedral chapter in Rouen, finally as archdeacon. At the same time he was appointed treasurer of the church of St. Martin in Tours by King Louis IX of France, an office he held until he was elected pope in 1281. In 1255–1259, King Louis IX founded the French royal convent at Longchamps for the Poor Clares (Minoresses); the King&#x27;s sister Isabelle was the patroness (though she never entered the cloister herself), and Simon de Brion was the Guardian. In 1259, he was appointed to the council of the king, who made him keeper of the great seal, chancellor of France, one of the great officers in the household of the king. He became Chancellor of Louis IX of France (1260–1261).

==Cardinal Simon de Brion==
On 17 December 1261, the new French Pope, Urban IV (Jacques Pantaléon), made Chancellor de Brion cardinal-priest, with the &quot;titulus&quot; of the church of St. Cecilia. This would have entailed Simon de Brion&#x27;s residence in Rome, but the affairs of Pope Urban required that he send a representative of the highest level to France to deal personally with King Louis IX and his brother Charles of Anjou and Provence. Simon&#x27;s previous experience at the French Court made him the perfect choice as Legate.

Cardinal Simon therefore returned to France as Papal Legate for Urban IV and also for his successor Pope Clement IV in 1264–1268. In 1264, on the eve of S. Bartholomew, he held a general synod at Paris. He was appointed again, by Pope Gregory X on 1 August 1274, and he served continuously in France until 1279. His first task was to raise support and money for a Crusade against Manfred, the Hohenstaufen candidate for the Imperial Crown. He immediately became deeply involved in the negotiations for papal support for the assumption of the crown of Sicily by Charles of Anjou. As Legate he presided over several synods on reform, and on the raising of funds for Pope Gregory&#x27;s crusade. The most important of these was held at Bourges on 13 September 1276.

Signatures on papal bulls indicate that Cardinal Simon was back in Viterbo by 11 January 1268. In a letter of 14 or 15 January 1268, Pope Clement IV wrote to Cardinal Simon de Brion that he had heard that the Cardinal had fallen from his horse and in the accident had injured his leg. He also wrote that Conradin and Ludwig Duke of Bavaria were at Verona, and were pressing for Pavia. A general war was likely. Cardinal Simon&#x27;s injury must not have been severe, since, on 3 April 1268, the Pope wrote to him with the request (not an order) that he undertake a legation to Germany (Teutonia), if he wished and if it were possible. The Pope needed a prudent and faithful man, who had clean hands and eyes wide open, who could stay centered on the business and let himself stray neither right nor left, who could preserve the Empire, keep the Apostolic See free from scandal, and the neighboring kingdoms free from danger. In vetting names, Simon seemed the most suitable.

Pope Clement IV (Guy Foulques) fell ill on the Feast of S. Cecilia (22 November), and died at Viterbo on 29 November 1268. He had governed the Church for three years, nine months, and twenty-four days. The See of Peter was vacant for two years and nine months. Cardinal Simon de Brion came from France to attend the Conclave, which took place in the Episcopal Palace, next to the Cathedral of S. Lorenzo in Viterbo. He was the senior cardinal-priest. Around Pentecost of 1270 (1 June), Cardinal Simon and Cardinal Riccardo Annibaldi of S. Angelo had to leave the Conclave and retire to their residences for the sake of their health. On 22 August 1270, he was one of the signatories to the letter of protest sent by the Cardinals to Raynerius Gatti, Captain of the City of Viterbo, to cease and desist from their harassment of the Cardinals and their suites. He was one of the cardinals who signed the electoral compact on September, 1270, to leave the election of a new pope to a committee of six, promising to accept the committee&#x27;s decision. He was not, however, one of the six cardinals elected to the Compromise Committee that selected Archdeacon Teobaldo Visconti as pope on 1 September 1270. The newly elected pope was not present in Viterbo, but was serving on Crusade with King Edward I of England. He arrived in Italy on 1 January 1271, and travelled to Viterbo, where he arrived early in February. He accepted the election, and chose to be called Gregory X. He and the Curia travelled to Rome, arriving on 13 March. On 19 March he was ordained a priest, and on 27 March he was consecrated bishop, and then crowned by Cardinal Giovanni Gaetano Orsini.

==Three Conclaves of 1276==
Simon de Brion&#x27;s appointment as Legate in France, made by Pope Gregory on 1 August 1274 continued throughout 1276. He was unable to be present for the Conclave of 1 January 1276, which elected Peter of Tarantaise as Pope Innocent V. Nor was he present for the Conclave of 2–11 July, which elected Ottobono Fieschi as Pope Adrian V. Nor was he present at the September Conclave, which, on 8 September, elected Peter Julian as Pope John XXI. In each case the election was completed before he could have been notified, and before he could have travelled from France to central Italy. This was one of the defects of Gregory X&#x27;s regulations on the holding of a Conclave.

==Election of Nicholas III==
Pope John XXI was in contact with Cardinal Simon. He had written to him on 3 March 1277, ordering him to speak with the king of France about matters connected with Alfonso of Castile. But the Pope died rather suddenly, after a reign of only eight months. He was still living in the Episcopal Palace in Viterbo, where Adrian V (Fieschi) had died and where he had been elected. The palace was still under construction, when suddenly the roof of one of the chambers collapsed. The Pope was in the room at the time, and he was severely injured. He died three (or six) days later, on 20 May 1277. Cardinal Simon de Brion was still in France when the Conclave began, but he was unable to predict that the Conclave would last until 25 November, and therefore he was not present. There were only seven cardinals in Viterbo, since neither Innocent V, nor Adrian V, nor John XXI had named any new cardinals. They argued on and on, trying to choose a pope. There were three cardinals who favored the Angevin Charles I and his designs. There were three who opposed him. Cardinal Bertrand de Saint Martin, Bishop of Sabina, the only surviving Cardinal Bishop, held a middle course, or perhaps one should say he saw too clearly to be willing to commit to either party. Finally, they chose Cardinal Giovanni Gaetani (Orsini), a native Roman, the Deacon of S. Nicola in Carcere and senior Deacon, and Archpriest of the Vatican Basilica.

Nicholas III immediately set out for Rome, where he was ordained a priest on 18 December 1277, and consecrated Bishop of Rome on 19 December. He was crowned on the Feast of S. Stephen, 26 December 1277 at the Vatican Basilica. One person, at least, was deeply unhappy about the outcome of this Conclave, King Charles I of Sicily. The new Orsini pope was an enemy of the Angevins, and Charles knew he would have nothing but trouble from Nicholas III.

A week after the election of Nicholas III, the new pope wrote to Simon, who was still Legate in France, urging him to effect a reconciliation between the King of France, Philip III, and the King of Leon and Castile, Alfonso the Wise. Since the King of Aragon, Peter III (who was married to Constance of Sicily) was involved in the struggle over Sicily with Charles I, this peace initiative threatened King Charles directly. On 22 April 1279, Pope Nicholas wrote to Cardinal Simon about King Philip. The Pope had issued a prohibition on tournaments, and King Philip and his barons were flagrantly violating the prohibition. Cardinal Simon was ordered to excommunicate the King of France.

To ensure that his victory against the Angevins would stand, Nicholas III decided to go forward with a much needed addition to the Sacred College of Cardinals. At his first opportunity, on 12 March 1278, he created ten cardinals. Five cardinal bishops were named: Latino Frangipani Malabranca, OP, of Rome (Nicholas III&#x27;s nephew by his sister Mabilia); Erhard de Lessines (Lesigny), of Langres, son of Guillaume, Marshal of Champagne; Bentivenga de Bentivengis, O.Min., of Aquasparta; Robert Kilwardby, OP, Archbishop of Canterbury; and Ordoño (Ordeonio) Álvarez, Bishop of Braga. Two cardinal-priests were named: Gerardo Bianchi of Parma, and Girolamo Masci d&#x27; Ascoli, O.Min., of Picenum. He also appointed three cardinal-deacons: Giordano Orsini, brother of Pope Nicholas III, of Rome; Giacomo Colonna of Rome; and Gerardo Cupalates, O.Min., of Piacenza. The effect of these creations was to seriously dilute the Angevin influence in the Sacred College, and to considerably increase the monastic element, especially the Franciscan one. It needs to be recalled that Nicholas III was the Governor, Corrector, and Protector of the Franciscans. The Roman influence was also strengthened. The inevitable consequence would be that the next pope too would not be a creature of Charles I of Sicily.

Eventually, though, by 19 October 1279, Pope Nicholas recalled Cardinal Simon de Brion.

==Conclave of 1280–1281==
Pope Nicholas III (Giovanni Caetano Orsini) died at Castro Soriano in the diocese of Viterbo on 22 August 1280 of an apoplectic stroke which had left him without speech. A story was circulated nonetheless that he had been poisoned. At the time of his death on 22 August 1280, there were thirteen cardinals. This would be the fifth Conclave in five years. King Charles had taken the trouble to make friends with the Annibaldi faction, led by Riccardo Annibaldi, who were enemies of the Orsini and who had been driven out of Rome in street fighting following the death of Nicholas III. They had taken refuge in Viterbo, and now, by coincidence, they were present and entrenched and ready to make trouble on behalf of Charles I and themselves. Annibaldi led a coup in Viterbo, which drove out the governor of the city, Orso Orsini, the dead pope&#x27;s nephew. The Angevins thereupon dominated the Conclave, in which the regulations of Gregory X were still in abeyance. But the Conclave still required a two-thirds vote to elect a pope, in according with the Constitution of Alexander III, which was still in effect. Neither the Orsini faction nor the French faction had sufficient votes to elect, but each had sufficient votes to block an election. The stalemate continued throughout the winter. On 2 February 1281, the Feast of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary, a mob broke into the Episcopal palace, where the Conclave was in progress, and abducted two of the cardinals, Matteo Rosso Orsini and Giordano Orsini (the late pope&#x27;s brother). Without their opposition, Simon de Brion was unanimously elected to the papacy on 22 February 1281, taking the name Martin IV,

For the third time in fifteen years Viterbo had hosted a papal conclave. And for the third time there were disorders which had threatened the validity of the election and the lives of the participants. Viterbo was placed under the ban of excommunication and of the interdict for the imprisonment of the cardinals. It was not possible, therefore, for the Coronation to take place in Viterbo. But Rome was not at all inclined to accept a hated Frenchman as Pope. Martin IV sent two cardinals, Latino Orsini and Goffredo da Alatri, to Rome with a letter, proposing that he be crowned in Rome on Quadragesima Sunday. The Romans positively refused to allow the Coronation to take place in Rome. But they did hold a public meeting, and elected Giovanni Caetani Orsini in his purely personal capacity as their Senator, and authorized him to appoint anyone he chose as his substitute. So Martin IV was crowned instead at Orvieto on 23 March 1281. He never visited Rome during his Pontificate. Instead he immediately sent his Vicar, Peter of Lavagna, to Rome. But on 30 April 1281, Pope Martin handed the senatorial power over to King Charles for the rest of his reign.

==Papacy==
Dependent on Charles of Anjou in nearly everything, the new Pope quickly appointed him to the position of Senator of Rome. At the insistence of Charles, Martin IV excommunicated the Eastern Roman Emperor Michael VIII Palaeologus, who stood in the way of Charles&#x27;s plans to restore the Latin Empire of the East that had been established in the aftermath of the Fourth Crusade. He thus broke the tenuous union which had been reached between the Greek and the Latin Churches at the Second Council of Lyons in 1274 and further compromise was rendered impossible.

In 1282, Charles lost control of the island of Sicily in the violent massacre known as the Sicilian Vespers. The Sicilians had elected Peter III of Aragon as their king and sought papal confirmation, in vain, though they were willing to reconfirm Sicily as a vassal state of the papacy. Martin IV used all the spiritual and material resources at his command against the Aragonese in order to preserve Sicily for the House of Anjou. He excommunicated Peter III, declared his kingdom of Aragon forfeit, and ordered a crusade against him, but it was all in vain.

Due to the hostility of Raynerius, the Captain of Orvieto, in the repeated struggles between Guelphs and Ghibellines, Pope Martin was unable to remain at Orvieto. He removed himself and the Papal Curia from Orvieto on 26 June 1284, and arrived in Perugia on 4 October. He died at Perugia on 28 March 1285.

Following the example of Nicholas III, Pope Martin IV created new cardinals at his first opportunity, on the &quot;Quattuor Tempora&quot; of Lent, 12 April 1281. His new cardinals included: Bernardus de Languissello of Nîmes, the Archbishop of Arles since 1273; Hugh of Evesham, Canon of York and Archdeacon of Worcester; Gervasius de Glincamp of Mans, Archdeacon of Paris; Comes Giusianus, Conte de Casate, of Milan, Auditor of the Rota; Gaufridus (Geoffroy) de Barro or Barbeau, of Burgundy, Dean of the Cathedral of Paris; Johannes Chauleti (Cholet), of the village of Nointre in the diocese of Beauvais, a personal friend of Philip III, Philip IV, and Pope Martin IV; and Benedetto Gaetano of Anagni, who was elected Pope Boniface VIII on 24 December 1295. The French influence is strongly in evidence, and only Cardinal Gaetano came from the neighborhood of Rome.

==Death==
Pope Martin IV celebrated a solemn Mass in the Cathedral of Perugia on Easter Sunday, 25 March 1285, which was also the Feast of the Annunciation. After his usual lunch with his chaplains, he was stricken with a sudden illness. On Easter Wednesday, 28 March, around the fifth hour of the night, he died. He was buried in the Cathedral of San Lorenzo in Perugia. He had reigned four years and one month. His successor was elected four days later, on 2 April.

In the &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;, Dante sees Martin IV in Purgatory, where the reader is reminded of the former pontiff&#x27;s fondness for Lake Bolsena eels and Vernaccia wine.

==See also==

* Cardinals created by Martin IV
* List of popes

==Notes==
==Bibliography==
* Chouiller, Ernest, &quot;Recherches sur la vie du pape Martin IV,&quot; &quot;Revue de Champagne et de Brie&quot; 4 (1878) 15–30.
* Picherit, Gilles, &quot;Documents pour l&#x27;histoire de Simon de Brion, pape Martin II dit IV., 1215–1285&quot; (Les Herbiers: chez l&#x27;Auteur 1995).
* Cerrini, Simonetta, &quot;Martino IV,&quot; &quot;Enciclopedia dei papi&quot; (Roma 2000), I, 446–449.
*&quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; &quot;Pope Martin IV&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q227719" start="0" end="14" title="Pope Martin IV" label="Pope Martin IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q227719" start="54" end="68" title="Pope Martin IV" label="Simon de Brion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="90" end="105" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="123" end="135" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915348" start="200" end="211" title="List of French popes" label="last French"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="287" end="294" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="300" end="314" title="Avignon Papacy" label="Avignon Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13917" start="418" end="431" title="Île-de-France" label="Île-de-France"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="433" end="439" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165364" start="524" end="539" title="Diocese of Sens" label="Diocese of Sens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="545" end="556" title="Manorialism" label="seigneurial"/>
<link wikidata="Q476584" start="610" end="616" title="Joigny" label="Joigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q914050" start="642" end="655" title="Brie (region)" label="Brie français"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="684" end="703" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q617" start="745" end="750" title="Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="755" end="762" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q182744" start="810" end="823" title="Saint-Quentin, Aisne" label="Saint-Quentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="868" end="873" title="canon (priest)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="902" end="907" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q288" start="1007" end="1012" title="Tours" label="Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="1021" end="1039" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q236952" start="1226" end="1234" title="Isabelle of France (saint)" label="Isabelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402428" start="1432" end="1452" title="chancellor of France" label="chancellor of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="1534" end="1552" title="Louis IX of France" label="Louis IX of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q169305" start="1637" end="1645" title="Pope Urban IV" label="Urban IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="1692" end="1707" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal-priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092939" start="1724" end="1731" title="Titular church" label="titulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="1828" end="1832" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="2159" end="2171" title="papal legate" label="Papal Legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q172928" start="2212" end="2227" title="Pope Clement IV" label="Pope Clement IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q161740" start="2342" end="2356" title="Pope Gregory X" label="Pope Gregory X"/>
<link wikidata="Q131405361" start="2476" end="2499" title="Crusade against Manfred" label="Crusade against Manfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="2663" end="2669" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="2673" end="2689" title="Charles of Anjou" label="Charles of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="2726" end="2731" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="2845" end="2852" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q161740" start="5314" end="5323" title="Gregory X" label="Gregory X"/>
<link wikidata="Q170871" start="5768" end="5783" title="Pope Innocent V" label="Pope Innocent V"/>
<link wikidata="Q173000" start="5869" end="5882" title="Pope Adrian V" label="Pope Adrian V"/>
<link wikidata="Q172916" start="5977" end="5990" title="Pope John XXI" label="Pope John XXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q170859" start="10233" end="10250" title="Pope Nicholas III" label="Pope Nicholas III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291244" start="12180" end="12189" title="Interdict (Catholic canon law)" label="interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="12310" end="12314" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="12828" end="12835" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16601501" start="13194" end="13209" title="Summus Senator" label="Senator of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="13251" end="13265" title="excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="13270" end="13283" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q200033" start="13292" end="13316" title="Michael VIII Palaeologus" label="Michael VIII Palaeologus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="13453" end="13467" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q10951" start="13572" end="13595" title="Second Council of Lyons" label="Second Council of Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q207327" start="13744" end="13760" title="Sicilian Vespers" label="Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q312311" start="13788" end="13807" title="Peter III of Aragon" label="Peter III of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="13912" end="13918" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="14069" end="14083" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="House of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q625133" start="14166" end="14187" title="Aragonese Crusade" label="a crusade against him"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="14307" end="14330" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelphs and Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="14494" end="14501" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142954" start="14630" end="14658" title="Ember days" label="&amp;quot;Quattuor Tempora&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="15242" end="15260" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="15472" end="15485" title="Easter Sunday" label="Easter Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087807" start="15521" end="15546" title="Feast of the Annunciation" label="Feast of the Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438705" start="15632" end="15648" title="Easter Wednesday" label="Easter Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="15873" end="15886" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="15894" end="15899" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="15918" end="15927" title="Purgatory" label="Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q208180" start="16000" end="16012" title="Lake Bolsena" label="Lake Bolsena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401752" start="16022" end="16031" title="Vernaccia di San Gimignano" label="Vernaccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537878" start="16055" end="16085" title="Cardinals created by Martin IV" label="Cardinals created by Martin IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q40483" start="16088" end="16101" title="List of popes" label="List of popes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23937" wikidata="Q169612" url="?curid=23937" title="Pope Martin V">
<text>Pope Martin V (; ; January/February 1369 – 20 February 1431), born Otto (or Oddone) Colonna, was the head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 11 November 1417 to his death in February 1431. His election effectively ended the Western Schism of 1378–1417. He is the last pope to date to take on the pontifical name &quot;Martin&quot;.

==Biography==
Oddone Colonna was born at Genazzano, the son of Agapito Colonna, Lord of Genazzano, Capranica Prenestina, San Vito and Ciciliano from 1374, who died after 23 May 1398, and wife Caterina Conti, between 26 January and 20 February 1369. He belonged to one of the oldest and most distinguished families of Rome. His brother Giordano, Lord of Genazzano, Capranica Prenestina, San Vito and Ciciliano, a Neapolitan General, Patrician of Naples in 1417, was shortly Prince of Salerno and Duke of Venosa from 3 August 1419, dying of plague on 16 August 1422, having married Mascia Annibaldi, who died in 1423, without issue, while his sister Paola was Lady of Piombino between 1441 and 1445.

Oddone studied law at the University of Pavia. He became apostolic protonotary under Pope Urban VI (1378–1389), and was created Cardinal-Deacon of San Giorgio in Velabro by Pope Innocent VII in 1405.

In 1409 he took part in the Council of Pisa, and was one of the supporters of Antipope Alexander V. Later he confirmed his allegiance to Alexander&#x27;s successor, John XXIII, by whom his family obtained several privileges, while Oddone obtained for himself the vicariate of Todi, Orvieto, Perugia and Umbria. He was excommunicated for this in 1411 by Pope Gregory XII. Oddone was with John XXIII&#x27;s entourage at the Council of Constance and followed him in his escape at Schaffhausen on 21 March 1415. Later he returned to Constance and took part in the process leading to the deposition of John XXIII.

==Papacy==

===Election===
After deposing Antipope John XXIII in 1415, the Council of Constance was long divided by the conflicting claims of Pope Gregory XII (1406–15) and Antipope Benedict XIII (1394–1423); eventually Gregory resigned and Benedict was deposed, ending the schism. 

Martin was elected pope, at the age of 48, at the Council of Constance on St. Martin&#x27;s Day, 11 November 1417. Participants in the conclave included 23 cardinals and 30 delegates of the council. He was ordained a priest on 13 November 1417, and consecrated bishop the next day.

Martin left Constance at the close of the council (May 1418), but travelled slowly through Italy and lingered at Florence. His authority in Rome was represented by his brother Giordano, who had fought under Muzio Attendolo against the condottiero Braccio da Montone. The Pope at the time ruled only Rome (when not rebellious) and its environs: Braccio held Umbria, Bologna as an independent commune, while much of Romagna and the Marche was held by local &quot;vicars&quot;, who were in fact petty hereditary lords. In particular, Martin confirmed Giorgio Ordelaffi in Forlì, Ludovico Alidosi in Imola, Malatesta IV Malatesta in Rimini, and Guidantonio da Montefeltro in Spoleto, who would later marry the pope&#x27;s niece Caterina Colonna. 

In exchange for the recognition of Joanna II of Naples, Martin obtained the restitution of Benevento, several fiefs in the Kingdom of Naples for his relatives and, most important of all, an agreement that Muzio Attendolo, then hired by the Neapolitans, should leave Rome.

After a long stay in Florence while these matters were arranged, Martin was able to enter Rome in September 1420. He at once set to work establishing order and restoring the dilapidated churches, palaces, bridges, and other public structures. For this reconstruction he engaged some famous masters of the Tuscan school and helped instigate the Roman Renaissance.

Faced with competing plans for general reform offered by various nations, Martin V submitted a counter-scheme and entered into negotiations for separate concordats, for the most part vague and illusory, with the Holy Roman Empire, England, France and Spain.

===Hussite Wars===
By 1415 Bohemia was in turmoil and the subject of much discussion at the Council of Constance. Adherents of Jan Hus, who had been previously burned at the stake as a heretic by the council, adopted the practice of Communion under both kinds. The Council sent letters to the civil and ecclesiastical authorities in Bohemia, insisting they deal with the heresy. Bohemian and Moravian nobles responded that the sentence on Hus was unjust and insulting to their country, and promised to protect priests against episcopal prosecutions for heresy. Prague was placed under interdict for sheltering the excommunicated Jan of Jesenice. Beghards arrived attracted by Bohemia&#x27;s reputation for religious liberty.

In 1419 King Wenceslaus IV, who had resisted what he considered interference in his kingdom, commanded that all ejected Catholic beneficiaries should be reinstated in their offices and revenues. Prague prepared for armed resistance. Jan Želivský, an extreme anti-Catholic preacher of Prague, led a procession to the town hall, where under the leadership of Jan Žižka of Trocnov, a noble of southern Bohemia, the building was stormed and people found inside were thrown out of the windows on to the spears and swords of the processionists, and hacked to pieces. In Kuttenberg, hundreds of captured Hussites were thrown by the miners into the shafts of disused silver mines. King Wenceslaus swore death to all the rebels, but died of a stroke in August, 1419. The next months were marked by deeds of violence; many citizens, especially Germans, had to flee.

Wenceslaus was succeeded by his brother Sigismund, King of the Romans and King of Hungary, who prepared to restore order. On 1 March 1420, Pope Martin V issued a Bull inviting all Christians to unite in a crusade against the Wycliffites (Lollards), Hussites, and other heretics. In 1428, the pope commanded that the remains of Wycliffe, who was posthumously declared a heretic in 1415, be dug up and burned. The crusades against the Lollards, however, were ultimately unsuccessful.

===Crusades===
According to Burton, Pope Martin authorized a crusade against Africa in 1418 in relation to the slave trade.

In addition to the Hussite Crusades, Martin declared a Crusade against the Ottoman Empire in 1420 in response to the rising pressure from the Ottoman Turks. In 1419–1420 Martin had diplomatic contacts with the Byzantine emperor Manuel II, who was invoking a council in Constantinople. On 12 July 1420 the Pope conceded to attach an indulgence to anyone who would contribute to a crusade against the latter, which would be led by Sigismund, King of the Romans.

===War against Braccio da Montone===
The main concern of Martin&#x27;s pontificate from 1423 was the resumed war against Braccio da Montone. The following year, the combined Papal-Neapolitan army, led by Giacomo Caldora and Francesco Sforza, defeated him at the Battle of L&#x27;Aquila (2 June 1424); Braccio died a few days later.

In the same year Martin obtained a reduction of the autonomy of the commune of Bologna, whose finances would be thenceforth under the authority of a papal treasurer. He also ended the war with Braccio da Montone in exchange for his recognition as vicar and reconciled with the deposed John XXIII, to whom he gave the title of Cardinal of Tusculum.

===Annuity contracts===
Canon law prohibited interest upon a loan. To avoid this, annuities were paid, interest in effect but not in name. The dispute as to the legality of annuity contracts was brought before Martin V in 1423. He held that purchased annuities, which were redeemable at the option of the seller, were lawful. When the lawfulness of annuities was established, they were widely used in commerce; it seems that city states used them to raise compulsory loans from their citizens.

===Periodic ecumenical councils===
A decree of the Council of Constance (&quot;Frequens&quot;) ordered that councils should be held every five years. Martin V summoned a council in 1423 that met first at Pavia and later at Siena (the &quot;Council of Siena&quot;). It was rather poorly attended, which gave the Pope a pretext for dissolving it, as soon as it had come to the resolution that &quot;internal church union by reform ought to take precedence over external union&quot;. It was prorogued for seven years. The seventeenth council then met as the &quot;Council of Basel&quot; in February 1431 shortly before Martin&#x27;s death.

===Founding of the University of Louvain===
On December 9, 1425, Martin founded the University of Louvain or Universitas Lovaniensis in Leuven (also known as &quot;Louvain&quot; in both English and French), a town in what was then the Duchy of Brabant, and what is modern day Belgium.

==Death==
Martin V died in Rome of a stroke on 20 February 1431 at the age of 62. He is buried at St. John Lateran Basilica.

==Personal views==

===Position on Jews===
The excitement of the Church during the Hussite movement rendered the Jews apprehensive, and through Emperor Sigismund, they obtained from Pope Martin V various bulls (1418 and 1422) in which their former privileges were confirmed and in which he exhorted the friars to use moderate language. In the last years of his pontificate, however, he repealed several of his ordinances. A gathering, convoked by the Jews in Forlì, sent a deputation asking Pope Martin V to abolish the oppressive laws promulgated by Antipope Benedict XIII. The deputation succeeded in its mission.

===Position on slavery===
During the Middle Ages, slavery had fallen out of usage in Europe. The Church denounced the enslavement of Christians. However, voyages and discoveries brought other continents, where slavery still existed, into European consciousness, raising the question of whether slavery of unbelievers and outside of Europe was permitted. According to Burton, Martin authorized a crusade against Africa in 1418, and this, coupled with a later bull of Pope Eugene IV (1441), sanctioned the Portuguese trade in African slaves. In March 1425 a bull was issued that threatened excommunication for any dealers in Christian slaves and ordered Jews to wear a &quot;badge of infamy&quot; to deter, in part, the buying of Christians. In June 1425 Martin anathematized those who sold Christian slaves to Muslims. Traffic in Christian slaves was not banned, purely the sale to non-Christian owners. The papal bull of excommunication issued to the Genoese merchants of Caffa related to the buying and selling of Christians, but has been considered ineffectual as prior injunctions against the Viennese, including the Laws of Gazaria, made allowances for the sale of both Christian and Muslim slaves. Ten black African slaves were presented to Martin by Prince Henry of Portugal. According to Koschorke, Martin supported colonial expansion. Davidson (1961) argues that Martin&#x27;s injunction against slavery was not a condemnation of slavery itself, but rather driven through fear of &quot;infidel power&quot;.

Norman Housley finds it &quot;...hard to avoid the conclusion that the pope was agreeing to whatever was asked of him by the king... [P]olitical weakness compelled the Renaissance Papacy to adopt an acquiescent and unchallenging position when approached for requests for privileges in favour of these ventures.&quot;

==Residences==
During his permanence in Rome, Martin moved his residence from the Lateran to Santa Maria Maggiore and, from 1424, the Basilica of Santi Apostoli near the Palazzo Colonna. He also frequently sojourned in towns held by his family in the Latium (Tivoli, Vicovaro, Marino, Gallicano and others).

==Numbering==
When the second Pope to take the name Martin was elected in 1281, there was confusion over how many Popes had taken the name before. It was believed then that there were three, so the new Pope of 1281 became Martin IV. But, in reality, those believed to be Martin II and Martin III were actually named Marinus I and Marinus II, although they are sometimes still referred to as &quot;Martin II&quot; and &quot;Martin III&quot;. This has advanced the numbering of all subsequent Popes Martin by two. Popes Martin IV–V were actually the second and third popes by that name.

==See also==

*Cardinals created by Martin V
*List of popes

==Notes==
==References==
* Review
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q169612" start="0" end="13" title="Pope Martin V" label="Pope Martin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q169612" start="67" end="71" title="Pope Martin V" label="Otto"/>
<link wikidata="Q169612" start="76" end="82" title="Pope Martin V" label="Oddone"/>
<link wikidata="Q169612" start="84" end="91" title="Pope Martin V" label="Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="113" end="128" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="146" end="158" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="247" end="261" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q242675" start="397" end="406" title="Genazzano" label="Genazzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q327202" start="427" end="434" title="Colonna family" label="Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q241990" start="455" end="475" title="Capranica Prenestina" label="Capranica Prenestina"/>
<link wikidata="Q243377" start="477" end="485" title="San Vito Romano" label="San Vito"/>
<link wikidata="Q242521" start="490" end="499" title="Ciciliano" label="Ciciliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688910" start="557" end="562" title="Conti di Segni" label="Conti"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="673" end="677" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="839" end="846" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q52691" start="859" end="865" title="Venosa" label="Venosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893550" start="1004" end="1009" title="Paola Colonna" label="Paola"/>
<link wikidata="Q537503" start="1014" end="1030" title="prince of Piombino" label="Lady of Piombino"/>
<link wikidata="Q219317" start="1081" end="1100" title="University of Pavia" label="University of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620175" start="1112" end="1133" title="apostolic protonotary" label="apostolic protonotary"/>
<link wikidata="Q171626" start="1140" end="1153" title="Pope Urban VI" label="Pope Urban VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="1183" end="1198" title="Cardinal-Deacon" label="Cardinal-Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q517374" start="1202" end="1224" title="San Giorgio in Velabro" label="San Giorgio in Velabro"/>
<link wikidata="Q227713" start="1228" end="1245" title="Pope Innocent VII" label="Pope Innocent VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349804" start="1284" end="1299" title="Council of Pisa" label="Council of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q262884" start="1334" end="1354" title="Antipope Alexander V" label="Antipope Alexander V"/>
<link wikidata="Q294599" start="1421" end="1431" title="Antipope John XXIII" label="John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q20579" start="1532" end="1536" title="Todi" label="Todi"/>
<link wikidata="Q541" start="1538" end="1545" title="Orvieto" label="Orvieto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="1547" end="1554" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="1559" end="1565" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q227694" start="1614" end="1625" title="Gregory XII" label="Gregory XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="1678" end="1698" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009" start="1733" end="1745" title="Schaffhausen" label="Schaffhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834" start="1785" end="1794" title="Konstanz" label="Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q294599" start="1908" end="1927" title="Antipope John XXIII" label="Antipope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q227694" start="2008" end="2024" title="Pope Gregory XII" label="Pope Gregory XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q310371" start="2039" end="2061" title="Antipope Benedict XIII" label="Antipope Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q29278" start="2224" end="2245" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="2306" end="2314" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="2546" end="2554" title="Florence, Italy" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q932356" start="2640" end="2655" title="Muzio Attendolo" label="Muzio Attendolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q273108" start="2668" end="2679" title="condottiero" label="condottiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q896536" start="2680" end="2698" title="Braccio da Montone" label="Braccio da Montone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280" start="2790" end="2796" title="Umbria" label="Umbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="2798" end="2805" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q244482" start="2847" end="2854" title="Romagna" label="Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279" start="2863" end="2869" title="Marche" label="Marche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247836" start="2981" end="2998" title="Giorgio Ordelaffi" label="Giorgio Ordelaffi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13367" start="3002" end="3007" title="Forlì" label="Forlì"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699937" start="3009" end="3025" title="Ludovico Alidosi" label="Ludovico Alidosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q50195" start="3029" end="3034" title="Imola" label="Imola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843785" start="3036" end="3058" title="Malatesta IV Malatesta" label="Malatesta IV Malatesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="3062" end="3068" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q942595" start="3074" end="3100" title="Guidantonio da Montefeltro" label="Guidantonio da Montefeltro"/>
<link wikidata="Q20571" start="3104" end="3111" title="Spoleto" label="Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q236933" start="3212" end="3231" title="Joanna II of Naples" label="Joanna II of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q13437" start="3268" end="3277" title="Benevento" label="Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q25313710" start="3958" end="3977" title="Concordats of 1418" label="separate concordats"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4026" end="4043" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4045" end="4052" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4054" end="4060" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="4065" end="4070" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="4100" end="4107" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43977" start="4200" end="4207" title="Jan Hus" label="Jan Hus"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="4233" end="4252" title="Death by burning" label="burned at the stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="4258" end="4265" title="Heresy" label="heretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q448779" start="4306" end="4332" title="Communion under both kinds" label="Communion under both kinds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4702" end="4717" title="Jan z Jesenice" label="Jan of Jesenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q147618" start="4719" end="4727" title="Beghards" label="Beghards"/>
<link wikidata="Q152148" start="4807" end="4825" title="Wenceslaus IV of Bohemia" label="King Wenceslaus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q575086" start="5032" end="5044" title="Jan Želivský" label="Jan Želivský"/>
<link wikidata="Q215968" start="5156" end="5176" title="Jan Žižka" label="Jan Žižka of Trocnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q478301" start="5396" end="5404" title="Hussite Wars" label="Hussites"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="5696" end="5745" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund, King of the Romans and King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q731652" start="5894" end="5902" title="Lollardy" label="Lollards"/>
<link wikidata="Q173893" start="5983" end="5991" title="John Wycliffe" label="Wycliffe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6250" end="6261" title="#Position on slavery" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q37097" start="6492" end="6501" title="Manuel II Palaiologos" label="Manuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="6693" end="6702" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805853" start="6929" end="6944" title="Giacomo Caldora" label="Giacomo Caldora"/>
<link wikidata="Q310536" start="6949" end="6965" title="Francesco Sforza" label="Francesco Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q21235188" start="6987" end="7010" title="Battle of L&amp;#x27;Aquila" label="Battle of L&amp;#x27;Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455546" start="7981" end="7989" title="Frequens" label="Frequens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="8106" end="8111" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="8125" end="8130" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517162" start="8142" end="8158" title="Council of Siena" label="Council of Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812889" start="8390" end="8399" title="prorogued" label="prorogued"/>
<link wikidata="Q321032" start="8463" end="8479" title="Council of Basel" label="Council of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q378134" start="8624" end="8645" title="University of Louvain" label="University of Louvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="8676" end="8682" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="8816" end="8823" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="8863" end="8869" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="8924" end="8949" title="St. John Lateran Basilica" label="St. John Lateran Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q57124" start="9096" end="9113" title="Sigismund, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Sigismund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="9403" end="9407" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q13367" start="9411" end="9416" title="Forlì" label="Forlì"/>
<link wikidata="Q172748" start="9503" end="9511" title="Antipope" label="Antipope"/>
<link wikidata="Q310371" start="9512" end="9525" title="Avignon Pope Benedict XIII" label="Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q167561" start="10035" end="10049" title="Pope Eugene IV" label="Pope Eugene IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q211517" start="10329" end="10337" title="anathema" label="anathema"/>
<link wikidata="Q158491" start="10541" end="10546" title="Caffa" label="Caffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q182897" start="10825" end="10849" title="Prince Henry of Portugal" label="Prince Henry of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="11496" end="11516" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515300" start="11537" end="11563" title="Basilica of Santi Apostoli" label="Basilica of Santi Apostoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971299" start="11573" end="11588" title="Palazzo Colonna" label="Palazzo Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048669" start="11654" end="11660" title="Latium" label="Latium"/>
<link wikidata="Q159605" start="11662" end="11668" title="Tivoli, Italy" label="Tivoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q243521" start="11670" end="11678" title="Vicovaro" label="Vicovaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q242926" start="11680" end="11686" title="Marino, Italy" label="Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q217269" start="11688" end="11697" title="Gallicano" label="Gallicano"/>
<link wikidata="Q227719" start="11934" end="11943" title="Pope Martin IV" label="Martin IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q227721" start="12028" end="12037" title="Pope Marinus I" label="Marinus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q103423" start="12042" end="12052" title="Pope Marinus II" label="Marinus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356199" start="12313" end="12342" title="Cardinals created by Martin V" label="Cardinals created by Martin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q40483" start="12344" end="12357" title="List of popes" label="List of popes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23939" wikidata="Q42478" url="?curid=23939" title="Perl">
<text>Perl is a high-level, general-purpose, interpreted, dynamic programming language. Though Perl is not officially an acronym, there are various backronyms in use, including &quot;Practical Extraction and Reporting Language&quot;.

Perl was developed by Larry Wall in 1987 as a general-purpose Unix scripting language to make report processing easier. Since then, it has undergone many changes and revisions. Perl originally was not capitalized and the name was changed to being capitalized by the time Perl 4 was released. The latest release is Perl 5, first released in 1994. From 2000 to October 2019 a sixth version of Perl was in development; the sixth version&#x27;s name was changed to Raku. Both languages continue to be developed independently by different development teams which liberally borrow ideas from each other.

Perl borrows features from other programming languages including C, sh, AWK, and sed. It provides text processing facilities without the arbitrary data-length limits of many contemporary Unix command line tools. Perl is a highly expressive programming language: source code for a given algorithm can be short and highly compressible.

Perl gained widespread popularity in the mid-1990s as a CGI scripting language, in part due to its powerful regular expression and string parsing abilities. In addition to CGI, Perl 5 is used for system administration, network programming, finance, bioinformatics, and other applications, such as for graphical user interfaces (GUIs). It has been nicknamed &quot;the Swiss Army chainsaw of scripting languages&quot; because of its flexibility and power. In 1998, it was also referred to as the &quot;duct tape that holds the Internet together&quot;, in reference to both its ubiquitous use as a glue language and its perceived inelegance.

== Name and logos ==
Perl was originally named &quot;Pearl&quot;. Wall wanted to give the language a short name with positive connotations. It is also a Christian reference to the Parable of the Pearl from the Gospel of Matthew. However, Wall discovered the existing PEARL language before Perl&#x27;s official release and dropped the &quot;a&quot; from the name.

The name is occasionally expanded as a backronym: &quot;Practical Extraction and Report Language&quot; and Wall&#x27;s own &quot;Pathologically Eclectic Rubbish Lister&quot;, which is in the manual page for perl.

&quot;Programming Perl&quot;, published by O&#x27;Reilly Media, features a picture of a dromedary camel on the cover and is commonly called the &quot;Camel Book&quot;. This image has become an unofficial symbol of Perl. O&#x27;Reilly owns the image as a trademark but licenses it for non-commercial use, requiring only an acknowledgement and a link to www.perl.com. Licensing for commercial use is decided on a case-by-case basis. O&#x27;Reilly also provides &quot;Programming Republic of Perl&quot; logos for non-commercial sites and &quot;Powered by Perl&quot; buttons for any site that uses Perl.

The Perl Foundation owns an alternative symbol, an onion, which it licenses to its subsidiaries, Perl Mongers, PerlMonks, Perl.org, and others. The symbol is a visual pun on pearl onion.

== History ==

=== Early versions ===

Larry Wall began work on Perl in 1987, while employed as a programmer at Unisys; he released version 1.0 on December 18, 1987. Wall based early &quot;Perl&quot; on some methods existing languages used for text manipulation.

Perl 2, released in June 1988, featured a better regular expression engine. Perl 3, released in October 1989, added support for binary data streams.

=== 1990s ===
Originally, the only documentation for Perl was a single lengthy man page. In 1991, &quot;Programming Perl&quot;, known to many Perl programmers as the &quot;Camel Book&quot; because of its cover, was published and became the &quot;de facto&quot; reference for the language. At the same time, the Perl version number was bumped to 4, not to mark a major change in the language but to identify the version that was well documented by the book. Perl 4 was released in March 1991.

Perl 4 went through a series of maintenance releases, culminating in Perl 4.036 in 1993, whereupon Wall abandoned Perl 4 to begin work on Perl 5. Initial design of Perl 5 continued into 1994. The &quot;perl5-porters&quot; mailing list was established in May 1994 to coordinate work on porting Perl 5 to different platforms. It remains the primary forum for development, maintenance, and porting of Perl 5.

Perl 5.000 was released on October 17, 1994. It was a nearly complete rewrite of the interpreter, and it added many new features to the language, including objects, references, lexical (my) variables, and modules. Importantly, modules provided a mechanism for extending the language without modifying the interpreter. This allowed the core interpreter to stabilize, even as it enabled ordinary Perl programmers to add new language features. Perl 5 has been in active development since then.

Perl 5.001 was released on March 13, 1995. Perl 5.002 was released on February 29, 1996 with the new prototypes feature. This allowed module authors to make subroutines that behaved like Perl builtins. Perl 5.003 was released June 25, 1996, as a security release.

One of the most important events in Perl 5 history took place outside of the language proper and was a consequence of its module support. On October 26, 1995, the Comprehensive Perl Archive Network (CPAN) was established as a repository for the Perl language and Perl modules; , it carries over 211,850 modules in 43,865 distributions, written by more than 14,324 authors, and is mirrored worldwide at more than 245 locations.

Perl 5.004 was released on May 15, 1997, and included, among other things, the UNIVERSAL package, giving Perl a base object from which all classes were automatically derived and the ability to require versions of modules. Another significant development was the inclusion of the CGI.pm module, which contributed to Perl&#x27;s popularity as a CGI scripting language.

Perl 5.004 added support for Microsoft Windows, Plan 9, QNX, and AmigaOS.

Perl 5.005 was released on July 22, 1998. This release included several enhancements to the regex engine, new hooks into the backend through the codice_1 modules, the codice_2 regex quote operator, a large selection of other new core modules, and added support for several more operating systems, including BeOS.

===2000–2020===

Perl 5.6 was released on March 22, 2000. Major changes included 64-bit support, Unicode string representation, support for files over 2 GiB, and the &quot;our&quot; keyword. When developing Perl 5.6, the decision was made to switch the versioning scheme to one more similar to other open source projects; after 5.005_63, the next version became 5.5.640, with plans for development versions to have odd numbers and stable versions to have even numbers.

In 2000, Wall put forth a call for suggestions for a new version of Perl from the community. The process resulted in 361 RFC (Request for Comments) documents that were to be used in guiding development of Perl 6. In 2001, work began on the &quot;Apocalypses&quot; for Perl 6, a series of documents meant to summarize the change requests and present the design of the next generation of Perl. They were presented as a digest of the RFCs, rather than a formal document. At this time, Perl 6 existed only as a description of a language.

Perl 5.8 was first released on July 18, 2002, and further 5.X versions have been released approximately yearly since then. Perl 5.8 improved Unicode support, added a new I/O implementation, added a new thread implementation, improved numeric accuracy, and added several new modules. As of 2013, this version was still the most popular Perl version and was used by Red Hat Linux 5, SUSE Linux 10, Solaris 10, HP-UX 11.31, and AIX 5.

In 2004, work began on the &quot;Synopses&quot; – documents that originally summarized the Apocalypses, but which became the specification for the Perl 6 language. In February 2005, Audrey Tang began work on Pugs, a Perl 6 interpreter written in Haskell. This was the first concerted effort toward making Perl 6 a reality. This effort stalled in 2006.

The Perl On New Internal Engine (PONIE) project existed from 2003 until 2006. It was to be a bridge between Perl 5 and 6, and an effort to rewrite the Perl 5 interpreter to run on the Perl 6 Parrot virtual machine. The goal was to ensure the future of the millions of lines of Perl 5 code at thousands of companies around the world. The PONIE project ended in 2006 and is no longer being actively developed. Some of the improvements made to the Perl 5 interpreter as part of PONIE were folded into that project.

On December 18, 2007, the 20th anniversary of Perl 1.0, Perl 5.10.0 was released. Perl 5.10.0 included notable new features, which brought it closer to Perl 6. These included a switch statement (called &quot;given&quot;/&quot;when&quot;), regular expressions updates, and the &quot;smart match operator&quot; (~~).
Around this same time, development began in earnest on another implementation of Perl 6 known as Rakudo Perl, developed in tandem with the Parrot virtual machine. As of November 2009, Rakudo Perl has had regular monthly releases and now is the most complete implementation of Perl 6.

A major change in the development process of Perl 5 occurred with Perl 5.11; the development community has switched to a monthly release cycle of development releases, with a yearly schedule of stable releases. By that plan, bugfix point releases will follow the stable releases every three months.

On April 12, 2010, Perl 5.12.0 was released. Notable core enhancements include new codice_3 syntax, the yada yada operator (intended to mark placeholder code that is not yet implemented), implicit , full Y2038 compliance, regex conversion overloading, DTrace support, and Unicode 5.2.

On May 14, 2011, Perl 5.14 was released with JSON support built-in.

On May 20, 2012, Perl 5.16 was released. Notable new features include the ability to specify a given version of Perl that one wishes to emulate, allowing users to upgrade their version of Perl, but still run old scripts that would normally be incompatible. Perl 5.16 also updates the core to support Unicode 6.1.

On May 18, 2013, Perl 5.18 was released. Notable new features include the new dtrace hooks, lexical subs, more CORE:: subs, overhaul of the hash for security reasons, support for Unicode 6.2.

On May 27, 2014, Perl 5.20 was released. Notable new features include subroutine signatures, hash slices/new slice syntax, postfix dereferencing (experimental), Unicode 6.3, and a function using a consistent random number generator.

Some observers credit the release of Perl 5.10 with the start of the Modern Perl movement. In particular, this phrase describes a style of development that embraces the use of the CPAN, takes advantage of recent developments in the language, and is rigorous about creating high quality code. While the book &quot;Modern Perl&quot; may be the most visible standard-bearer of this idea, other groups such as the Enlightened Perl Organization have taken up the cause.

In late 2012 and 2013, several projects for alternative implementations for Perl 5 started: Perl5 in Perl6 by the Rakudo Perl team, &#x27; by Stevan Little and friends, &#x27; by the Perl11 team under Reini Urban, &quot;&quot; by , and &quot;,&quot; a Kickstarter project led by Will Braswell and affiliated with the Perl11 project.

=== Perl 6 and Raku ===

At the 2000 Perl Conference, Jon Orwant made a case for a major new language initiative. This led to a decision to begin work on a redesign of the language, to be called Perl 6. Proposals for new language features were solicited from the Perl community at large, which submitted more than 300 RFCs.

Wall spent the next few years digesting the RFCs and synthesizing them into a coherent framework for Perl 6. He presented his design for Perl 6 in a series of documents called &quot;apocalypses&quot; – numbered to correspond to chapters in &quot;Programming Perl&quot;. , the developing specification of Perl 6 was encapsulated in design documents called Synopses – numbered to correspond to Apocalypses.

Thesis work by Bradley M. Kuhn, overseen by Wall, considered the possible use of the Java virtual machine as a runtime for Perl. Kuhn&#x27;s thesis showed this approach to be problematic. In 2001, it was decided that Perl 6 would run on a cross-language virtual machine called Parrot.

In 2005, Audrey Tang created the Pugs project, an implementation of Perl 6 in Haskell. This acted as, and continues to act as, a test platform for the Perl 6 language (separate from the development of the actual implementation), allowing the language designers to explore. The Pugs project spawned an active Perl/Haskell cross-language community centered around the Libera Chat #raku IRC channel. Many functional programming influences were absorbed by the Perl 6 design team.

In 2012, Perl 6 development was centered primarily on two compilers:
# Rakudo, an implementation running on the Parrot virtual machine and the Java virtual machine.
# Niecza, which targets the Common Language Runtime.

In 2013, MoarVM (&quot;Metamodel On A Runtime&quot;), a C language-based virtual machine designed primarily for Rakudo was announced.

In October 2019, Perl 6 was renamed to Raku.

 only the Rakudo implementation and MoarVM are under active development, and other virtual machines, such as the Java Virtual Machine and JavaScript, are supported.

=== Perl 7 ===

In June 2020, Perl 7 was announced as the successor to Perl 5. Perl 7 was to initially be based on Perl 5.32 with a release expected in first half of 2021, and release candidates sooner.

This plan was revised in May 2021, without any release timeframe or version of Perl 5 for use as a baseline specified. When Perl 7 would be released, Perl 5 would have gone into long term maintenance. Supported Perl 5 versions however would continue to get important security and bug fixes.

Perl 7 was announced on 24 June 2020 at &quot;The Perl Conference in the Cloud&quot; as the successor to Perl 5. Based on Perl 5.32, Perl 7 was planned to be backward compatible with modern Perl 5 code; Perl 5 code, without boilerplate (pragma) header needs adding codice_4 to stay compatible, but modern code can drop some of the boilerplate.

The plan to go to Perl 7 brought up more discussion, however, and the Perl Steering Committee canceled it to avoid issues with backward compatibility for scripts that were not written to the pragmas and modules that would become the default in Perl 7. Perl 7 will only come out when the developers add enough features to warrant a major release upgrade.

== Design ==
=== Philosophy ===

According to Wall, Perl has two slogans. The first is &quot;There&#x27;s more than one way to do it,&quot; commonly known as TMTOWTDI, (pronounced &quot;Tim Toady&quot;). As proponents of this motto argue, this philosophy makes it easy to write concise statements.

The second slogan is &quot;Easy things should be easy and hard things should be possible&quot;.

The design of Perl can be understood as a response to three broad trends in the computer industry: falling hardware costs, rising labor costs, and improvements in compiler technology. Many earlier computer languages, such as Fortran and C, aimed to make efficient use of expensive computer hardware. In contrast, Perl was designed so that computer programmers could write programs more quickly and easily.

Perl has many features that ease the task of the programmer at the expense of greater CPU and memory requirements. These include automatic memory management; dynamic typing; strings, lists, and hashes; regular expressions; introspection; and an codice_5 function. Perl follows the theory of &quot;no built-in limits&quot;, an idea similar to the Zero One Infinity rule.

Wall was trained as a linguist, and the design of Perl is very much informed by linguistic principles. Examples include Huffman coding (common constructions should be short), good end-weighting (the important information should come first), and a large collection of language primitives. Perl favors language constructs that are concise and natural for humans to write, even where they complicate the Perl interpreter.

Perl&#x27;s syntax reflects the idea that &quot;things that are different should look different.&quot; For example, scalars, arrays, and hashes have different leading sigils. Array indices and hash keys use different kinds of braces. Strings and regular expressions have different standard delimiters.

There is a broad practical bent to both the Perl language and the community and culture that surround it. The preface to &quot;Programming Perl&quot; begins: &quot;Perl is a language for getting your job done.&quot; One consequence of this is that Perl is not a tidy language. It includes many features, tolerates exceptions to its rules, and employs heuristics to resolve syntactical ambiguities. Because of the forgiving nature of the compiler, bugs can sometimes be hard to find. Perl&#x27;s function documentation remarks on the variant behavior of built-in functions in list and scalar contexts by saying, &quot;In general, they do what you want, unless you want consistency.&quot;

=== Features ===

The overall structure of Perl derives broadly from C. Perl is procedural in nature, with variables, expressions, assignment statements, brace-delimited blocks, control structures, and subroutines.

Perl also takes features from shell programming. All variables are marked with leading sigils, which allow variables to be interpolated directly into strings. However, unlike the shell, Perl uses sigils on all accesses to variables, and unlike most other programming languages that use sigils, the sigil doesn&#x27;t denote the type of the variable but the type of the expression. So for example, while an array is denoted by the sigil &quot;@&quot; (for example codice_6), an individual member of the array is denoted by the scalar sigil &quot;$&quot; (for example codice_7). Perl also has many built-in functions that provide tools often used in shell programming (although many of these tools are implemented by programs external to the shell) such as sorting, and calling operating system facilities.

Perl takes hashes (&quot;associative arrays&quot;) from AWK and regular expressions from sed. These simplify many parsing, text-handling, and data-management tasks. Shared with Lisp is the implicit return of the last value in a block, and all statements are also expressions which can be used in larger expressions themselves.

Perl 5 added features that support complex data structures, first-class functions (that is, closures as values), and an object-oriented programming model. These include references, packages, class-based method dispatch, and lexically scoped variables, along with compiler directives (for example, the codice_8 pragma). A major additional feature introduced with Perl 5 was the ability to package code as reusable modules. Wall later stated that &quot;The whole intent of Perl 5&#x27;s module system was to encourage the growth of Perl culture rather than the Perl core.&quot;

All versions of Perl do automatic data-typing and automatic memory management. The interpreter knows the type and storage requirements of every data object in the program; it allocates and frees storage for them as necessary using reference counting (so it cannot deallocate circular data structures without manual intervention). Legal type conversions – for example, conversions from number to string – are done automatically at run time; illegal type conversions are fatal errors.

=== Syntax ===

Perl has been referred to as &quot;&quot; and a &quot;write-only language&quot; by its critics. Randal L. Schwartz in the first edition of the book &quot;Learning Perl&quot;, in the first chapter states: He also stated that the accusation that Perl is a write-only language could be avoided by coding with &quot;proper care&quot;. The Perl overview document &#x27; states that the names of built-in &quot;magic&quot; scalar variables &quot;look like punctuation or line noise&quot;. However, the English module provides both long and short English alternatives. &#x27; document states that line noise in regular expressions could be mitigated using the codice_9 modifier to add whitespace.

According to the &quot;Perl 6 FAQ&quot;, Perl 6 was designed to mitigate &quot;the usual suspects&quot; that elicit the &quot;line noise&quot; claim from Perl 5 critics, including the removal of &quot;the majority of the punctuation variables&quot; and the sanitization of the regex syntax. The &quot;Perl 6 FAQ&quot; also states that what is sometimes referred to as Perl&#x27;s line noise is &quot;the actual syntax of the language&quot; just as gerunds and prepositions are a part of the English language. In a December 2012 blog posting, despite claiming that &quot;Rakudo Perl 6 has failed and will continue to fail unless it gets some adult supervision&quot;, chromatic stated that the design of Perl 6 has a &quot;well-defined grammar&quot;, an He also stated that 

In Perl, one could write the &quot;Hello, World!&quot; program as:
print &quot;Hello, World!\n&quot;;
Here is a more complex Perl program, that counts down seconds from a given starting value:
#!/usr/bin/perl
use strict;
use warnings;

my ( $remaining, $total );

$remaining=$total=shift(@ARGV);

STDOUT-&gt;autoflush(1);

while ( $remaining ) {
 printf ( &quot;Remaining %s/%s \r&quot;, $remaining--, $total );
 sleep 1;

print &quot;\n&quot;;
The Perl interpreter can also be used for one-off scripts on the command line. The following example (as invoked from an sh-compatible shell, such as Bash) translates the string &quot;Bob&quot; in all files ending with .txt in the current directory to &quot;Robert&quot;:
$ perl -i.bak -lp -e &#x27;s/Bob/Robert/g&#x27; *.txt
=== Implementation ===

No written specification or standard for the Perl language exists for Perl versions through Perl 5, and there are no plans to create one for the current version of Perl. There has been only one implementation of the interpreter, and the language has evolved along with it. That interpreter, together with its functional tests, stands as a &quot;de facto&quot; specification of the language. Perl 6, however, started with a specification, and several projects aim to implement some or all of the specification.

Perl is implemented as a core interpreter, written in C, together with a large collection of modules, written in Perl and C. , the interpreter is 150,000 lines of C code and compiles to a 1 MB executable on typical machine architectures. Alternatively, the interpreter can be compiled to a link library and embedded in other programs. There are nearly 500 modules in the distribution, comprising 200,000 lines of Perl and an additional 350,000 lines of C code (much of the C code in the modules consists of character encoding tables).

The interpreter has an object-oriented architecture. All of the elements of the Perl language—scalars, arrays, hashes, coderefs, file handles—are represented in the interpreter by C structs. Operations on these structs are defined by a large collection of macros, typedefs, and functions; these constitute the Perl C API. The Perl API can be bewildering to the uninitiated, but its entry points follow a consistent naming scheme, which provides guidance to those who use it.

The life of a Perl interpreter divides broadly into a compile phase and a run phase. According to Aluín et al., &quot;Perl cannot be parsed by a straight Lex/Yacc lexer/parser combination. Instead, the interpreter implements its own lexer, which coordinates with a modified GNU bison parser to resolve ambiguities in the language.&quot;

Most of what happens in Perl&#x27;s compile phase is compilation, and most of what happens in Perl&#x27;s run phase is execution, but there are significant exceptions. Perl makes important use of its capability to execute Perl code during the compile phase. Perl will also delay compilation into the run phase. The terms that indicate the kind of processing that is actually occurring at any moment are &quot;compile time&quot; and &quot;run time&quot;. Perl is in compile time at most points during the compile phase, but compile time may also be entered during the run phase. The compile time for code in a string argument passed to the codice_10 built-in occurs during the run phase. Perl is often in run time during the compile phase and spends most of the run phase in run time. Code in codice_11 blocks executes at run time but in the compile phase.

At compile time, the interpreter parses Perl code into a syntax tree. At run time, it executes the program by walking the tree. Text is parsed only once, and the syntax tree is subject to optimization before it is executed, so that execution is relatively efficient. Compile-time optimizations on the syntax tree include constant folding and context propagation, but peephole optimization is also performed.

Perl has a Turing-complete grammar because parsing can be affected by run-time code executed during the compile phase. The code cannot be parsed by a straight Lex/Yacc lexer/parser. To resolve ambiguities in the language the interpreter must implement its own lexer to coordinate with a modified GNU bison parser.

It is often said that &quot;Only perl can parse Perl&quot;, meaning that only the Perl interpreter (&quot;codice_12&quot;) can parse the Perl language (&quot;Perl&quot;), but even this is not, in general, true. Because the Perl interpreter can simulate a Turing machine during its compile phase, it would need to decide the halting problem in order to complete parsing in every case. It is a longstanding result that the halting problem is undecidable, and therefore not even Perl can always parse Perl. Perl makes the unusual choice of giving the user access to its full programming power in its own compile phase. The cost in terms of theoretical purity is high, but practical inconvenience seems to be rare.

Other programs that undertake to parse Perl, such as source-code analyzers and auto-indenters, have to contend not only with ambiguous syntactic constructs but also with the undecidability of Perl parsing in the general case. Adam Kennedy&#x27;s PPI project focused on parsing Perl code as a document (retaining its integrity as a document), instead of parsing Perl as executable code (that not even Perl itself can always do). It was Kennedy who first conjectured that &quot;parsing Perl suffers from the &#x27;halting problem&#x27;,&quot; which was later proved.

Perl is distributed with over 250,000 functional tests for core Perl language and over 250,000 functional tests for core modules. These run as part of the normal build process and extensively exercise the interpreter and its core modules. Perl developers rely on the functional tests to ensure that changes to the interpreter do not introduce software bugs; further, Perl users who see that the interpreter passes its functional tests on their system can have a high degree of confidence that it is working properly.

== Ports ==
Perl is dual licensed under both the Artistic License 1.0 and the GNU General Public License. Distributions are available for most operating systems. It is particularly prevalent on Unix and Unix-like systems, but it has been ported to most modern (and many obsolete) platforms. With only six reported exceptions, Perl can be compiled from source code on all POSIX-compliant, or otherwise-Unix-compatible, platforms.

Because of unusual changes required for the classic Mac OS environment, a special port called MacPerl was shipped independently.

The Comprehensive Perl Archive Network carries a complete list of supported platforms with links to the distributions available on each. CPAN is also the source for publicly available Perl modules that are not part of the core Perl distribution.

ActivePerl is a closed-source distribution from ActiveState that has regular releases that track the core Perl releases. The distribution previously included the Perl package manager (PPM), a popular tool for installing, removing, upgrading, and managing the use of common Perl modules; however, this tool was discontinued as of ActivePerl 5.28. Included also is PerlScript, a Windows Script Host (WSH) engine implementing the Perl language. Visual Perl is an ActiveState tool that adds Perl to the Visual Studio .NET development suite. A VBScript-to-Perl converter, a Perl compiler for Windows, and converters of AWK and sed to Perl have also been produced by this company and included on the &quot;ActiveState CD for Windows&quot;, which includes all of their distributions plus the Komodo IDE and all but the first on the Unix–Linux–POSIX variant thereof in 2002 and afterward.

== Performance ==

The Computer Language Benchmarks Game compares the performance of implementations of typical programming problems in several programming languages. The submitted Perl implementations typically perform toward the high end of the memory-usage spectrum and give varied speed results. Perl&#x27;s performance in the benchmarks game is typical for interpreted languages.

Large Perl programs start more slowly than similar programs in compiled languages because Perl has to compile the source every time it runs. In a talk at the YAPC::Europe 2005 conference and subsequent article &quot;A Timely Start&quot;, Jean-Louis Leroy found that his Perl programs took much longer to run than expected because the perl interpreter spent significant time finding modules within his over-large include path. Unlike Java, Python, and Ruby, Perl has only experimental support for pre-compiling. Therefore, Perl programs pay this overhead penalty on every execution. The run phase of typical programs is long enough that amortized startup time is not substantial, but benchmarks that measure very short execution times are likely to be skewed due to this overhead.

A number of tools have been introduced to improve this situation. The first such tool was Apache&#x27;s mod_perl, which sought to address one of the most-common reasons that small Perl programs were invoked rapidly: CGI Web development. ActivePerl, via Microsoft ISAPI, provides similar performance improvements.

Once Perl code is compiled, there is additional overhead during the execution phase that typically isn&#x27;t present for programs written in compiled languages such as C or C++. Examples of such overhead include bytecode interpretation, reference-counting memory management, and dynamic type-checking.

The most critical routines can be written in other languages (such as C), which can be connected to Perl via simple Inline modules or the more complex, but flexible, XS mechanism.

== Applications ==

Perl has many and varied applications, compounded by the availability of many standard and third-party modules.

Perl has chiefly been used to write CGI scripts: large projects written in Perl include cPanel, Slash, Bugzilla, RT, TWiki, and Movable Type; high-traffic websites that use Perl extensively include Priceline.com, Craigslist, IMDb, LiveJournal, DuckDuckGo, Slashdot and Ticketmaster. 
It is also an optional component of the popular LAMP technology stack for Web development, in lieu of PHP or Python. Perl is used extensively as a system programming language in the Debian Linux distribution.

Perl is often used as a glue language, tying together systems and interfaces that were not specifically designed to interoperate, and for &quot;data munging&quot;, that is, converting or processing large amounts of data for tasks such as creating reports. These strengths are linked intimately. The combination makes Perl a popular all-purpose language for system administrators, particularly because short programs, often called &quot;one-liner programs&quot;, can be entered and run on a single command line.

Perl code can be made portable across Windows and Unix; such code is often used by suppliers of software (both commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) and bespoke) to simplify packaging and maintenance of software build- and deployment-scripts.

Perl/Tk and wxPerl are commonly used to add graphical user interfaces to Perl scripts.

Perl&#x27;s text-handling capabilities can be used for generating SQL queries; arrays, hashes, and automatic memory management make it easy to collect and process the returned data. For example, in Tim Bunce&#x27;s Perl DBI application programming interface (API), the arguments to the API can be the text of SQL queries; thus it is possible to program in multiple languages at the same time (e.g., for generating a Web page using HTML, JavaScript, and SQL in a here document). The use of Perl variable interpolation to programmatically customize each of the SQL queries, and the specification of Perl arrays or hashes as the structures to programmatically hold the resulting data sets from each SQL query, allows a high-level mechanism for handling large amounts of data for post-processing by a Perl subprogram.
In early versions of Perl, database interfaces were created by relinking the interpreter with a client-side database library. This was sufficiently difficult that it was done for only a few of the most-important and most widely used databases, and it restricted the resulting codice_12 executable to using just one database interface at a time.

In Perl 5, database interfaces are implemented by Perl DBI modules. The DBI (Database Interface) module presents a single, database-independent interface to Perl applications, while the DBD (Database Driver) modules handle the details of accessing some 50 different databases; there are DBD drivers for most ANSI SQL databases.

DBI provides caching for database handles and queries, which can greatly improve performance in long-lived execution environments such as mod_perl, helping high-volume systems avert load spikes as in the Slashdot effect.

In modern Perl applications, especially those written using web frameworks such as Catalyst, the DBI module is often used indirectly via object-relational mappers such as , Class::DBI or Rose::DB::Object that generate SQL queries and handle data transparently to the application author.

== Community ==

Perl&#x27;s culture and community has developed alongside the language itself. Usenet was the first public venue in which Perl was introduced, but over the course of its evolution, Perl&#x27;s community was shaped by the growth of broadening Internet-based services including the introduction of the World Wide Web. The community that surrounds Perl was, in fact, the topic of Wall&#x27;s first &quot;State of the Onion&quot; talk.

State of the Onion is the name for Wall&#x27;s yearly keynote-style summaries on the progress of Perl and its community. They are characterized by his hallmark humor, employing references to Perl&#x27;s culture, the wider hacker culture, Wall&#x27;s linguistic background, sometimes his family life, and occasionally even his Christian background. Each talk is first given at various Perl conferences and is eventually also published online.

In email, Usenet, and message board postings, &quot;Just another Perl hacker&quot; (JAPH) programs are a common trend, originated by Randal L. Schwartz, one of the earliest professional Perl trainers. In the parlance of Perl culture, Perl programmers are known as Perl hackers, and from this derives the practice of writing short programs to print out the phrase &quot;Just another Perl hacker&quot;. In the spirit of the original concept, these programs are moderately obfuscated and short enough to fit into the signature of an email or Usenet message. The &quot;canonical&quot; JAPH as developed by Schwartz includes the comma at the end, although this is often omitted.
Perl &quot;golf&quot; is the pastime of reducing the number of characters (key &quot;strokes&quot;) used in a Perl program to the bare minimum, much in the same way that golf players seek to take as few shots as possible in a round. The phrase&#x27;s first use emphasized the difference between pedestrian code meant to teach a newcomer and terse hacks likely to amuse experienced Perl programmers, an example of the latter being JAPHs that were already used in signatures in Usenet postings and elsewhere. Similar stunts had been an unnamed pastime in the language APL in previous decades. The use of Perl to write a program that performed RSA encryption prompted a widespread and practical interest in this pastime. In subsequent years, the term &quot;code golf&quot; has been applied to the pastime in other languages. A Perl Golf Apocalypse was held at Perl Conference 4.0 in Monterey, California in July 2000.

As with C, obfuscated code competitions were a well known pastime in the late 1990s. The Obfuscated Perl Contest was a competition held by The Perl Journal from 1996 to 2000 that made an arch virtue of Perl&#x27;s syntactic flexibility. Awards were given for categories such as &quot;most powerful&quot;—programs that made efficient use of space—and &quot;best four-line signature&quot; for programs that fit into four lines of 76 characters in the style of a Usenet signature block.

Perl poetry is the practice of writing poems that can be compiled as legal Perl code, for example the piece known as &quot;Black Perl&quot;. Perl poetry is made possible by the large number of English words that are used in the Perl language. New poems are regularly submitted to the community at PerlMonks.

==See also==

* Outline of Perl
* Perl Data Language
* Perl Object Environment
* Plain Old Documentation

==References==
==Further reading==
* Learning Perl 6th Edition (2011), O&#x27;Reilly. Beginner-level introduction to Perl.
* Beginning Perl 1st Edition (2012), Wrox. A beginner&#x27;s tutorial for those new to programming or just new to Perl.
* Modern Perl 2nd Edition (2012), Onyx Neon. Describes Modern Perl programming techniques.
* Programming Perl 4th Edition (2012), O&#x27;Reilly. The definitive Perl reference.
* Effective Perl Programming 2nd Edition (2010), Addison-Wesley. Intermediate- to advanced-level guide to writing idiomatic Perl.
* &quot;Perl Cookbook&quot;, . Practical Perl programming examples.
* Functional programming techniques in Perl.

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="0" end="4" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="10" end="20" title="High-level programming language" label="high-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q951497" start="22" end="37" title="General-purpose programming language" label="general-purpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="39" end="50" title="Interpreter (computing)" label="interpreted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268980" start="52" end="80" title="dynamic programming language" label="dynamic programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="142" end="151" title="backronym" label="backronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q92597" start="251" end="261" title="Larry Wall" label="Larry Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="291" end="295" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="296" end="314" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052676" start="690" end="694" title="Raku (programming language)" label="Raku"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="893" end="894" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q14663" start="896" end="898" title="Unix shell" label="sh"/>
<link wikidata="Q213970" start="900" end="903" title="AWK" label="AWK"/>
<link wikidata="Q305876" start="909" end="912" title="sed" label="sed"/>
<link wikidata="Q839478" start="1015" end="1038" title="List of Unix commands" label="Unix command line tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421724" start="1057" end="1067" title="Expressive power (computer science)" label="expressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="1219" end="1232" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="CGI scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="1271" end="1289" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="1294" end="1300" title="String (computing)" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="1301" end="1308" title="parsing" label="parsing"/>
<link wikidata="Q327353" start="1359" end="1380" title="System administrator" label="system administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403011" start="1382" end="1401" title="Computer network programming" label="network programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="1412" end="1426" title="bioinformatics" label="bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="1464" end="1488" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030313" start="1663" end="1672" title="duct tape" label="duct tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1688" end="1696" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="1758" end="1771" title="glue language" label="glue language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289917" start="1983" end="2003" title="Parable of the Pearl" label="Parable of the Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043979" start="2070" end="2075" title="PEARL (programming language)" label="PEARL"/>
<link wikidata="Q636300" start="2206" end="2215" title="backronym" label="backronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512572" start="2358" end="2369" title="man page" label="manual page"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065097" start="2424" end="2443" title="O&amp;#x27;Reilly Media" label="O&amp;#x27;Reilly Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q71516" start="2469" end="2484" title="Dromedary" label="dromedary camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="2635" end="2644" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048868" start="2665" end="2679" title="non-commercial" label="non-commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q941805" start="2982" end="3001" title="The Perl Foundation" label="The Perl Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827757" start="3079" end="3091" title="Perl Mongers" label="Perl Mongers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169102" start="3093" end="3102" title="PerlMonks" label="PerlMonks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933810" start="3142" end="3152" title="visual pun" label="visual pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q508630" start="3156" end="3167" title="pearl onion" label="pearl onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q92597" start="3209" end="3219" title="Larry Wall" label="Larry Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q518016" start="3282" end="3288" title="Unisys" label="Unisys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913888" start="3562" end="3573" title="binary data" label="binary data"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512572" start="3663" end="3671" title="man page" label="man page"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736813" start="4109" end="4128" title="maintenance release" label="maintenance release"/>
<link wikidata="Q714827" start="4299" end="4311" title="mailing list" label="mailing list"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="4569" end="4580" title="interpreter (computing)" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="4640" end="4647" title="Object (computer science)" label="objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334113" start="4649" end="4659" title="Reference (computer science)" label="references"/>
<link wikidata="Q960279" start="4661" end="4683" title="Local variable" label="lexical (my) variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453666" start="4689" end="4696" title="Modular programming" label="modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="5133" end="5143" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493710" start="5168" end="5176" title="Shell builtin" label="builtins"/>
<link wikidata="Q841507" start="5404" end="5438" title="CPAN" label="Comprehensive Perl Archive Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334294" start="5467" end="5477" title="Software repository" label="repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165116" start="5504" end="5515" title="Perl module" label="Perl module"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="5808" end="5815" title="Class (computer programming)" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010968" start="5948" end="5954" title="CGI.pm" label="CGI.pm"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="6012" end="6034" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="CGI scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="6066" end="6083" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q725779" start="6085" end="6091" title="Plan 9 from Bell Labs" label="Plan 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="6093" end="6096" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q380526" start="6102" end="6109" title="AmigaOS" label="AmigaOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="6204" end="6209" title="Regular expression" label="regex"/>
<link wikidata="Q62563" start="6419" end="6423" title="BeOS" label="BeOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="6507" end="6513" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="6523" end="6530" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859422" start="6679" end="6689" title="software versioning" label="versioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="7022" end="7042" title="Request for Comments" label="Request for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q485593" start="7795" end="7802" title="Red Hat" label="Red Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="7803" end="7808" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="7812" end="7822" title="SUSE Linux" label="SUSE Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="7827" end="7834" title="Oracle Solaris" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q847593" start="7839" end="7844" title="HP-UX" label="HP-UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="7856" end="7859" title="IBM AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q15025" start="8046" end="8057" title="Audrey Tang" label="Audrey Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q914561" start="8072" end="8076" title="Pugs (compiler)" label="Pugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="8110" end="8117" title="Haskell" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354914" start="8408" end="8430" title="Parrot virtual machine" label="Parrot virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q838092" start="8907" end="8923" title="switch statement" label="switch statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q63629" start="9142" end="9148" title="Rakudo" label="Rakudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354914" start="9184" end="9206" title="Parrot virtual machine" label="Parrot virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9734" end="9752" title="Ellipsis (computer programming)#yadayada" label="yada yada operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q459405" start="9834" end="9839" title="Y2038" label="Y2038"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155967" start="9882" end="9888" title="DTrace" label="DTrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="9902" end="9909" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063" start="9961" end="9965" title="JSON" label="JSON"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="10285" end="10292" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052676" start="11293" end="11298" title="Raku (programming language)" label="Perl6"/>
<link wikidata="Q660739" start="11563" end="11578" title="O&amp;#x27;Reilly Open Source Convention" label="Perl Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="11844" end="11848" title="Request for Comments" label="RFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305639" start="12272" end="12287" title="Bradley M. Kuhn" label="Bradley M. Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q193321" start="12342" end="12362" title="Java virtual machine" label="Java virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="12511" end="12526" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354914" start="12534" end="12540" title="Parrot virtual machine" label="Parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15025" start="12552" end="12563" title="Audrey Tang" label="Audrey Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q914561" start="12576" end="12580" title="Pugs (compiler)" label="Pugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="12621" end="12628" title="Haskell" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q106908381" start="12909" end="12920" title="Libera Chat" label="Libera Chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="12945" end="12967" title="functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q63629" start="13092" end="13098" title="Rakudo" label="Rakudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052676" start="13188" end="13194" title="Niecza" label="Niecza"/>
<link wikidata="Q733134" start="13214" end="13237" title="Common Language Runtime" label="Common Language Runtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948420" start="13249" end="13255" title="MoarVM" label="MoarVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="13313" end="13328" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="13559" end="13569" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="14241" end="14260" title="Backward compatibility" label="backward compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4938355" start="14307" end="14318" title="Boilerplate code" label="boilerplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="15342" end="15350" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="15404" end="15411" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="15672" end="15675" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="15744" end="15758" title="dynamic typing" label="dynamic typing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202184" start="15809" end="15822" title="type introspection" label="introspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q191947" start="15932" end="15949" title="Zero One Infinity" label="Zero One Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="16037" end="16047" title="linguistic" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="16077" end="16091" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075258" start="16224" end="16242" title="language primitive" label="language primitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="16389" end="16395" title="Syntax (programming languages)" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="17031" end="17041" title="heuristics" label="heuristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418502" start="17448" end="17458" title="procedural programming" label="procedural"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="17475" end="17483" title="variable (programming)" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q778379" start="17486" end="17497" title="expression (programming)" label="expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q231158" start="17499" end="17519" title="assignment statement" label="assignment statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q174565" start="17522" end="17527" title="bracket" label="brace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327579" start="17538" end="17543" title="block (programming)" label="block"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="17546" end="17563" title="control structure" label="control structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="17570" end="17580" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483527" start="17671" end="17677" title="sigil (computer programming)" label="sigils"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623982" start="17707" end="17719" title="Variable interpolation" label="interpolated"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="17734" end="17741" title="String (computer science)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303697" start="18339" end="18346" title="Ascending order" label="sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="18360" end="18376" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q80585" start="18401" end="18407" title="associative array" label="hashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213970" start="18446" end="18449" title="AWK" label="AWK"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="18454" end="18472" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q305876" start="18479" end="18482" title="sed" label="sed"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="18567" end="18571" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242416" start="18588" end="18594" title="Return statement" label="return"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="18761" end="18775" title="data structure" label="data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344046" start="18778" end="18798" title="first-class function" label="first-class function"/>
<link wikidata="Q535335" start="18810" end="18818" title="Closure (computer science)" label="closures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334113" start="18887" end="18897" title="reference (computer science)" label="references"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268939" start="18921" end="18936" title="Dynamic dispatch" label="method dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034415" start="18942" end="18968" title="Scope (programming)" label="lexically scoped variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121492" start="18981" end="18999" title="compiler directive" label="compiler directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121492" start="19028" end="19034" title="Directive (programming)" label="pragma"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="19329" end="19340" title="Type system" label="data-typing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="19355" end="19372" title="memory management" label="memory management"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="19409" end="19416" title="Computer data storage" label="storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352761" start="19526" end="19544" title="reference counting" label="reference counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q205885" start="19570" end="19594" title="circular dependency" label="circular data structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333515" start="19631" end="19646" title="type conversion" label="type conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="19725" end="19733" title="Run time (program lifecycle phase)" label="run time"/>
<link wikidata="Q93056" start="19891" end="19909" title="Randal L. Schwartz" label="Randal L. Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510120" start="19949" end="19962" title="Learning Perl" label="Learning Perl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20049" end="20068" title="write-only language" label="write-only language"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="20219" end="20228" title="Variable (computer science)" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="20399" end="20417" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923028" start="20934" end="20940" title="gerund" label="gerund"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="20946" end="20958" title="Preposition and postposition" label="prepositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="20977" end="20993" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113723" start="21152" end="21161" title="chromatic (programmer)" label="chromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="21289" end="21322" title="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program" label="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549976" start="21747" end="21762" title="One-liner program" label="one-off scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="21770" end="21782" title="command line" label="command line"/>
<link wikidata="Q189248" start="21855" end="21859" title="Bash (Unix shell)" label="Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437424" start="22066" end="22079" title="Formal specification" label="specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="23073" end="23091" title="character encoding" label="character encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060813" start="23231" end="23242" title="file handle" label="file handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164699" start="23282" end="23291" title="struct (C programming language)" label="C structs"/>
<link wikidata="Q629579" start="23358" end="23364" title="Macro (computer science)" label="macros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629778" start="23366" end="23373" title="typedef" label="typedef"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="23419" end="23422" title="application programming interface" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142164" start="23517" end="23530" title="naming scheme" label="naming scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q127380" start="24830" end="24841" title="Abstract syntax tree" label="syntax tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210082" start="24883" end="24899" title="Tree traversal" label="walking the tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342581" start="25094" end="25110" title="constant folding" label="constant folding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160329" start="25140" end="25161" title="peephole optimization" label="peephole optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="25193" end="25208" title="Turing-complete" label="Turing-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="25209" end="25216" title="formal grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q306650" start="25341" end="25344" title="Lex programming tool" label="Lex"/>
<link wikidata="Q305932" start="25345" end="25349" title="Yacc" label="Yacc"/>
<link wikidata="Q835922" start="25350" end="25355" title="Lexical analysis" label="lexer"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="25356" end="25362" title="parser" label="parser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071969" start="25478" end="25487" title="GNU bison" label="GNU bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q622849" start="25821" end="25836" title="halting problem" label="halting problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329550" start="26262" end="26283" title="Static program analysis" label="source-code analyzers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13444128" start="26288" end="26302" title="Indent style" label="auto-indenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486712" start="26344" end="26364" title="Language construct" label="syntactic constructs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455907" start="26383" end="26397" title="Recursive language" label="undecidability"/>
<link wikidata="Q841507" start="26435" end="26447" title="Adam Kennedy (programmer)" label="Adam Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493432" start="26813" end="26829" title="Functional testing" label="functional tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="27118" end="27130" title="software bug" label="software bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367082" start="27313" end="27326" title="dual licensed" label="dual licensed"/>
<link wikidata="Q713244" start="27342" end="27358" title="Artistic License" label="Artistic License"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="27371" end="27397" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="27436" end="27452" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="27487" end="27491" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="27496" end="27505" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="27645" end="27656" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q14658" start="27664" end="27669" title="POSIX" label="POSIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="27767" end="27781" title="classic Mac OS" label="classic Mac OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q841507" start="27857" end="27891" title="CPAN" label="Comprehensive Perl Archive Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033362" start="28148" end="28159" title="ActiveState" label="ActiveState"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381482" start="28262" end="28282" title="Perl package manager" label="Perl package manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033363" start="28463" end="28473" title="PerlScript" label="PerlScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152468" start="28477" end="28496" title="Windows Script Host" label="Windows Script Host"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265324" start="28542" end="28553" title="Visual Perl" label="Visual Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q134067" start="28599" end="28612" title="Visual Studio" label="Visual Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622213" start="28613" end="28617" title=".NET" label=".NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q13743" start="28639" end="28647" title="VBScript" label="VBScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q213970" start="28714" end="28717" title="AWK" label="AWK"/>
<link wikidata="Q305876" start="28722" end="28725" title="sed" label="sed"/>
<link wikidata="Q21043327" start="28885" end="28895" title="Komodo IDE" label="Komodo IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q30596044" start="29001" end="29038" title="The Computer Language Benchmarks Game" label="The Computer Language Benchmarks Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572233" start="29526" end="29543" title="Yet Another Perl Conference" label="YAPC::Europe 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q331716" start="30004" end="30013" title="amortized" label="amortized"/>
<link wikidata="Q292390" start="30253" end="30261" title="mod_perl" label="mod_perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="30365" end="30368" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="30369" end="30372" title="World Wide Web" label="Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033362" start="30386" end="30396" title="ActiveState" label="ActivePerl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434299" start="30412" end="30417" title="ISAPI" label="ISAPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q837330" start="30676" end="30684" title="bytecode" label="bytecode"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="30837" end="30838" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042480" start="30933" end="30935" title="XS (Perl)" label="XS"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="31117" end="31120" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q283637" start="31169" end="31175" title="cPanel" label="cPanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130350" start="31177" end="31182" title="Slash (weblog system)" label="Slash"/>
<link wikidata="Q55671" start="31184" end="31192" title="Bugzilla" label="Bugzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q746739" start="31194" end="31196" title="Request Tracker" label="RT"/>
<link wikidata="Q611744" start="31198" end="31203" title="TWiki" label="TWiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q909734" start="31209" end="31221" title="Movable Type" label="Movable Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242653" start="31279" end="31292" title="Priceline.com" label="Priceline.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q788500" start="31294" end="31304" title="Craigslist" label="Craigslist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="31306" end="31310" title="Internet Movie Database" label="IMDb"/>
<link wikidata="Q219523" start="31312" end="31323" title="LiveJournal" label="LiveJournal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12805" start="31325" end="31335" title="DuckDuckGo" label="DuckDuckGo"/>
<link wikidata="Q59083" start="31337" end="31345" title="Slashdot" label="Slashdot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609162" start="31350" end="31362" title="Ticketmaster" label="Ticketmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q191342" start="31413" end="31417" title="LAMP (software bundle)" label="LAMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q386275" start="31439" end="31454" title="Web development" label="Web development"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="31467" end="31470" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="31474" end="31480" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117397" start="31512" end="31539" title="system programming language" label="system programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="31547" end="31553" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="31554" end="31559" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="31599" end="31612" title="glue language" label="glue language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227374" start="31719" end="31731" title="data munging" label="data munging"/>
<link wikidata="Q327353" start="31932" end="31952" title="system administrator" label="system administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549976" start="32011" end="32028" title="one-liner program" label="one-liner program"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="32072" end="32084" title="Command-line interface" label="command line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="32125" end="32132" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115443" start="32198" end="32222" title="commercial off-the-shelf" label="commercial off-the-shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q616360" start="32325" end="32332" title="Tk (framework)" label="Perl/Tk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973675" start="32337" end="32343" title="wxPerl" label="wxPerl"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="32369" end="32393" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="32479" end="32482" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q358027" start="32628" end="32636" title="Perl DBI" label="Perl DBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="32637" end="32670" title="application programming interface" label="application programming interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q36774" start="32829" end="32837" title="Web page" label="Web page"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="32844" end="32848" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="32850" end="32860" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609764" start="32875" end="32888" title="here document" label="here document"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623982" start="32907" end="32929" title="variable interpolation" label="variable interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172284" start="33089" end="33097" title="data set" label="data set"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="33323" end="33334" title="client-side" label="client-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="33881" end="33885" title="American National Standards Institute" label="ANSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="33886" end="33889" title="SQL" label="SQL"/>
<link wikidata="Q292390" start="34040" end="34048" title="mod_perl" label="mod_perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072097" start="34106" end="34121" title="Slashdot effect" label="Slashdot effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330336" start="34184" end="34197" title="web framework" label="web framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050338" start="34207" end="34215" title="Catalyst (software)" label="Catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q58748" start="34261" end="34285" title="object-relational mapper" label="object-relational mapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="34508" end="34514" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q960189" start="34916" end="34923" title="keynote" label="keynote"/>
<link wikidata="Q93056" start="35438" end="35456" title="Randal L. Schwartz" label="Randal L. Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="36149" end="36153" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q296187" start="36545" end="36548" title="APL (programming language)" label="APL"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="36620" end="36623" title="RSA (algorithm)" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q956247" start="36733" end="36742" title="code golf" label="code golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150647" start="36906" end="36921" title="obfuscated code" label="obfuscated code"/>
<link wikidata="Q206681" start="36984" end="37007" title="Obfuscated Perl Contest" label="Obfuscated Perl Contest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37034" end="37050" title="The Perl Journal" label="The Perl Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362562" start="37362" end="37377" title="signature block" label="signature block"/>
<link wikidata="Q798394" start="37503" end="37513" title="Black Perl" label="Black Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169102" start="37677" end="37686" title="PerlMonks" label="PerlMonks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083764" start="37705" end="37720" title="Outline of Perl" label="Outline of Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046690" start="37723" end="37741" title="Perl Data Language" label="Perl Data Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169113" start="37744" end="37767" title="Perl Object Environment" label="Perl Object Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935864" start="37770" end="37793" title="Plain Old Documentation" label="Plain Old Documentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169109" start="38352" end="38365" title="Perl Cookbook" label="Perl Cookbook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23940" wikidata="Q732937" url="?curid=23940" title="Proto-Human language">
<text>The Proto-Human language, also known as Proto-Sapiens or Proto-World, is the hypothetical direct genetic predecessor of all human languages. 

The concept is speculative and not amenable to analysis in historical linguistics. It presupposes a &quot;monogenetic&quot; origin of language, i.e. the derivation of all natural languages from a single origin, presumably at some time in the Middle Paleolithic period. As the predecessor of all &quot;extant&quot; languages spoken by modern humans (&quot;Homo sapiens&quot;), Proto-Human as hypothesised would not necessarily be ancestral to any hypothetical Neanderthal language.

==Terminology==
There is no generally accepted term for this concept. Most treatments of the subject do not include a name for the language under consideration (e.g. Bengtson and Ruhlen). The terms &quot;Proto-World&quot; and &quot;Proto-Human&quot; are in occasional use. Merritt Ruhlen used the term &quot;Proto-Sapiens&quot;.

==History of the idea==
The first serious scientific attempt to establish the reality of monogenesis was that of Alfredo Trombetti, in his book &quot;L&#x27;unità d&#x27;origine del linguaggio&quot;, published in 1905. Trombetti estimated that the common ancestor of existing languages had been spoken between 100,000 and 200,000 years ago.

Monogenesis was dismissed by many linguists in the late 19th and early 20th centuries when the doctrine of the polygenesis of the human races and their languages was popularised.

The best-known supporter of monogenesis in America in the mid-20th century was Morris Swadesh. He pioneered two important methods for investigating deep relationships between languages, lexicostatistics and glottochronology.

In the second half of the 20th century, Joseph Greenberg produced a series of large-scale classifications of the world&#x27;s languages. These were and are controversial but widely discussed. Although Greenberg did not produce an explicit argument for monogenesis, all of his classification work was geared toward this end. As he stated: &quot;The ultimate goal is a comprehensive classification of what is very likely a single language family.&quot;

Notable American advocates of linguistic monogenesis include Merritt Ruhlen, John Bengtson, and Harold Fleming.

==Date and location==
The first concrete attempt to estimate the date of the hypothetical ancestor language was that of Alfredo Trombetti, who concluded it was spoken between 100,000 and 200,000 years ago, or close to the first emergence of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;.

It is uncertain or disputed whether the earliest members of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; had fully developed language. Some scholars link the emergence of language proper (out of a proto-linguistic stage that may have lasted considerably longer) to the development of behavioral modernity toward the end of the Middle Paleolithic or at the beginning of the Upper Paleolithic, roughly 50,000 years ago. 
Thus, in the opinion of Richard Klein, the ability to produce complex speech only developed some 50,000 years ago (with the appearance of modern humans or Cro-Magnon).
Johanna Nichols (1998) argued that vocal languages must have begun diversifying in our species at least 100,000 years ago.

In 2011, an article in the journal &quot;Science&quot; proposed an African origin of modern human languages. It was suggested that human language predates the out-of-Africa migrations of 50,000 to 70,000 years ago and that language might have been the essential cultural and cognitive innovation that facilitated human colonization of the globe.
In Perreault and Mathew (2012), an estimate of the time of the first emergence of human language was based on phonemic diversity. This is based on the assumption that phonemic diversity evolves much more slowly than grammar or vocabulary, slowly increasing over time (but reduced among small founding populations).
The largest phoneme inventories are found among African languages, while the smallest inventories are found in South America and Oceania, some of the last regions of the globe to be settled.
The authors used data from the colonization of Southeast Asia to estimate the rate of increase in phonemic diversity.
Applying this rate to African languages, Perreault and Mathew (2012) arrived at an estimated age of 150,000 to 350,000 years, compatible with the emergence and early dispersal of &quot;H. sapiens&quot;.
The validity of this approach has been criticized as flawed.

==Claimed characteristics==
Speculation on the &quot;characteristics&quot; of Proto-World is limited to linguistic typology, i.e. the identification of universal features shared by all human languages, such as grammar (in the sense of &quot;fixed or preferred sequences of linguistic elements&quot;), and recursion, but beyond this, nothing is known of it.

Christopher Ehret has hypothesized that Proto-Human had a very complex consonant system, including clicks.

A few linguists, such as Merritt Ruhlen, have suggested the application of mass comparison and internal reconstruction (cf. Babaev 2008). Several linguists have attempted to reconstruct the language, while many others reject this as fringe science.

===Vocabulary===
Ruhlen tentatively traces several words back to the ancestral language, based on the occurrence of similar sound-and-meaning forms in languages across the globe. Bengtson and Ruhlen identify 27 &quot;global etymologies&quot;. The following table lists a selection of these forms:

Based on these correspondences, Ruhlen lists these roots for the ancestor language:

*&quot;*ku&quot; = &#x27;who&#x27;
*&quot;*ma&quot; = &#x27;what&#x27;
*&quot;*akʷa&quot; = &#x27;water&#x27;
*&quot;*sum&quot; = &#x27;hair&#x27;
*&quot;*čuna&quot; = &#x27;nose, smell&#x27;

Selected items from Bengtson&#x27;s and Ruhlen&#x27;s (1994) list of 27 &quot;global etymologies&quot;:

===Syntax===

There are competing theories about the basic word order of the hypothesized Proto-Human. These usually assume subject-initial ordering because it is the most common globally. Derek Bickerton proposes SVO (subject-verb-object) because this word order (like its mirror OVS) helps differentiate between the subject and object in the absence of evolved case markers by separating them with the verb.

By contrast, Talmy Givón hypothesizes that Proto-Human had SOV (subject-object-verb), based on the observation that many old languages (e.g., Sanskrit and Latin) had dominant SOV, but the proportion of SVO has increased over time. On such a basis, it is suggested that human languages are shifting globally from the original SOV to the modern SVO. Givón bases his theory on the empirical claim that word-order change mostly results in SVO and never in SOV.

Exploring Givón&#x27;s idea in their 2011 paper, Murray Gell-Mann and Merritt Ruhlen stated that shifts to SOV are also attested. However, when these are excluded, the data indeed supported Givón&#x27;s claim. The authors justified the exclusion by pointing out that the shift to SOV is unexceptionally a matter of borrowing the order from a neighboring language. Moreover, they argued that, since many languages have already changed to SVO, a new trend towards VSO and VOS ordering has arisen. 

Harald Hammarström reanalysed the data. In contrast to such claims, he found that a shift to SOV is in every case the most common type, suggesting that there is, rather, an unchanged universal tendency towards SOV regardless of the way that languages change and that the relative increase of SVO is a historical effect of European colonialism.

== Criticism ==

Many linguists reject the methods used to determine these forms. Several areas of criticism are raised with the methods Ruhlen and Gell-Mann employed. The essential basis of these criticisms is that the words being compared do not show common ancestry; the reasons for this vary. One is onomatopoeia: for example, the suggested root for &quot;smell&quot; listed above, *&quot;čuna&quot;, may simply be a result of many languages employing an onomatopoeic word that sounds like sniffing, snuffling, or smelling. Another is the taboo quality of certain words. Lyle Campbell points out that many established proto-languages do not contain an equivalent word for *&quot;putV&quot; &#x27;vulva&#x27; because of how often such taboo words are replaced in the lexicon, and notes that it &quot;strains credibility to imagine&quot; that a Proto-World form of such a word would survive in many languages.

Using the criteria that Bengtson and Ruhlen employ to find cognates to their proposed roots, Campbell found seven possible matches to their root for woman *&quot;kuna&quot; in Spanish, including &quot;cónyuge&quot; &#x27;wife, spouse&#x27;, &quot;chica&quot; &#x27;girl&#x27;, and &quot;cana&quot; &#x27;old (of a woman)&#x27; (adjective). He then goes on to show how what Bengtson and Ruhlen would identify as reflexes of *&quot;kuna&quot; cannot possibly be related to a Proto-World word for &#x27;woman&#x27;. &quot;Cónyuge&quot;, for example, comes from the Latin root meaning &#x27;to join&#x27;, so its origin had nothing to do with the word &#x27;woman&#x27;; &quot;chica&quot; is related to a Latin word meaning &#x27;insignificant thing&#x27;; &quot;cana&quot; comes from the Latin word for &#x27;white&#x27;, and again shows a history unrelated to the word for &#x27;woman&#x27;. Campbell asserts that these types of problems are endemic to the methods used by Ruhlen and others.

Some linguists question the very possibility of tracing language elements so far back into the past. Campbell notes that given the time elapsed since the origin of human language, every word from that time would have been replaced or changed beyond recognition in all languages today. Campbell harshly criticizes efforts to reconstruct a Proto-Human language, saying: &quot;the search for global etymologies is at best a hopeless waste of time, at worst an embarrassment to linguistics as a discipline, unfortunately confusing and misleading to those who might look to linguistics for understanding in this area&quot;.

==See also==
* Adamic language
* Borean languages
* Linguistic monogenesis and polygenesis
* Linguistic universals
* List of languages by first written accounts
* List of proto-languages
* Origin of language
* Origin of speech
* Recent African origin of modern humans
* Universal grammar

==References==
===Notes===

===Sources===

* Bengtson, John D. 2007. &quot;On fossil dinosaurs and fossil words&quot;.
* Campbell, Lyle, and William J. Poser. 2008. &quot;Language Classification: History and Method&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Gell-Mann, Murray and Merritt Ruhlen. 2003. &quot;The origin and evolution of syntax&quot;. (Also: HTML version.)
* Givón, Talmy. 1979. &quot;On Understanding Grammar&quot;. New York: Academic Press.
* Greenberg, Joseph. 1963. &quot;Some universals of grammar with particular reference to the order of meaningful elements&quot;. In &quot;Universals of Language&quot;, edited by Joseph Greenberg, Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 58–90. (In second edition of &quot;Universals of Language&quot;, 1966: pp. 73–113.)
* Greenberg, Joseph H. 1966. &quot;The Languages of Africa&quot;, revised edition. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. (Published simultaneously at The Hague by Mouton &amp; Co.)
* Greenberg, Joseph H. 1971. &quot;The Indo-Pacific hypothesis&quot;. Reprinted in Joseph H. Greenberg, &quot;Genetic Linguistics: Essays on Theory and Method&quot;, edited by William Croft, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
* Greenberg, Joseph H. 2000–2002. &quot;Indo-European and Its Closest Relatives: The Eurasiatic Language Family. Volume 1: Grammar. Volume 2: Lexicon&quot;. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
* Klein, Richard G. and Blake Edgar. 2002. &quot;The Dawn of Human Culture&quot;. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
* Nandi, Owi Ivar. 2012. &quot;Human Language Evolution, as Coframed by Behavioral and Psychological Universalisms&quot;, Bloomington: iUniverse Publishers.
* Wells, Spencer. 2007. &quot;Deep Ancestry: Inside the Genographic Project&quot;. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic.


==External links==
* &quot;Genetic Distance and Language Affinities Between Autochthonous Human Populations&quot;
* Babaev, Kirill. 2008. &quot;Critics of the Nostratic theory&quot;, in &quot;Nostratica: Resources on Distant Language Relationship&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q732937" start="4" end="24" title="Proto-Human language" label="Proto-Human language"/>
<link wikidata="Q732937" start="40" end="53" title="Proto-Human language" label="Proto-Sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q732937" start="57" end="68" title="Proto-Human language" label="Proto-World"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="97" end="104" title="Genetic relationship (linguistics)" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="202" end="224" title="historical linguistics" label="historical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673893" start="229" end="240" title="Tacit assumption" label="presupposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q501032" start="267" end="285" title="origin of language" label="origin of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="314" end="330" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="385" end="403" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="477" end="490" title="modern humans" label="modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="498" end="510" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984279" start="602" end="622" title="Neanderthal language" label="Neanderthal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922057" start="898" end="912" title="Merritt Ruhlen" label="Merritt Ruhlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523993" start="1068" end="1085" title="Alfredo Trombetti" label="Alfredo Trombetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q323800" start="1408" end="1419" title="Polygenism" label="polygenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331691" start="1439" end="1458" title="polygenesis (linguistics)" label="and their languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q333227" start="1556" end="1570" title="Morris Swadesh" label="Morris Swadesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q284290" start="1663" end="1679" title="lexicostatistics" label="lexicostatistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q942552" start="1684" end="1700" title="glottochronology" label="glottochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q309997" start="1743" end="1759" title="Joseph Greenberg" label="Joseph Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922057" start="2216" end="2230" title="Merritt Ruhlen" label="Merritt Ruhlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394809" start="2232" end="2245" title="John Bengtson" label="John Bengtson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660246" start="2251" end="2265" title="Harold C. Fleming" label="Harold Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523993" start="2388" end="2405" title="Alfredo Trombetti" label="Alfredo Trombetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="2515" end="2527" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q501032" start="2713" end="2729" title="proto-linguistic" label="proto-linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706556" start="2800" end="2820" title="behavioral modernity" label="behavioral modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="2843" end="2861" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="2889" end="2906" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="Upper Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164276" start="2959" end="2972" title="Richard Klein (paleoanthropologist)" label="Richard Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="3090" end="3100" title="Cro-Magnon" label="Cro-Magnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11727799" start="3103" end="3118" title="Johanna Nichols" label="Johanna Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="3268" end="3275" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="3386" end="3410" title="Recent African origin of modern humans" label="out-of-Africa migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="3683" end="3691" title="phonemic" label="phonemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207930" start="3936" end="3953" title="African languages" label="African languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q192625" start="4566" end="4585" title="linguistic typology" label="linguistic typology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="4672" end="4679" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4767" end="4776" title="Recursion#In language" label="recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q456009" start="4820" end="4837" title="Christopher Ehret" label="Christopher Ehret"/>
<link wikidata="Q427013" start="4919" end="4925" title="click consonant" label="clicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922057" start="4953" end="4967" title="Merritt Ruhlen" label="Merritt Ruhlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503202" start="5003" end="5018" title="mass comparison" label="mass comparison"/>
<link wikidata="Q904252" start="5023" end="5046" title="internal reconstruction" label="internal reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140308" start="5161" end="5175" title="fringe science" label="fringe science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5912" end="5928" title="Linguistic typology#Dominant order" label="basic word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200003" start="6048" end="6063" title="Derek Bickerton" label="Derek Bickerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="6073" end="6076" title="Subject–verb–object word order" label="SVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q989463" start="6140" end="6143" title="Object–verb–subject word order" label="OVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q631256" start="6222" end="6234" title="Case marker" label="case markers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137966" start="6283" end="6294" title="Thomas Givon" label="Talmy Givón"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="6329" end="6332" title="Subject–object–verb word order" label="SOV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="6412" end="6420" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="6425" end="6430" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172840" start="6777" end="6793" title="Murray Gell-Mann" label="Murray Gell-Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922057" start="6798" end="6812" title="Merritt Ruhlen" label="Merritt Ruhlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83561067" start="7225" end="7243" title="Harald Hammarström" label="Harald Hammarström"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="7874" end="7886" title="onomatopoeia" label="onomatopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="8113" end="8118" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450352" start="8145" end="8158" title="Lyle Campbell" label="Lyle Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q351633" start="10109" end="10124" title="Adamic language" label="Adamic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225764" start="10127" end="10143" title="Borean languages" label="Borean languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331691" start="10146" end="10184" title="Linguistic monogenesis and polygenesis" label="Linguistic monogenesis and polygenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q980142" start="10187" end="10208" title="Linguistic universals" label="Linguistic universals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624925" start="10211" end="10254" title="List of languages by first written accounts" label="List of languages by first written accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560416" start="10257" end="10280" title="List of proto-languages" label="List of proto-languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q501032" start="10283" end="10301" title="Origin of language" label="Origin of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102483" start="10304" end="10320" title="Origin of speech" label="Origin of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="10323" end="10361" title="Recent African origin of modern humans" label="Recent African origin of modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q728252" start="10364" end="10381" title="Universal grammar" label="Universal grammar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="23943" wikidata="Q1176995" url="?curid=23943" title="Palestine (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Palestine]], officially the State of Palestine, is a country in West Asia.

Palestine (variously transliterated from Arabic as Falastin, Felesteen, and Felestin, and from Latin as Palaestina) may also refer to:

== Geographic region ==
In alphabetical order:
* Jund Filastin, a military district in the Umayyad and Abbasid province of Bilad al-Sham
* Mandatory Palestine (1920–1948), a geopolitical entity under British administration
* Occupied Palestinian territories, territories occupied by Israel since 1967, namely the West Bank (including East Jerusalem) and the Gaza Strip
* Palaestina Prima or Palaestina I (395-630s), Byzantine province
* Palaestina Secunda or Palaestina II (390-630s), Byzantine province
* Palaestina Tertia or Palaestina Salutaris (c. 300-630s), Byzantine province
* Palestine (region), a geographic region in West Asia
* Syria Palaestina, a Roman province in the Palestine region between the early 2nd and late 4th centuries AD

== Other places ==
=== Iraq ===
* Palestine Hotel, building in Baghdad
* Palestine Street, in Baghdad

=== United Kingdom ===
* Palestine, Hampshire, England
* Palestine Place, headquarters in London of the Church of England&#x27;s organization Church&#x27;s Ministry Among Jewish People

=== United States ===
Alphabetically by state.
* Palestine, Arkansas
* Palestine, a community of Newtown, Connecticut
* Palestine, Illinois, in Crawford County
* Palestine Township, Woodford County, Illinois 
* New Palestine, Illinois
* Palestine, Indiana (disambiguation), several places
* Palestine Township, Story County, Iowa
* Palestine Township, Cooper County, Missouri
* Palestine, Ohio
* East Palestine, Ohio
* New Palestine, Ohio
* Palestine, Texas
* Lake Palestine, in Texas
* Palestine, Greenbrier County, West Virginia
* Palestine, Wirt County, West Virginia

== Arts, entertainment, and media ==
* &quot;Falastin&quot;, a Palestinian newspaper published from 1911 to 1967
* &quot;Felesteen&quot; (newspaper), a Palestinian newspaper published since 2006
* &quot;New Palestine&quot; (magazine), an American magazine published in 1919
* &quot;Palestine&quot; (graphic novel), a 2001 non-fiction graphic novel by Joe Sacco
* &quot;Palestine from the Perspective of Ayatollah Khamenei&quot;, a 2011 compilation of statements by Ayatollah Ali Khamenei 
* &quot;Palestine&quot; (poem), an 1803 poem by Reginald Heber
* &quot;Palestine&quot;, a 1912 American silent documentary film by Sidney Olcott
* Charlemagne Palestine (born 1947), American composer

== Other uses ==
* Palestine (horse), a racehorse who won the 2,000 Guineas in 1950

== See also ==

* All-Palestine Government, a Palestinian Arab state proclaimed by the Arab League in 1948 and seated in Egyptian-occupied Gaza Strip
* Definitions of Palestinian
* Holy Land (disambiguation)
* Israel (disambiguation)
* Palaestina (disambiguation)
* Palestina (disambiguation)
* Palestinian (disambiguation)
* Palestinian territories (disambiguation)
* Palestyna (disambiguation)
* Philistines (disambiguation)
* Palestinian National Authority
*Palestrina, an Italian city</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1176995" start="0" end="13" title="Palestine (disambiguation)" label="[[Palestine]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176995" start="78" end="87" title="Palestine (disambiguation)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176995" start="129" end="137" title="Palestine (disambiguation)" label="Falastin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176995" start="139" end="148" title="Palestine (disambiguation)" label="Felesteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176995" start="154" end="162" title="Palestine (disambiguation)" label="Felestin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176995" start="182" end="192" title="Palestine (disambiguation)" label="Palaestina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353320" start="263" end="276" title="Jund Filastin" label="Jund Filastin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="353" end="372" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Mandatory Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="439" end="471" title="Occupied Palestinian territories" label="Occupied Palestinian territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274024" start="585" end="601" title="Palaestina Prima" label="Palaestina Prima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126539" start="651" end="669" title="Palaestina Secunda" label="Palaestina Secunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896786" start="720" end="737" title="Palaestina Tertia" label="Palaestina Tertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="798" end="816" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine (region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669578" start="853" end="869" title="Syria Palaestina" label="Syria Palaestina"/>
<link wikidata="Q917607" start="995" end="1010" title="Palestine Hotel" label="Palestine Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431668" start="1034" end="1050" title="Palestine Street" label="Palestine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848224" start="1089" end="1109" title="Palestine, Hampshire" label="Palestine, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919291" start="1121" end="1136" title="Palestine Place" label="Palestine Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q79491" start="1299" end="1318" title="Palestine, Arkansas" label="Palestine, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q738356" start="1347" end="1367" title="Newtown, Connecticut" label="Newtown, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666867" start="1370" end="1389" title="Palestine, Illinois" label="Palestine, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127332" start="1412" end="1457" title="Palestine Township, Woodford County, Illinois" label="Palestine Township, Woodford County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q56852757" start="1461" end="1484" title="New Palestine, Illinois" label="New Palestine, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q48441075" start="1487" end="1522" title="Palestine, Indiana (disambiguation)" label="Palestine, Indiana (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127330" start="1541" end="1579" title="Palestine Township, Story County, Iowa" label="Palestine Township, Story County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127326" start="1582" end="1625" title="Palestine Township, Cooper County, Missouri" label="Palestine Township, Cooper County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181925" start="1628" end="1643" title="Palestine, Ohio" label="Palestine, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924957" start="1646" end="1666" title="East Palestine, Ohio" label="East Palestine, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q22134039" start="1669" end="1688" title="New Palestine, Ohio" label="New Palestine, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q617602" start="1691" end="1707" title="Palestine, Texas" label="Palestine, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477277" start="1710" end="1724" title="Lake Palestine" label="Lake Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127275" start="1737" end="1780" title="Palestine, Greenbrier County, West Virginia" label="Palestine, Greenbrier County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127283" start="1783" end="1820" title="Palestine, Wirt County, West Virginia" label="Palestine, Wirt County, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448286" start="1867" end="1875" title="Falastin" label="Falastin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12231001" start="1937" end="1970" title="Felesteen (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Felesteen&amp;quot; (newspaper)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104903134" start="2019" end="2055" title="New Palestine (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;New Palestine&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q389083" start="2098" end="2135" title="Palestine (graphic novel)" label="&amp;quot;Palestine&amp;quot; (graphic novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21601949" start="2185" end="2249" title="Palestine (2011 book)" label="&amp;quot;Palestine from the Perspective of Ayatollah Khamenei&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386222" start="2313" end="2341" title="Palestine (poem)" label="&amp;quot;Palestine&amp;quot; (poem)"/>
<link wikidata="Q543630" start="2442" end="2455" title="Sidney Olcott" label="Sidney Olcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q369916" start="2458" end="2479" title="Charlemagne Palestine" label="Charlemagne Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127279" start="2531" end="2548" title="Palestine (horse)" label="Palestine (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051582" start="2615" end="2639" title="All-Palestine Government" label="All-Palestine Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127418" start="2749" end="2775" title="Definitions of Palestinian" label="Definitions of Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177566" start="2778" end="2804" title="Holy Land (disambiguation)" label="Holy Land (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q234180" start="2807" end="2830" title="Israel (disambiguation)" label="Israel (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92768017" start="2833" end="2860" title="Palaestina (disambiguation)" label="Palaestina (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q342334" start="2863" end="2889" title="Palestina (disambiguation)" label="Palestina (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127361" start="2892" end="2920" title="Palestinian (disambiguation)" label="Palestinian (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20109317" start="2923" end="2963" title="Palestinian territories (disambiguation)" label="Palestinian territories (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127446" start="2966" end="2992" title="Palestyna (disambiguation)" label="Palestyna (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185567" start="2995" end="3023" title="Philistines (disambiguation)" label="Philistines (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="3026" end="3056" title="Palestinian National Authority" label="Palestinian National Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q243133" start="3058" end="3068" title="Palestrina" label="Palestrina"/>
</links>
</doc>
