<doc id="27718" wikidata="Q32096" url="?curid=27718" title="Super Bowl">
<text>The Super Bowl is the annual league championship game of the National Football League of the United States. It has served as the final game of every NFL season since 1966, superseding the NFL Championship Game. Since 2022, the game has been played on the second Sunday in February. Prior Super Bowls were played on Sundays in early to mid-January from 1967 to 1978, late January from 1979 to 2003, and the first Sunday of February from 2004 to 2021. Winning teams are awarded the Vince Lombardi Trophy, named after the Packers coach who won the first two Super Bowls. Because the NFL restricts the use of its &quot;Super Bowl&quot; trademark, it is frequently referred to as the &quot;big game&quot; or other generic terms by non-sponsoring corporations. The day the game is held is commonly referred to as &quot;Super Bowl Sunday&quot; or simply &quot;Super Sunday&quot;.

The game was created as part of a 1966 merger agreement between the NFL and the competing American Football League (AFL) to have their &#x27;best&#x27; teams compete for a championship. It was originally called the AFL–NFL World Championship Game until the &quot;Super Bowl&quot; moniker was adopted in 1969&#x27;s Super Bowl III. The first four Super Bowls from 1967 to 1970 were played prior to the merger, with the NFL and AFL each winning two. After the merger in 1970, the 10 AFL teams and three of the NFL teams formed the American Football Conference (AFC) and the remaining 13 NFL teams formed the National Football Conference (NFC). All games since 1971&#x27;s Super Bowl V have been played between the best team from each of the two conferences, the NFC has won 30 while the AFC has won 29.
Among the NFL&#x27;s current 32 teams, 20 (11 NFC, nine AFC) have won a Super Bowl and 16 (eight AFC, eight NFC) hold multiple titles. The AFC&#x27;s Pittsburgh Steelers and New England Patriots have the most Super Bowl titles at six each. The Patriots also have the most Super Bowl appearances at 11. The Patriots and the Denver Broncos of the AFC hold the record for the most defeats in the Super Bowl at five each. The Baltimore Ravens of the AFC and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers of the NFC are the only franchises to be undefeated in multiple Super Bowls, having each won two. Among the 12 teams who have not won a Super Bowl, the AFC&#x27;s Cleveland Browns, Houston Texans, and Jacksonville Jaguars, and the NFC&#x27;s Detroit Lions are the only four to have not appeared in the game.

The Super Bowl is among the world&#x27;s most-watched single sporting events and frequently commands the largest audience among all American broadcasts during the year. It is second only to the UEFA Champions League final as the most watched annual club sporting event worldwide, and the seven most-watched broadcasts in American television history are Super Bowls. Its halftime shows feature top artists, and headlining a Super Bowl is considered one of the highest honors in music. Commercial airtime during the Super Bowl broadcast is the most expensive of the year because of the high viewership, leading to companies regularly developing their most expensive advertisements for the broadcast and commercial viewership becoming an integral part of the event. The Super Bowl is also the second-largest event for American food consumption, behind Thanksgiving dinner, with fans commonly purchasing beer, hot dogs, nachos, and other concessions, spending an average of $58 on food and drinks during an NFL game. 

==Origin==

Since the turn of the 20th century, college football teams from across the United States have scheduled &quot;bowl games&quot; against each other. The original &quot;bowl game&quot; was the Rose Bowl Game in Pasadena, California, which was first played in 1902 as the &quot;Tournament East–West football game&quot; as part of the Pasadena Tournament of Roses. In 1923, the Tournament East-West football game moved to the new Rose Bowl Stadium; the stadium got its name from the fact that the game played there was part of the Tournament of Roses and that it was shaped like a bowl, much like the Yale Bowl in New Haven, Connecticut. The Tournament of Roses football game thus eventually came to be known as the Rose Bowl Game. Exploiting the Rose Bowl Game&#x27;s popularity, post-season college football contests were created for Miami (the Orange Bowl), New Orleans (the Sugar Bowl), and El Paso (the Sun Bowl) in 1935, and for Dallas (the Cotton Bowl) in 1937. By the time the first Super Bowl was played, the term &quot;bowl&quot; for any major American football game was well established.
For four decades after its 1920 inception, the NFL successfully fended off several rival leagues. In 1960, it encountered its most serious competitor when the American Football League (AFL) was formed. The AFL vied with the NFL for players and fans. After the AFL&#x27;s inaugural season, AFL commissioner Joe Foss sent an invitation to the NFL on January 14, 1961, to schedule a &quot;World Playoff&quot; game between the two leagues&#x27; champions, beginning with the upcoming 1961 season. The first World Playoff game, if actually played, would have matched up the AFL champion Houston Oilers against the NFL champion Green Bay Packers.

In the mid-1960s, Lamar Hunt, owner of the AFL&#x27;s Kansas City Chiefs, first used the term &quot;Super Bowl&quot; to refer to the AFL–NFL championship game in the merger meetings. Hunt later said the name was likely in his head because his children had been playing with a Super Ball toy; a vintage example of the ball is on display at the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio. In a July 25, 1966, letter to NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle, Hunt wrote, &quot;I have kiddingly called it the &#x27;Super Bowl,&#x27; which obviously can be improved upon.&quot;

The leagues&#x27; owners chose the name &quot;AFL–NFL Championship Game&quot;, but in July 1966 the &quot;Kansas City Star&quot; quoted Hunt in discussing &quot;the Super Bowl—that&#x27;s my term for the championship game between the two leagues&quot;, and the media immediately began using the term. Although the league stated in May 1967 that &quot;not many people like it&quot;, asking for suggestions and considering alternatives such as &quot;Merger Bowl&quot;, &quot;Summit Bowl&quot;, and &quot;The Game&quot;, the Associated Press reported that &quot;Super Bowl&quot; &quot;grew and grew and grew—until it reached the point that there was Super Week, Super Sunday, Super Teams, Super Players, ad infinitum&quot;. &quot;Super Bowl&quot; became official beginning with the third annual game.

Roman numerals are used to identify each Super Bowl, rather than the year in which it is held, since the fifth edition, in January 1971. The sole exception to this naming convention tradition occurred with Super Bowl 50, played on February 7, 2016, following the season. The following year, the nomenclature returned to Roman numerals for Super Bowl LI.
After the NFL&#x27;s Green Bay Packers won the first two Super Bowls, some team owners feared for the future of the merger. At the time, many doubted the competitiveness of AFL teams compared with their NFL counterparts, though that perception changed when the AFL&#x27;s New York Jets defeated the heavily favored NFL contender Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III in Miami. One year later, the AFL&#x27;s Kansas City Chiefs defeated the NFL&#x27;s Minnesota Vikings 23–7 in Super Bowl IV in New Orleans, which was the final AFL–NFL World Championship Game played before the merger. Beginning with the 1970 season, the NFL realigned into two conferences; the former AFL teams plus three NFL teams (the Baltimore Colts, Pittsburgh Steelers, and Cleveland Browns) would constitute the American Football Conference (AFC), while the remaining NFL clubs would form the National Football Conference (NFC). The champions of the two conferences would play each other in the Super Bowl.

The winning team receives the Vince Lombardi Trophy, named after the former coach of the Green Bay Packers, who won the first two Super Bowl games as well as five NFL championships preceding the merger (1961, 1962, 1965, 1966, 1967). Following Lombardi&#x27;s death in September 1970, the trophy was named after him. The first trophy awarded under the new name was presented to the Baltimore Colts following their win in Super Bowl V in Miami.

==Game history==
The Super Bowl was held in January from its inception in 1967 until 2001. In 2002, a week of regular season games was postponed and rescheduled following the September 11 attacks; as a result, Super Bowl XXXVI became the first edition of the game played in February. Super Bowl XXXVII was held in January, but all subsequent games were held on the first Sunday in February until the schedule expansion of the 2021 season moved the game to the second Sunday.

The current NFL schedule begins on the weekend immediately after Labor Day (the first Monday in September). That weekend is the first of an 18-week regular season, followed by three weeks of playoff games and one week for the Pro Bowl. The Super Bowl is contested the week after the Pro Bowl. This schedule has been in effect since an 18th week and 17th regular season game were added to the NFL schedule for the 2021 season, with Super Bowl LVI on February 13, 2022, the first to be played under this format.

The Pittsburgh Steelers and New England Patriots are tied with a record six Super Bowl wins. The Dallas Cowboys and San Francisco 49ers have five victories each, while the Packers, Chiefs and New York Giants have four. Fourteen other NFL franchises have won at least one Super Bowl.

The Patriots own the record for most Super Bowl appearances with eleven. The Cowboys, Steelers, Broncos and the 49ers are tied for second with eight appearances apiece, reaching that milestone in this respective order. Bill Belichick owns the record for the most Super Bowl wins (eight) and appearances (twelve: nine times as head coach, once as assistant head coach, and twice as defensive coordinator) by an individual. Tom Brady has the most Super Bowl starts (ten) and wins as a player (seven), while Charles Haley has the second-most wins among players with five.

Eight teams have appeared in Super Bowl games without a win. The Minnesota Vikings were the first team to appear four times without a win, while the Buffalo Bills played in a record four consecutive Super Bowls, losing all four matches. The Patriots and Broncos are tied for the most Super Bowl losses at five.

The Cleveland Browns, Detroit Lions, Houston Texans, and Jacksonville Jaguars are the four teams to have never appeared in a Super Bowl, although the Browns and Lions both won NFL championships before the Super Bowl era. The Jaguars, who began play in 1995, and the Texans, who began play in 2002, are among the youngest franchises in the league.

===1960s: Early history and Packers dominance===
The Packers won the first two AFL–NFL World Championship Games, later renamed Super Bowls, defeating the Kansas City Chiefs and Oakland Raiders following the and seasons, respectively. The Packers were led by quarterback Bart Starr, who was named the Most Valuable Player (MVP) for both games. These two championships, coupled with the Packers&#x27; NFL championships in , , and , amount to the most successful stretch in NFL History; five championships in seven years, and the second threepeat in NFL history (1965, 1966, and 1967). The Packers are the only team to threepeat, as they also accomplished the feat in the pre-playoff era (1929, 1930 and 1931). The first playoff game in the NFL was in 1932.

In Super Bowl III, the AFL&#x27;s New York Jets defeated the 19.5-point favorite Baltimore Colts of the NFL, 16–7. The Jets were led by quarterback Joe Namath, who had said that he guaranteed a Jets win before the game, and former Colts head coach Weeb Ewbank, and their victory demonstrated that the AFL was competitive with the NFL. This was reinforced the following year when the Chiefs defeated the NFL&#x27;s Vikings 23–7 in Super Bowl IV.

===1970s: Dominant franchises===
After the AFL–NFL merger was completed in 1970, three franchises—the Cowboys, Miami Dolphins, and Steelers—would go on to dominate the 1970s, winning a combined eight Super Bowls between them in the decade, with the Steelers winning four of the eight.

The Baltimore Colts, now a member of the AFC, would start the decade by defeating the Cowboys in Super Bowl V, a game which is the only Super Bowl to date in which a player from the losing team won the Super Bowl MVP (Cowboys&#x27; linebacker Chuck Howley). Beginning with this Super Bowl, all Super Bowls have served as the NFL&#x27;s championship game.
The Cowboys, coming back from a loss the previous season, won Super Bowl VI over the Dolphins. However, this would be the Dolphins&#x27; final loss for over a year, as the next year, the Dolphins would go 14–0 in the regular season and eventually win all their playoff games, capped off with a 14–7 victory in Super Bowl VII, becoming the first and only team in the Super Bowl era to finish an entire perfect regular and postseason undefeated. The Dolphins would repeat as league champions by winning Super Bowl VIII a year later with a 24–7 win over the Minnesota Vikings.

In the mid to late 1970s, the Steelers became the first NFL dynasty of the post-merger era by winning four Super Bowls (IX, X, XIII, and XIV) in six years. They were led by head coach Chuck Noll, the play of offensive stars Terry Bradshaw, Franco Harris, Lynn Swann, John Stallworth, and Mike Webster, and their dominant &quot;Steel Curtain&quot; defense, led by &quot;Mean&quot; Joe Greene, L. C. Greenwood, Ernie Holmes, Mel Blount, Jack Ham, and Jack Lambert. Many of the team&#x27;s key players were selected in the 1974 draft, in which Pittsburgh selected four future Hall of Famers, the most for any team in any sport in a single draft. A fifth player, Donnie Shell, was signed by Pittsburgh after going unselected in the 1974 NFL Draft; he too was later enshrined in the Hall of Fame. The Steelers were the first team to win three and then four Super Bowls and appeared in six AFC Championship Games during the decade, making the playoffs in eight straight seasons. Pittsburgh still remains the only team to win back-to-back Super Bowls twice and four Super Bowls in a six-year period.

The Steelers&#x27; 1970s dynasty was interrupted only by the Raiders&#x27; first Super Bowl win in Super Bowl XI and the Cowboys&#x27; second Super Bowl win in Super Bowl XII. Conversely, the Vikings, with their Purple People Eaters defense, were the only other team to appear in multiple Super Bowls (IV, VIII, IX and XI) during the decade but failed to win each one.

===1980s and 1990s: The NFC&#x27;s winning streak===
In the 1980s and 1990s, the tables turned for the AFC, as the NFC dominated the Super Bowls of the new decade and most of those in the 1990s. The NFC won 16 of the 20 Super Bowls during these two decades, including 13 straight from Super Bowl XIX to Super Bowl XXXI.
The most successful team of the 1980s was the 49ers, which featured the West Coast offense of Hall of Fame head coach Bill Walsh. This offense was led by three-time Super Bowl MVP and Hall of Fame quarterback Joe Montana, Super Bowl MVP and Hall of Fame wide receiver Jerry Rice, running back Roger Craig, and Hall of Fame defensive safety/cornerback Ronnie Lott. Under their leadership, the 49ers won four Super Bowls in the decade (XVI, XIX, XXIII, and XXIV) and made nine playoff appearances between 1981 and 1990, including eight division championships, becoming the second dynasty of the post-merger NFL. The 1984 San Francisco 49ers were the first team to achieve an 18–1 record, doing so under Walsh. The 1989 San Francisco 49ers, under first-year head coach George Seifert, posted the most lop-sided victory in Super Bowl history, defeating the Denver Broncos by a score of 55–10 in Super Bowl XXIV.

The 1980s also produced the 1985 Chicago Bears, who posted an 18–1 record under head coach Mike Ditka; quarterback Jim McMahon; and Hall of Fame running back Walter Payton. Their team won Super Bowl XX in dominant fashion. The Washington Redskins and New York Giants were also top teams of this period; Washington won Super Bowls XVII, XXII, and XXVI. The Giants claimed Super Bowls XXI and XXV. Both teams won multiple Super Bowls with different starting quarterbacks; Washington won with Joe Theismann (XVII), Doug Williams (XXII) and Mark Rypien (XXVI), and the Giants with Phil Simms (XXI) and Jeff Hostetler (XXV). As in the 1970s, the Raiders were the only AFC team to interrupt the Super Bowl dominance of NFC teams; they won Super Bowls XV and XVIII (the latter as the Los Angeles Raiders).

Conversely, the Cincinnati Bengals (XVI and XXIII), Dolphins, (XVII and XIX), and Broncos (XXI, XXII and XXIV) made multiple Super Bowls in the 1980s without winning one.

Following several seasons with poor records in the 1980s, the Cowboys rose back to prominence in the 1990s. During this decade, the Cowboys made post-season appearances every year except for the seasons of 1990 and 1997. From 1992 to 1996, the Cowboys won their division championship each year. In this same period, the Buffalo Bills reached the Super Bowl for a record four consecutive years, but lost all four (XXV-XXVIII). After Super Bowl championships by division rivals New York (1990) and Washington (1991), the Cowboys won three of the next four Super Bowls (XXVII, XXVIII, and XXX) led by quarterback Troy Aikman, running back Emmitt Smith, and wide receiver Michael Irvin. All three of these players went to the Hall of Fame. The Cowboys&#x27; streak was interrupted by the 49ers, who were the first team to win their league-leading fifth title overall with Super Bowl XXIX with a dominant performance featuring the Super Bowl MVP and Hall of Fame quarterback Steve Young (who threw a Super Bowl record 6 touchdown passes), Hall of Fame wide receiver Jerry Rice, and Hall of Fame cornerback Deion Sanders; however, the Cowboys&#x27; victory in Super Bowl XXX the next year also gave them five titles overall and they did so with Sanders after he won the Super Bowl the previous year with the 49ers. The NFC&#x27;s winning streak was continued by the Packers led by Hall of Fame quarterback Brett Favre, won Super Bowl XXXI, their first championship since Super Bowl II in 1967.

The Patriots made their maiden Super Bowl appearances in XX (1985) and XXXI (1996) but lost both times. However, the turn of the century would soon bring hope and glory to the franchise.

===2000s: AFC resurgence and the rise of the Patriots===

Super Bowl XXXII saw quarterback John Elway and running back Terrell Davis lead the Denver Broncos to an upset victory over the defending champion Packers, snapping the NFC&#x27;s thirteen-year winning streak. The following year, the Broncos defeated the Atlanta Falcons in Super Bowl XXXIII, Elway&#x27;s fifth Super Bowl appearance, his second NFL championship, and his final NFL game. The back-to-back victories heralded a change in momentum in which AFC teams would win nine out of 12 Super Bowls. In the years between 1995 and 2018, five teams—the Steelers, Patriots, Broncos, Baltimore Ravens, and Indianapolis Colts—accounted for 22 of the 24 AFC Super Bowl appearances (including the last 16), with those same teams often meeting each other earlier in the playoffs. In contrast, the NFC saw a different representative in the Super Bowl every season from 2001 through 2010.
The New England Patriots became the dominant team throughout the early 2000s, winning the championship three out of four years early in the decade. They would become only the second team in the history of the NFL to do so (after the 1990s Dallas Cowboys). In Super Bowl XXXVI, first-year starting quarterback Tom Brady led his team to a 20–17 upset victory over the St. Louis Rams, who two seasons earlier won Super Bowl XXXIV. Brady would go on to win the MVP award for this game. The Patriots also won Super Bowls XXXVIII and XXXIX defeating the Carolina Panthers and the Philadelphia Eagles respectively. This four-year stretch of Patriot dominance was interrupted by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers&#x27; 48–21 Super Bowl XXXVII victory over the Oakland Raiders.

The Steelers and Colts continued the era of AFC dominance by winning Super Bowls XL and XLI in the 2005 and 2006 seasons, respectively defeating the Seattle Seahawks and Chicago Bears.

In the 2007 season, the Patriots became the fourth team in NFL history to have a perfect unbeaten and untied regular-season record, the second in the Super Bowl era after the 1972 Miami Dolphins, and the first to finish 16–0. They easily marched through the AFC playoffs and were heavy favorites in Super Bowl XLII. However, they lost that game to Eli Manning and the New York Giants 17–14, leaving the Patriots&#x27; 2007 record at 18–1.

The following season, the Steelers logged their record sixth Super Bowl title (XLIII) in a 27–23, final-minute victory against the Arizona Cardinals.

The 2009 season saw the New Orleans Saints defeat the Indianapolis Colts in Super Bowl XLIV by a score of 31–17 to take home their first championship. With this victory, the Saints joined the New York Jets as the only teams to have won in their sole Super Bowl appearance, a distinction the Ravens also enjoyed in winning Super Bowl XXXV after the 2000 season and the Buccaneers in 2002.

===2010s: Patriots reign; parity in the NFC===
In the AFC, this era was dominated by the Patriots, with the only four other teams to represent the conference being the Steelers, Ravens, Broncos, and Chiefs. The Patriots had tied a record with the 1970s Dallas Cowboys for most Super Bowl appearances in a decade with five appearances (2011, 2014, 2016, 2017, 2018). The Patriots also had four Super Bowl appearances in five years. They also had eight consecutive AFC championship appearances spanning 2011–2018.

The Super Bowls of the 2000s and 2010s saw strong performances from several of the participating quarterbacks, especially on the AFC side with repeated appearances by the same teams and players. In particular, Tom Brady, Ben Roethlisberger, or Peyton Manning appeared as the AFC team&#x27;s quarterback in all but two of the Super Bowls from 2001 through 2018. Conversely, the only NFC teams to make the Super Bowl multiple times with the same quarterback in this era were the Seahawks, led by quarterback Russell Wilson, and the Giants, led by quarterback Eli Manning.

One of these teams was featured in the culmination of the 2010 season, Super Bowl XLV, which brought the Packers their fourth Super Bowl victory and record thirteenth NFL championship overall with the defeat of the Steelers in February 2011. This became Aaron Rodgers&#x27; only Super Bowl victory.

The following year, in Super Bowl XLVI, the Patriots made their first appearance of the decade, a position where they would become a mainstay. The Patriots, however, lost to the Eli Manning-led Giants, 21–17, who had beaten the Patriots four years before. This was the Giants&#x27; fourth Super Bowl victory.

In Super Bowl XLVII, the NFC&#x27;s 49ers were defeated by the Ravens 34–31. The game had been dubbed as the &#x27;Harbaugh Bowl&#x27; in the weeks leading up to the game, due to the fact that the coaches of the two teams, John Harbaugh and Jim Harbaugh, are brothers. During the third quarter, the Ravens had a commanding 28–6 lead. However, there was a blackout in New Orleans, where the game was being played. The game was delayed for 34 minutes, and after play resumed, San Francisco stormed back with 17 straight points, but still lost.

Super Bowl XLVIII, played at New Jersey&#x27;s MetLife Stadium in February 2014, was the first Super Bowl held outdoors in a cold-weather environment. The Seahawks won their first NFL title with a 43–8 defeat of the Broncos, in a highly touted matchup that pitted Seattle&#x27;s top-ranked defense against a Peyton Manning-led Denver offense that had broken the NFL&#x27;s single-season scoring record.

In Super Bowl XLIX, the Patriots beat the defending Super Bowl champions, the Seahawks, by a score of 28–24. Down by 10, the Patriots mounted a late fourth quarter comeback to win the game with Tom Brady scoring two touchdowns in the fourth quarter. In a key play in the final seconds of the game, then-rookie free agent Malcolm Butler would intercept a pass by Russell Wilson at the one-yard line, allowing the Patriots to run out the clock and end the game. Tom Brady was awarded his third Super Bowl MVP, tying Joe Montana for the most Super Bowl MVP awards.

In Super Bowl 50, the first Super Bowl to be branded with Arabic numerals, the Broncos, led by the league&#x27;s top-ranked defense, defeated the Panthers, who had the league&#x27;s top-ranked offense, in what became the final game of quarterback Peyton Manning&#x27;s career. Von Miller dominated, totaling 2.5 sacks and forcing two Cam Newton fumbles; both fumbles leading to Broncos touchdowns.

In Super Bowl LI, the first Super Bowl to end in overtime, the Atlanta Falcons led 28–3 late in the third quarter, but the Patriots came back to tie the game 28–28 with back-to-back touchdowns and two-point conversions, and the Patriots went on to win 34–28 in overtime. This 25-point deficit was the largest comeback win for any team in a Super Bowl, breaking the previous of a 10-point deficit to come back and win. The Patriots never held the lead until the game-winning touchdown in overtime. It was Tom Brady&#x27;s 5th Super Bowl win and he was awarded his record fourth Super Bowl MVP, throwing a then-record 466 yards for 43 completions.

In Super Bowl LII, the Philadelphia Eagles defeated the defending champion Patriots 41–33, ending a 57-year championship drought for the franchise. Nick Foles won the Super Bowl MVP. The Patriots totaled 613 yards in defeat, with Tom Brady breaking his previous Super Bowl record of 466 passing yards with an all-time playoff record of 505 passing yards in the high-scoring game; while the Eagles would gain 538 yards in the victory. The combined total for both teams of 1,151 yards of offense broke an NFL record (for any game) that had stood for nearly seven decades. The Patriots&#x27; 33 points were the highest losing score in Super Bowl history, a record held until 2023, when the Eagles lost Super Bowl LVII to the Kansas City Chiefs by a score of 38–35. It was the Eagles&#x27; third Super Bowl appearance and their first win in franchise history. With the Eagles&#x27; victory, the NFC East became the first division to have each team win at least one Super Bowl.

While Super Bowl LII produced the second highest-scoring Super Bowl, the following year&#x27;s Super Bowl LIII became the lowest-scoring Super Bowl. The Patriots defeated the Los Angeles Rams, 13–3. In so doing, they became the team with the lowest point total by a winning team in Super Bowl history. Tom Brady would receive a record sixth Super Bowl championship, the most of any player in NFL history, surpassing his tie with Charles Haley for five wins. Brady would also become the oldest player to ever win a Super Bowl at age 41, while Bill Belichick would be the oldest coach to ever win a Super Bowl at age 66. Wide receiver Julian Edelman was named Super Bowl MVP.

===2020s: Beginning of Chiefs&#x27; dominance===
In Super Bowl LIV, the Chiefs defeated the 49ers in a comeback, 31–20, for their first Super Bowl title in 50 years. This victory marked the first time since 1991 that the NFC did not have more Super Bowl victories than the AFC. The Patriots were absent; after making it to the Super Bowl in each of the last three years and winning two of them, they had lost in the Wild Card round of the playoffs to the Tennessee Titans 20–13. That game represented Tom Brady&#x27;s final game as a New England Patriot.

In Super Bowl LV, which took place in Tampa, Florida, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers defeated the defending champion Chiefs, 31–9. No player on the Buccaneers who scored points (Rob Gronkowski, Antonio Brown, Leonard Fournette, and Ryan Succop) was on the Buccaneers&#x27; roster the previous season. This marked a record seventh Super Bowl victory for Tom Brady, also more than any individual NFL franchise, and who would also break his own record for the oldest quarterback to win a championship at 43 years old. Tampa Bay head coach Bruce Arians would also break Bill Belichick&#x27;s record for the oldest head coach to win a championship at 68. Super Bowl LV also marked the first time in the history of the modern league that a host city&#x27;s professional football franchise got to play in a Super Bowl that was hosted in their home stadium.

A year later in Inglewood, California, the Los Angeles Rams defeated the Cincinnati Bengals 23–20 to win Super Bowl LVI, becoming the second team to win the Super Bowl in its home stadium.

On February 12, 2023, at State Farm Stadium in Glendale, Arizona, the Chiefs overcame a 10-point deficit at halftime to defeat the Philadelphia Eagles 38–35, winning Super Bowl LVII on a last-minute field goal.

On February 11, 2024, the Chiefs won Super Bowl LVIII at Allegiant Stadium on an overtime touchdown. The first Super Bowl in Las Vegas, this was a rematch of Super Bowl LIV between the 49ers and the Chiefs, and was the Chiefs&#x27; fourth Super Bowl appearance in five years. The second Super Bowl to go into overtime, the Chiefs came back from another 10-point deficit to win their third Super Bowl in five years and secure back-to-back championships for the first time since the 2004 New England Patriots.

On February 9, 2025, Patrick Mahomes went to his fifth Super Bowl since he became the starting quarterback. The Chiefs played the Philadelphia Eagles in Super Bowl LIX. This was the second time the Chiefs rematched another team in the Super Bowl. The Eagles successfully avenged their Super Bowl LVII defeat, winning 40–22 after leading 34–0 at the end of the third quarter and preventing the Chiefs from becoming the first team to win three straight Super Bowl championships. Jalen Hurts was named Super Bowl MVP.

==Television coverage and ratings==

The Super Bowl is one of the most-watched annual sporting events in the world, with viewership overwhelmingly domestic. The only other annual event that gathers more viewers is the UEFA Champions League final. For many years, the Super Bowl has possessed a large US and global television viewership, and it is often the most-watched United States originating television program of the year. The game tends to have a high Nielsen television rating, which is usually around a 40 rating and 60 shares. This means that, on average, more than 100 million people from the United States alone are tuned into the Super Bowl at any given moment.

In press releases preceding the game, the NFL has claimed that the Super Bowl has a potential worldwide audience of around one billion people in over 200 countries. However, this figure refers to the number of people &quot;able&quot; to watch the game, not the number of people who will actually be watching. Regardless, the statements have been frequently misinterpreted in the media as referring to the latter figure, leading to a misperception about the game&#x27;s actual global audience. The New York-based media research firm Initiative measured the global audience for the Super Bowl XXXIX at 93 million people, with 98 percent of that figure being viewers in North America, which meant roughly two million people outside North America watched the Super Bowl that year.

Super Bowl LVIII holds the record for average number of US viewers, with 123.7 million, making the game the most-viewed television broadcast of any kind in American history. The halftime show set a record with 129.2 million viewers tuning in.

The highest-rated game according to Nielsen was Super Bowl XVI in 1982, which was watched in 49.1% of households (73 shares), or 40,020,000 households at the time. Super Bowl XVI still ranks fourth on Nielsen&#x27;s list of top-rated programs of all time, with three other Super Bowls (XVII, XX, and XLIX) in the top ten.

Famous Super Bowl commercials include the 1984 introduction of Apple&#x27;s Macintosh computer, the Budweiser &quot;Bud Bowl&quot; campaign, and the dot-com ads aired during Super Bowl XXXIV. As the television ratings of the Super Bowl have steadily increased over the years, commercial prices have also increased, with advertisers paying as much as $7 million for a thirty-second spot during Super Bowl LVI in 2022. A segment of the audience tunes into the Super Bowl solely to view commercials. In 2010, Nielsen reported that 51 percent of Super Bowl viewers tune in for the commercials.

Since 1991, the Super Bowl has begun between 6:19 and 6:40 PM EST so that most of the game is played during the primetime hours on the East Coast.

===US television rights===

Throughout most of its history, the Super Bowl has been rotated annually between the same American television networks that broadcast the NFL&#x27;s regular season and postseason games.

Super Bowl I, played in 1967, is the only Super Bowl to have been broadcast in the United States by two different broadcasters simultaneously. At the time, NBC held the rights to nationally televise AFL games while CBS had the rights to broadcast NFL games. Both networks were allowed to cover the game, and each network used its own announcers, but NBC was only allowed to use the CBS feed instead of producing its own.

Beginning with Super Bowl II, NBC televised the game in even years and CBS in odd years. This annual rotation between the two networks continued through the 1970 AFL–NFL merger when NBC was given the rights to televise AFC games and CBS winning the rights to broadcast NFC games. Although ABC began broadcasting &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; in 1970, it was not added to the Super Bowl rotation until Super Bowl XIX, played in 1985. ABC, CBS and NBC then continued to rotate the Super Bowl until 1994, when Fox replaced CBS as the NFC broadcaster. CBS then took NBC&#x27;s place in the rotation after CBS replaced NBC as the AFC broadcaster in 1998. As a result of new contracts signed in 2006, with NBC taking over &quot;Sunday Night Football&quot; from ESPN, and &quot;Monday Night Football&quot; moving from ABC to ESPN, NBC took ABC&#x27;s place in the Super Bowl rotation. The rotation between CBS, Fox, and NBC will continue until the new contracts that took effect for the first time with Super Bowl LVIII, allowing ABC to return and starting a four-network rotation.

The four-year rotation beginning with Super Bowl LVIII also allows each broadcaster to offer simulcasts or alternative broadcasts on its sister networks and platforms. CBS&#x27;s sister network Nickelodeon aired an alternate children-oriented telecast of Super Bowl LVIII. And ABC&#x27;s rights include ESPN simulcasts and alternative broadcasts on other ESPN networks.

The NFL has broken the traditional broadcasting rotation if it can be used to bolster other major sporting events a network airs afterwards. For example, CBS was given Super Bowl XXVI (1992) after it won the rights to air the 1992 Winter Olympics, with NBC subsequently airing Super Bowl XXVII (1993) and Super Bowl XXVIII (1994) in consecutive years. Likewise, NBC aired Super Bowl LVI (2022) instead of CBS during the 2022 Winter Olympics, which were also aired by NBC. CBS received Super Bowl LV (2021) in return. Under the four-network rotation that will take effect beginning in 2024, the league will award NBC the Super Bowl during Winter Olympic years.

The first six Super Bowls were blacked out in the television markets of the host cities, due to league restrictions then in place. Super Bowl VII (1973) was telecast in Los Angeles on an experimental basis after all tickets were sold ten days before the game.

Game analyst John Madden is the only person to broadcast a Super Bowl for each of the four networks that have televised the game (five with CBS, three with Fox, two with ABC, and one with NBC).
&lt;br&gt;

===Lead-out programming===

The Super Bowl provides an extremely strong lead-in to programming following it on the same channel, the effects of which can last for several hours. For instance, in discussing the ratings of a local TV station, Buffalo television critic Alan Pergament noted that following Super Bowl XLVII, which aired on CBS: &quot;A paid program that ran on CBS4 (WIVB-TV) at 2:30 in the morning had a 1.3 rating. That&#x27;s higher than some CW prime time shows get on WNLO-TV, Channel 4&#x27;s sister station.&quot;

Because of this strong coattail effect, the network that airs the Super Bowl typically takes advantage of the large audience to air an episode of a hit series or to premiere the pilot of a promising new one in the lead-out slot, which immediately follows the Super Bowl and post-game coverage.

==Ceremonies and entertainment==


Early Super Bowls featured a halftime show consisting of marching bands from local colleges or high schools; but as the popularity of the game increased, a trend emerged where popular singers and musicians performed during its pre-game ceremonies and the halftime show, or simply sang the national anthem of the United States, &quot;America the Beautiful&quot;, or &quot;Lift Every Voice and Sing&quot;.

The U.S. national anthem has been performed at all but one Super Bowl: Super Bowl XI in 1977 when Vikki Carr sang &quot;America the Beautiful&quot; in place of the anthem. Beginning with Super Bowl XLIII in 2009, &quot;America the Beautiful&quot; is sung before the national anthem every year and is followed by the presentation of the colors and a military flyover preceding the anthem. Beginning with Super Bowl LV in 2021, &quot;Lift Every Voice and Sing&quot; is sung prior to &quot;America the Beautiful&quot; in honor of Black History Month.

For many years, Whitney Houston&#x27;s performance of the national anthem at Super Bowl XXV in 1991, during the Gulf War, had long been regarded as one of the best renditions of the anthem in history. Before Super Bowl XLVIII, soprano Renée Fleming became the first opera singer to perform the anthem.

Recently, the winner of the Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award has been acknowledged before &quot;America the Beautiful&quot; and &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot;.

Since Super Bowl XII in 1978, a former football player, a celebrity, or another special guest participates in the coin toss ceremony to recognize their community involvement or significance.

The pre-game ceremonies usually go in the following order:
* Presentation of the Most Valuable Players, occurred every ten years since 1986 
* &quot;Lift Every Voice and Sing&quot;
* Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award presentation
* &quot;America the Beautiful&quot;
* Presentation of the Colors
* &quot;The Star-Spangled Banner&quot; followed by flyover 
* Coin toss

Unlike regular season or playoff games, thirty minutes are allocated for the Super Bowl halftime. After a special live episode of the Fox sketch comedy series &quot;In Living Color&quot; caused a drop in viewership for the Super Bowl XXVI halftime show, the NFL sought to increase the Super Bowl&#x27;s audience by hiring A-list talent to perform. They approached Michael Jackson, whose performance the following year drew higher figures than the game itself. U2 performed at Super Bowl XXXVI in 2002; during their third song, &quot;Where the Streets Have No Name&quot;, the band played under a large projection screen which scrolled through names of the victims of the September 11 attacks.

The halftime show of Super Bowl XXXVIII attracted controversy, following an incident in which Justin Timberlake removed a piece of Janet Jackson&#x27;s top, briefly exposing one of her breasts before the broadcast quickly cut away from the shot. The incident led to fines being issued by the FCC (and a larger crackdown over &quot;indecent&quot; content broadcast on television), and MTV (then a sister to the game&#x27;s broadcaster that year, CBS, under Viacom) being banned by the NFL from producing the Super Bowl halftime show in the future. In an effort to prevent a repeat of the incident, the NFL held a moratorium on Super Bowl halftime shows featuring pop performers, and instead invited a single, headlining veteran act, such as Paul McCartney, the Rolling Stones, the Who, Prince, and Bruce Springsteen. This practice ended at Super Bowl XLV, which returned to using current pop acts such as the Black Eyed Peas, Katy Perry, and Lady Gaga.

Minnesota Vikings announcer Alan Roach is the official public address announcer of the Super Bowl since Super Bowl XL in 2006, with the exceptions of Super Bowl XLVIII, XLIX and 50 when the Denver Broncos played in those games. Roach was also Denver&#x27;s regular P.A. announcer during those years, and thus the league felt it was a potential competitive advantage. In those years, NFL on Westwood One host and NFL Films voice Scott Graham held the duties.

Excluding Super Bowl XXXIX, the &quot;I&#x27;m going to Disney World!&quot; advertising campaign took place in every Super Bowl since Super Bowl XXI in 1987, when quarterback Phil Simms from the Giants became the first player to say the tagline.

==Venues==
As of Super Bowl LIX, 30 of 59 Super Bowls have been played in three metropolitan areas: the Greater Miami area (eleven times), New Orleans (eleven times), and the Greater Los Angeles area (eight times). No market or region without an active NFL franchise has ever hosted a Super Bowl, and the presence of an NFL team in a market or region is now a &quot;de jure&quot; requirement for bidding on the game. For instance, while Los Angeles has been an eight-time host city, with its most recent being Super Bowl LVI in 2022, it did not host one from the departure of both its NFL teams in 1995 until the Rams and the Chargers subsequently returned to Los Angeles in 2016 and 2017 respectively. The Caesars Superdome in New Orleans has hosted eight Super Bowls, the most of any venue. The Orange Bowl was the only AFL stadium to host a Super Bowl and the only stadium to host consecutive Super Bowls, hosting Super Bowls II and III.

Seven Super Bowls have been held in a stadium other than the one the NFL team in that city was using at the time, a situation that has not arisen after Super Bowl XXVII&#x27;s host stadium was selected on March 19, 1991. This was as the winning market was previously not required to host the Super Bowl in the same stadium that its NFL team used, if the stadium in which the Super Bowl was held was perceived to be a better stadium for a large high-profile event than the existing NFL home stadium in the same city; for example, five of Los Angeles&#x27;s Bowls were played at the Rose Bowl, which has never been used by any NFL franchise outside of the Super Bowl. Besides the Rose Bowl, the only other Super Bowl venues that were not the home stadium to NFL teams at the time were Rice Stadium (the Houston Oilers had played in Rice Stadium previously but moved to the Astrodome several years before Super Bowl VIII) and Stanford Stadium. Starting with the selection of the Super Bowl XXVIII venue on May 23, 1990, the league has given preference in awarding the Super Bowl to brand new or recently renovated NFL stadiums, alongside a trend of teams demanding public money or relocating to play in new stadiums.

To date only two teams have qualified for a Super Bowl at their home stadiums: the 2020 Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who won Super Bowl LV hosted at Raymond James Stadium (selected on May 23, 2017), and the 2021 Los Angeles Rams the following season, who won Super Bowl LVI at SoFi Stadium. Before that, the closest any team had come to accomplishing this feat were the 2017 Minnesota Vikings, who reached the NFC Championship Game but lost to the Eagles. In that instance, U.S. Bank Stadium became the first Super Bowl host stadium (selected on May 20, 2014) to also host a Divisional Playoff Game in the same season (which the Vikings won); all previous times that the Super Bowl host stadium hosted another playoff game in the same postseason were all Wild Card games. Two teams have played the Super Bowl in their home market but at a different venue than their home stadium: the Los Angeles Rams, who lost Super Bowl XIV in the Rose Bowl instead of Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum; and the 49ers, who won Super Bowl XIX in Stanford Stadium instead of Candlestick Park, during a time when the league often picked a stadium that was not home to an NFL team to host the Super Bowl (see above).

Traditionally, the NFL does not award Super Bowls to stadiums that are located in climates with an expected average daily temperature less than on game day unless the field can be completely covered by a fixed or retractable roof. Six Super Bowls have been played in northern cities: two in the Detroit area—Super Bowl XVI at Pontiac Silverdome in Pontiac, Michigan, and Super Bowl XL at Ford Field in Detroit; two in Minneapolis—Super Bowl XXVI at the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome and Super Bowl LII at the U.S. Bank Stadium; one in Indianapolis at Lucas Oil Stadium for Super Bowl XLVI; and one in New Jersey—Super Bowl XLVIII at MetLife Stadium. Only MetLife Stadium did not have a roof (be it fixed or retractable) but it was still picked as the host stadium for Super Bowl XLVIII in an apparent waiver of the warm-climate rule, with a contingency plan to reschedule the game in the event of heavy snowfall. MetLife Stadium&#x27;s selection over Sun Life Stadium generated controversy as the league requested a roof to be added to Sun Life Stadium (a venue afflicted with a heavy rainstorm during Super Bowl XLI) in order to be considered for future Super Bowls, which was done during a remodeling from 2015 into 2016. It then hosted Super Bowl LIV.

There have been a few instances where the league has rescinded the Super Bowl from cities. Super Bowl XXVII in 1993 was originally awarded to Sun Devil Stadium in Tempe, Arizona, but after Arizona voters elected not to recognize Martin Luther King, Jr. Day as a paid state employees&#x27; holiday in 1990, the NFL moved the game to the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California. When voters in Arizona opted to create such a legal holiday in 1992, Super Bowl XXX in 1996 was awarded to Tempe. Super Bowl XXXIII in 1999 was awarded first to Candlestick Park in San Francisco, but when plans to renovate the stadium fell through, the game was moved to Pro Player Stadium in greater Miami. Super Bowl XXXVII in 2003 was awarded to a new stadium not yet built in San Francisco, but when that stadium failed to be built, the game was moved to Qualcomm Stadium in San Diego. Super Bowl XLIV, slated for February 2010, was withdrawn from New York City&#x27;s proposed West Side Stadium, because the city, state, and proposed tenants (New York Jets) could not agree on funding. Super Bowl XLIV was then eventually awarded to Sun Life Stadium in Miami Gardens, Florida. Super Bowl XLIX in 2015 was originally given to Arrowhead Stadium in Kansas City, Missouri, but after two sales taxes failed to pass at the ballot box (a renovation proposal had passed successfully, but a second ballot question to add a rolling roof structure to be shared with Kaufmann Stadium critical for the game to be hosted was rejected), and opposition by local business leaders and politicians increased, Kansas City eventually withdrew its request to host the game. Super Bowl XLIX was then eventually awarded to University of Phoenix Stadium in Glendale, Arizona. Super Bowl LV in 2021 was first awarded to the yet-to-be completed SoFi Stadium, but construction delays forced the game to be moved to Raymond James Stadium and SoFi Stadium was then given Super Bowl LVI in 2022. Super Bowl LVIII in 2024 was first given to the Superdome, but the NFL&#x27;s 2021 regular season expansion pushed the game from February 4 to February 11 in a direct conflict with New Orleans&#x27; Mardi Gras celebrations; Super Bowl LVIII was then moved to Allegiant Stadium in Nevada and New Orleans was given Super Bowl LIX in 2025.

===Selection process===
The location of the Super Bowl is chosen at a meeting of all NFL team owners, usually three to five years before the event. The game has never been played in a metropolitan area that lacked an NFL franchise at the time the game was played, although in 2007 NFL commissioner Roger Goodell suggested that a Super Bowl might be played in London, perhaps at Wembley Stadium.

Through Super Bowl LVI, teams were allowed to bid for the rights to host Super Bowls, where cities submitted proposals to host a Super Bowl and were evaluated in terms of stadium renovation and their ability to host, but this competition was rescinded in 2018. The league has made all decisions regarding hosting sites from Super Bowl LVII onward; the league chose a potential venue unilaterally, the chosen team put together a hosting proposal, and the league voted upon it to determine if it is acceptable.

In 2014, a document listing the specific requirements of Super Bowl hosts was leaked, giving a clear list of what was required for a Super Bowl host. Some of the host requirements include:
* The host stadium must be in a market that hosts an NFL team and must have a minimum of 70,000 seats, with the media and electrical amenities necessary to produce the Super Bowl. Stadiums may include temporary seating for Super Bowls, but seating must be approved by the league. Stadiums where the average game day temperature is below must either have a roof or a waiver given by the league. There must be a minimum of 35,000 parking spaces within of the stadium.
* The host stadium must have space for the Gameday Experience, a large pregame entertainment area, within walking distance of the stadium.
* The host city must have space for the NFL Experience, the interactive football theme park which is operated the week before the Super Bowl. An indoor venue for the event must have a minimum of , and an outdoor venue must have a minimum of . Additionally, there must be space nearby for the Media Center, and space for all other events involved in the Super Bowl week, including golf courses and bowling alleys.
* The necessary infrastructure must be in place around the stadium and other Super Bowl facilities, including parking, security, electrical needs, media needs, communication needs, and transportation needs.
* There must be a minimum number of hotel spaces within one hour&#x27;s drive of the stadium equaling 35% of the stadium&#x27;s capacity, along with hotels for the teams, officials, media, and other dignitaries. (For Super Bowl XXXIX, the city of Jacksonville docked several luxury cruise liners at their port to act as temporary hotel space.)
* There must be practice space of equal and comparable quality for both teams within a twenty-minute drive of the team hotels, and rehearsal space for all events within a reasonable distance to the stadium. The practice facilities must have one grass field and at least one field of the same surface as the host stadium.
* The stadium must have a minimum of 70,000 fixed seats, including club and fixed suite seating, during regular season operations.

Much of the cost of a Super Bowl is to be assumed by the host community, although some costs are enumerated within the requirements to be assumed by the NFL. New Orleans, the site of Super Bowl XLVII in 2013, invested more than $1 billion in infrastructure improvements in the years leading up to the game.

The NFL allocates backup stadiums for the Super Bowl every year, in the event of a last-minute relocation of the game.

===Home team designation===
The designated &quot;home team&quot; alternates between the NFC team in odd-numbered games and the AFC team in even-numbered games. This alternation was initiated with the first Super Bowl, when the Packers were the designated home team. Regardless of being the home or away team of record, each team has its team logo and wordmark painted in one of the end zones. Designated away teams have won 32 of 59 Super Bowls to date (approximately 54%).

Since Super Bowl XIII in 1979, the home team is given the choice of wearing its colored or white jerseys. Originally, the designated home team had to wear its colored jerseys, which resulted in the Cowboys donning their less exposed dark blue jerseys for Super Bowl V. While most of the home teams in the Super Bowl have chosen to wear their colored jerseys, there have been seven exceptions: the Cowboys during Super Bowls XIII and XXVII, the Washington Redskins during Super Bowl XVII, the Steelers during Super Bowl XL, the Broncos during Super Bowl 50, the Patriots in Super Bowl LII, and the Buccaneers in Super Bowl LV. The Cowboys, since , have worn white jerseys at home. The Washington Redskins wore white at home under coach Joe Gibbs starting in through , continued by Richie Petitbon and Norv Turner through , then again when Gibbs returned from through . Meanwhile, the Steelers, who have always worn their black jerseys at home since the AFL–NFL merger in , opted for the white jerseys after winning three consecutive playoff games on the road, wearing white. The Steelers&#x27; decision was compared with the Patriots in Super Bowl XX; the Patriots had worn white jerseys at home during the season, but after winning road playoff games against the Jets and Dolphins wearing red jerseys, New England opted to switch to scarlet for the Super Bowl as the designated home team. For the Broncos in Super Bowl 50, Denver general manager John Elway simply stated, &quot;We&#x27;ve had Super Bowl success in our white uniforms&quot;; they previously had been in Super Bowls when wearing their orange jerseys. The Broncos&#x27; decision is also perceived to be made out of superstition, losing all Super Bowl games with the orange jerseys in terrible fashion. It is unclear why the Patriots chose to wear their white jerseys for Super Bowl LII. During the pairing of Bill Belichick and Tom Brady, New England has mostly worn their blue jerseys for home games, but have worn white for a home game in the , , and seasons. The Patriots were 3–0 in their white uniforms in Super Bowls before Super Bowl LII with Belichick and Brady, and they may have been going on recent trends of teams who wear white for the Super Bowl game. For Super Bowl LV, when the Buccaneers became the first team to reach the Super Bowl that their own stadium hosted, the Buccaneers were designated the home team as per AFC-NFC rotation and elected to wear their white jerseys, having previously won both their divisional and championship post-season games on the road in white jerseys. White-shirted teams have won 37 of 58 Super Bowls to date (approximately 64%). The only teams to win in their dark-colored uniform in more recent years are the Packers against the Steelers in Super Bowl XLV, the Eagles against the Patriots in Super Bowl LII, the Chiefs against the 49ers in Super Bowls LIV and LVIII, and the Eagles against the Chiefs in LIX. Since Super Bowl XXXIX, teams in white jerseys have won 16 of the last 20 Super Bowls.

The 49ers, as part of the league&#x27;s 75th Anniversary celebration, used their 1955 throwback uniform in Super Bowl XXIX, which for that year was their regular home jersey. The Los Angeles Rams in Super Bowl LIII wore their royal blue and yellow uniforms, which was a throwback uniform but then turned into their primary colors over the navy blue and metallic gold uniform, which they have previously worn for six home games including a home playoff game. No team has yet worn a third jersey or Color Rush uniform for the Super Bowl. The 49ers reportedly requested to wear an all-white third jersey ensemble for Super Bowl LIV, which the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; noted they could do with special permission from the league; the league never granted such permission, and the 49ers instead opted for their standard uniform of white jerseys with gold pants.

===Host cities/regions===

Sixteen different regions have hosted Super Bowls.

===Host stadiums===
A total of 27 different stadiums have either hosted, or are scheduled to host, a Super Bowl, with 14 of the stadiums having hosted, or are scheduled to host, more than one Super Bowl. Seven of the Super Bowl hosting stadiums have been demolished.

The years listed in the table below are the years the game was actually played (&quot;will be played&quot;) rather than the NFL season it concluded.



====Future venues====

The Super Bowl has not yet been played in any region that lacked an NFL or AFL franchise at the time the game was played.

San Diego is the only metropolitan area as of 2021 that has hosted past Super Bowls, but does not currently have an NFL franchise: San Diego Stadium hosted three Super Bowls before their NFL franchise relocated to Los Angeles. Also, London, England, has occasionally been mentioned as a host city for a Super Bowl in the near future. Wembley Stadium has hosted several NFL games as part of the NFL International Series and is specifically designed for large, individual events, and NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell has openly discussed the possibility on different occasions.

Time zone complications are a significant obstacle to a Super Bowl in London; a typical 6:30 p.m. EST start would result in the game beginning at 11:30 p.m. local time in London: this is an unusually late hour to be holding spectator sports, while the NFL has never in its history started a game later than 9:15 p.m. local time.

Although bids have been submitted for all Super Bowls through Super Bowl LIX, the soonest that any stadium outside the NFL&#x27;s footprint could serve as host would be Super Bowl LXII in 2028.

Eight stadiums that hosted at least one Super Bowl no longer exist:
* Tulane Stadium, on the Tulane University campus, which hosted three Super Bowls, was demolished in November 1979.
* Tampa Stadium, which hosted two Super Bowls, was demolished in April 1999.
* Stanford Stadium, which hosted one Super Bowl, was demolished and redeveloped in 2005–06.
* The Orange Bowl, which hosted five Super Bowls, was demolished in May 2008.
* The Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in Minneapolis, which hosted one Super Bowl, was demolished in March 2014.
* The Georgia Dome in Atlanta, which hosted two Super Bowls, was demolished in November 2017.
* The Pontiac Silverdome in suburban Detroit, which hosted one Super Bowl, was demolished in March 2018.
* San Diego Stadium, which hosted three Super Bowls, closed in March 2020 and was demolished in early 2021.

==Super Bowl trademark==
The NFL very actively seeks to prevent what it calls unauthorized commercial use of its trademarked terms &quot;NFL&quot;, &quot;Super Bowl&quot;, and &quot;Super Bowl Sunday&quot;. As a result, many events and promotions tied to the game, but not sanctioned by the NFL, are asked to refer to it as &quot;The Big Game&quot;, or other generic descriptions. A radio spot for Planters nuts parodied this, by saying &quot;it would be &quot;super&quot;... to have a &quot;bowl&quot;... of Planters nuts while watching the big game!&quot; and comedian Stephen Colbert began referring to the game in 2014 as the &quot;Superb Owl&quot;. In 2015, the NFL filed opposition with the USPTO Trademark Trial and Appeal Board to a trademark application submitted by an Arizona-based nonprofit for &quot;Superb Owl&quot;. Another entity has a service mark for &quot;Superb Owl&quot;.

The NFL claims that the use of the phrase &quot;Super Bowl&quot; implies an NFL affiliation, and on this basis the league asserts broad rights to restrict how the game may be shown publicly; for example, the league says Super Bowl showings are prohibited in churches or at other events that &quot;promote a message&quot;, while non-sporting event venues are also prohibited to show the Super Bowl on any television screen larger than 55 inches. Some critics say the NFL is exaggerating its ownership rights by stating that &quot;any use is prohibited&quot;, as this contradicts the broad doctrine of fair use in the United States. Legislation was proposed by Utah Senator Orrin Hatch in 2008 &quot;to provide an exemption from exclusive rights in copyright for certain nonprofit organizations to display live football games&quot;, and &quot;for other purposes&quot;.

In 2004, the NFL started issuing cease-and-desist letters to casinos in Las Vegas that were hosting Super Bowl parties. &quot;Super Bowl&quot; is a registered trademark, owned by the NFL, and any other business using that name for profit-making ventures is in violation of federal law, according to the letters. In reaction to the letters, many Las Vegas resorts, rather than discontinue the popular and lucrative parties, started referring to them as &quot;Big Game Parties&quot;.

In 2006, the NFL made an attempt to trademark &quot;The Big Game&quot; as well; however, it withdrew the application in 2007 due to growing commercial and public relations opposition to the move, mostly from Stanford University and the University of California, Berkeley and their fans, as the Stanford Cardinal football and California Golden Bears football teams compete in the &quot;Big Game&quot;, which has been played since 1892 (28 years before the formation of the NFL and 75 years before Super Bowl I). Additionally, the Mega Millions lottery game was known as &quot;The Big Game&quot; (then &quot;The Big Game Mega Millions&quot;) from 1996 to 2002.

==See also==
* List of Super Bowl champions
* History of National Football League championship
* List of NFL champions (1920–1969)
* List of Super Bowl broadcasters
* List of Super Bowl head coaches
* List of Super Bowl officials
* List of Super Bowl records
* Grey Cup, the Canadian Football League (CFL) championship game
* List of NFL franchise post-season droughts
* List of NFL franchise post-season streaks
* List of quarterbacks with multiple Super Bowl starts
* List of Super Bowl starting quarterbacks
* List of players with most Super Bowl championships
* NFL Honors
* Super Bowl advertising
* Super Bowl counterprogramming
* Super Bowl curse
* Super Bowl indicator

==Notes and references==

===Notes===
===References===
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Chris Jones (February 2, 2005). &quot;NFL tightens restrictions on Super Bowl advertisements&quot;. &quot;Las Vegas Review-Journal&quot;.
* John Branch (February 4, 2006). &quot;Build It and They Will Come&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot;.
* Super Bowl play-by-plays from &quot;USA Today&quot;. Retrieved September 28, 2005.
* 100 Greatest Super Bowl Moments by Kevin Jackson, Jeff Merron, and David Schoenfield; ESPN. Retrieved December 5, 2021.
*SI&#x27;s 25 Lost Treasures—&quot;Sports Illustrated&quot;, July 11, 2005, p. 114.
* &quot;The Super Bowl I–VII.&quot; Lost Treasures of NFL Films. ESPN2. January 26, 2001.
* &quot;MTV&#x27;s Super Bowl Uncensored&quot;. MTV. January 27, 2001.
* &quot;Talk Shows.&quot; CBS: 50 Years from Television City. CBS. April 27, 2002.
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q32096" start="4" end="14" title="Super Bowl" label="Super Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865607" start="29" end="48" title="History of the NFL championship" label="league championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="61" end="85" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753746" start="166" end="170" title="1966 NFL season" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865607" start="188" end="209" title="History of the National Football League championship" label="NFL Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q30114464" start="217" end="221" title="Super Bowl LVI" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526532" start="480" end="501" title="Vince Lombardi Trophy" label="Vince Lombardi Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q553321" start="519" end="532" title="Vince Lombardi" label="Packers coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642195" start="813" end="830" title="Super Bowl Sunday" label="Super Bowl Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q431972" start="913" end="929" title="AFL–NFL merger" label="merger agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="964" end="988" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q847827" start="1089" end="1120" title="Super Bowl I" label="AFL–NFL World Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q939846" start="1189" end="1203" title="Super Bowl III" label="Super Bowl III"/>
<link wikidata="Q276530" start="1403" end="1431" title="American Football Conference" label="American Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q319007" start="1480" end="1508" title="National Football Conference" label="National Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q168380" start="1544" end="1556" title="Super Bowl V" label="Super Bowl V"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="1825" end="1844" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="1849" end="1869" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="1998" end="2012" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="2097" end="2113" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="2133" end="2153" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="2317" end="2333" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q223514" start="2335" end="2349" title="Houston Texans" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q272223" start="2355" end="2375" title="Jacksonville Jaguars" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="2396" end="2409" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="2657" end="2678" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122130" start="2947" end="2997" title="Super Bowl commercials" label="Commercial airtime during the Super Bowl broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642692" start="3312" end="3331" title="Thanksgiving dinner" label="Thanksgiving dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="3526" end="3542" title="college football" label="college football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922711" start="3600" end="3609" title="bowl game" label="bowl game"/>
<link wikidata="Q543429" start="3680" end="3694" title="Rose Bowl Game" label="Rose Bowl Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="3698" end="3718" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133638" start="3820" end="3848" title="Pasadena Tournament of Roses" label="Pasadena Tournament of Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q582280" start="3915" end="3932" title="Rose Bowl Stadium" label="Rose Bowl Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535796" start="4086" end="4095" title="Yale Bowl" label="Yale Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="4099" end="4121" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028075" start="4332" end="4343" title="Orange Bowl" label="Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299288" start="4363" end="4373" title="Sugar Bowl" label="Sugar Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16562" start="4380" end="4387" title="El Paso" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813537" start="4393" end="4401" title="Sun Bowl" label="Sun Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="4420" end="4426" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2688256" start="4432" end="4443" title="Cotton Bowl Classic" label="Cotton Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="4743" end="4767" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993947" start="4844" end="4871" title="1960 American Football League season" label="AFL&amp;#x27;s inaugural season"/>
<link wikidata="Q682197" start="4890" end="4898" title="Joe Foss" label="Joe Foss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879535" start="5166" end="5180" title="1961 Houston Oilers season" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880301" start="5206" end="5223" title="1961 Green Bay Packers season" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q187912" start="5244" end="5254" title="Lamar Hunt" label="Lamar Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="5280" end="5298" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156983" start="5502" end="5512" title="Super Ball" label="Super Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q778412" start="5569" end="5594" title="Pro Football Hall of Fame" label="Pro Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q491239" start="5598" end="5604" title="Canton, Ohio" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745380" start="5659" end="5671" title="Pete Rozelle" label="Pete Rozelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="6590" end="6604" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642193" start="6796" end="6809" title="Super Bowl 50" label="Super Bowl 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q863247" start="6885" end="6897" title="nomenclature" label="nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642194" start="6929" end="6942" title="Super Bowl LI" label="Super Bowl LI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514595" start="6965" end="6982" title="1967 Green Bay Packers season" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909751" start="7216" end="7229" title="1968 New York Jets season" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515248" start="7273" end="7288" title="1968 Baltimore Colts season" label="Baltimore Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q939846" start="7292" end="7306" title="Super Bowl III" label="Super Bowl III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910608" start="7348" end="7366" title="1969 Kansas City Chiefs season" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516226" start="7391" end="7408" title="1969 Minnesota Vikings season" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q376026" start="7417" end="7430" title="Super Bowl IV" label="Super Bowl IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573932" start="7644" end="7659" title="1970 Baltimore Colts season" label="Baltimore Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574138" start="7661" end="7680" title="1970 Pittsburgh Steelers season" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573970" start="7686" end="7702" title="1970 Cleveland Browns season" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q276530" start="7725" end="7753" title="American Football Conference" label="American Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q319007" start="7806" end="7834" title="National Football Conference" label="National Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526532" start="7951" end="7972" title="Vince Lombardi Trophy" label="Vince Lombardi Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q553321" start="7997" end="8002" title="Vince Lombardi" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865607" start="8084" end="8101" title="NFL championships" label="NFL championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570402" start="8124" end="8128" title="1961 NFL Championship Game" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570792" start="8130" end="8134" title="1962 NFL Championship Game" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571959" start="8136" end="8140" title="1965 NFL Championship Game" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572373" start="8142" end="8146" title="1966 NFL Championship Game" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q746614" start="8148" end="8152" title="1967 NFL Championship Game" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q168380" start="8342" end="8354" title="Super Bowl V" label="Super Bowl V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753746" start="8440" end="8444" title="1966 NFL season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960108" start="8451" end="8455" title="2000 NFL season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960112" start="8460" end="8464" title="2001 NFL season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8541" end="8561" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073479" start="8576" end="8592" title="Super Bowl XXXVI" label="Super Bowl XXXVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q939802" start="8650" end="8667" title="Super Bowl XXXVII" label="Super Bowl XXXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q104765108" start="8792" end="8803" title="2021 NFL season" label="2021 season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8854" end="8866" title="NFL regular season#Scheduling formula" label="NFL schedule"/>
<link wikidata="Q848352" start="8907" end="8916" title="Labor Day" label="Labor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661524" start="8990" end="9004" title="NFL regular season" label="regular season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548628" start="9033" end="9046" title="NFL playoffs" label="playoff games"/>
<link wikidata="Q786705" start="9068" end="9076" title="Pro Bowl" label="Pro Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q30114464" start="9273" end="9287" title="Super Bowl LVI" label="Super Bowl LVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="9357" end="9376" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="9381" end="9401" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="9450" end="9464" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q337758" start="9469" end="9488" title="San Francisco 49ers" label="San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="9545" end="9560" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="9856" end="9870" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9871" end="9886" title="Super Bowl ring#Most Super Bowl rings" label="owns the record"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="10059" end="10068" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q551136" start="10142" end="10155" title="Charles Haley" label="Charles Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="10272" end="10289" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="10356" end="10369" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="10523" end="10539" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="10541" end="10554" title="Detroit Lions" label="Detroit Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q223514" start="10556" end="10570" title="Houston Texans" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q272223" start="10576" end="10596" title="Jacksonville Jaguars" label="Jacksonville Jaguars"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="11021" end="11039" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870124" start="11044" end="11059" title="Oakland Raiders" label="Oakland Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q809211" start="11137" end="11147" title="Bart Starr" label="Bart Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079382" start="11167" end="11193" title="Super Bowl Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player (MVP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990858" start="11401" end="11410" title="threepeat" label="threepeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563052" start="11616" end="11620" title="1932 NFL Playoff Game" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="11657" end="11670" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q720558" start="11771" end="11781" title="Joe Namath" label="Joe Namath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777333" start="11871" end="11882" title="Weeb Ewbank" label="Weeb Ewbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q376026" start="12053" end="12066" title="Super Bowl IV" label="Super Bowl IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q431972" start="12112" end="12126" title="AFL–NFL merger" label="AFL–NFL merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q223243" start="12180" end="12194" title="Miami Dolphins" label="Miami Dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q332255" start="12598" end="12610" title="Chuck Howley" label="Chuck Howley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064741" start="12772" end="12785" title="Super Bowl VI" label="Super Bowl VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q13592724" start="12878" end="12891" title="1972 Miami Dolphins season" label="the next year"/>
<link wikidata="Q378744" start="13020" end="13034" title="Super Bowl VII" label="Super Bowl VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188158" start="13211" end="13226" title="Super Bowl VIII" label="Super Bowl VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188005" start="13405" end="13407" title="Super Bowl IX" label="IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q620277" start="13409" end="13410" title="Super Bowl X" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q632786" start="13412" end="13416" title="Super Bowl XIII" label="XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q585801" start="13422" end="13425" title="Super Bowl XIV" label="XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q952108" start="13469" end="13479" title="Chuck Noll" label="Chuck Noll"/>
<link wikidata="Q633263" start="13509" end="13523" title="Terry Bradshaw" label="Terry Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333547" start="13525" end="13538" title="Franco Harris" label="Franco Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q441528" start="13540" end="13550" title="Lynn Swann" label="Lynn Swann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640614" start="13552" end="13567" title="John Stallworth" label="John Stallworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q970489" start="13573" end="13585" title="Mike Webster" label="Mike Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605663" start="13612" end="13625" title="Steel Curtain" label="Steel Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q505256" start="13648" end="13675" title="&amp;quot;Mean&amp;quot; Joe Greene" label="&amp;quot;Mean&amp;quot; Joe Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6456380" start="13677" end="13692" title="L. C. Greenwood" label="L. C. Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057307" start="13694" end="13706" title="Ernie Holmes" label="Ernie Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q970406" start="13708" end="13718" title="Mel Blount" label="Mel Blount"/>
<link wikidata="Q507024" start="13720" end="13728" title="Jack Ham" label="Jack Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q941280" start="13734" end="13746" title="Jack Lambert (American football)" label="Jack Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714908" start="13805" end="13815" title="1974 NFL Draft" label="1974 draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296690" start="13944" end="13956" title="Donnie Shell" label="Donnie Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q291768" start="14169" end="14190" title="AFC Championship Game" label="AFC Championship Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q389690" start="14478" end="14491" title="Super Bowl XI" label="Super Bowl XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q632774" start="14539" end="14553" title="Super Bowl XII" label="Super Bowl XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261446" start="14591" end="14611" title="Purple People Eaters" label="Purple People Eaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965838" start="15034" end="15048" title="Super Bowl XIX" label="Super Bowl XIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q598389" start="15052" end="15067" title="Super Bowl XXXI" label="Super Bowl XXXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984850" start="15141" end="15159" title="West Coast offense" label="West Coast offense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365047" start="15187" end="15197" title="Bill Walsh (American football coach)" label="Bill Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q348011" start="15278" end="15289" title="Joe Montana" label="Joe Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q505423" start="15337" end="15347" title="Jerry Rice" label="Jerry Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q886606" start="15362" end="15373" title="Roger Craig (American football)" label="Roger Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q726226" start="15420" end="15431" title="Ronnie Lott" label="Ronnie Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q912929" start="15503" end="15506" title="Super Bowl XVI" label="XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965838" start="15508" end="15511" title="Super Bowl XIX" label="XIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307150" start="15513" end="15518" title="Super Bowl XXIII" label="XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064807" start="15524" end="15528" title="Super Bowl XXIV" label="XXIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581852" start="15683" end="15707" title="1984 San Francisco 49ers" label="1984 San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585416" start="15781" end="15805" title="1989 San Francisco 49ers" label="1989 San Francisco 49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544402" start="15835" end="15849" title="George Seifert" label="George Seifert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064807" start="15960" end="15975" title="Super Bowl XXIV" label="Super Bowl XXIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582244" start="16006" end="16024" title="1985 Chicago Bears" label="1985 Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355840" start="16069" end="16079" title="Mike Ditka" label="Mike Ditka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689159" start="16093" end="16104" title="Jim McMahon" label="Jim McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q963117" start="16136" end="16149" title="Walter Payton" label="Walter Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073454" start="16166" end="16179" title="Super Bowl XX" label="Super Bowl XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q212654" start="16205" end="16224" title="Washington Redskins" label="Washington Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770746" start="16308" end="16312" title="Super Bowl XVII" label="XVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q474760" start="16314" end="16318" title="Super Bowl XXII" label="XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576569" start="16324" end="16328" title="Super Bowl XXVI" label="XXVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808572" start="16361" end="16364" title="Super Bowl XXI" label="XXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512351" start="16369" end="16372" title="Super Bowl XXV" label="XXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q175963" start="16468" end="16481" title="Joe Theismann" label="Joe Theismann"/>
<link wikidata="Q951164" start="16490" end="16503" title="Doug Williams (quarterback)" label="Doug Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q353917" start="16515" end="16526" title="Mark Rypien" label="Mark Rypien"/>
<link wikidata="Q596953" start="16555" end="16565" title="Phil Simms" label="Phil Simms"/>
<link wikidata="Q366452" start="16576" end="16590" title="Jeff Hostetler" label="Jeff Hostetler"/>
<link wikidata="Q766921" start="16723" end="16725" title="Super Bowl XV" label="XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848392" start="16730" end="16735" title="Super Bowl XVIII" label="XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q223511" start="16794" end="16812" title="Cincinnati Bengals" label="Cincinnati Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463422" start="17517" end="17522" title="Super Bowl XXVII" label="XXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q621500" start="17524" end="17530" title="Super Bowl XXVIII" label="XXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065229" start="17536" end="17539" title="Super Bowl XXX" label="XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q525002" start="17560" end="17571" title="Troy Aikman" label="Troy Aikman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338802" start="17586" end="17598" title="Emmitt Smith" label="Emmitt Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q952676" start="17618" end="17631" title="Michael Irvin" label="Michael Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589701" start="17734" end="17739" title="1994 San Francisco 49ers season" label="49ers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064815" start="17818" end="17833" title="Super Bowl XXIX" label="Super Bowl XXIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q740086" start="17920" end="17931" title="Steve Young" label="Steve Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q505423" start="18011" end="18021" title="Jerry Rice" label="Jerry Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q954184" start="18051" end="18064" title="Deion Sanders" label="Deion Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q267088" start="18350" end="18361" title="Brett Favre" label="Brett Favre"/>
<link wikidata="Q598389" start="18367" end="18382" title="Super Bowl XXXI" label="Super Bowl XXXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q648144" start="18685" end="18701" title="Super Bowl XXXII" label="Super Bowl XXXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q432931" start="18718" end="18728" title="John Elway" label="John Elway"/>
<link wikidata="Q732266" start="18746" end="18759" title="Terrell Davis" label="Terrell Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="18940" end="18955" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q508448" start="18959" end="18976" title="Super Bowl XXXIII" label="Super Bowl XXXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q276539" start="19267" end="19283" title="Baltimore Ravens" label="Baltimore Ravens"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="19289" end="19307" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073479" start="19825" end="19841" title="Super Bowl XXXVI" label="Super Bowl XXXVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="19875" end="19884" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870467" start="19932" end="19946" title="St. Louis Rams" label="St. Louis Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q176843" start="19976" end="19992" title="Super Bowl XXXIV" label="Super Bowl XXXIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049630" start="20082" end="20089" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII" label="XXXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q926745" start="20094" end="20099" title="Super Bowl XXXIX" label="XXXIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q330120" start="20114" end="20131" title="Carolina Panthers" label="Carolina Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="20140" end="20159" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q320476" start="20241" end="20261" title="Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q939802" start="20274" end="20291" title="Super Bowl XXXVII" label="Super Bowl XXXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q904928" start="20408" end="20410" title="Super Bowl XL" label="XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q597607" start="20415" end="20418" title="Super Bowl XLI" label="XLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="20476" end="20492" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="20497" end="20510" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q254029" start="20520" end="20531" title="2007 NFL season" label="2007 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q597314" start="20812" end="20827" title="Super Bowl XLII" label="Super Bowl XLII"/>
<link wikidata="Q316187" start="20861" end="20872" title="Eli Manning" label="Eli Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q853768" start="21032" end="21037" title="Super Bowl XLIII" label="XLIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="21084" end="21101" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="21128" end="21146" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q268882" start="21180" end="21195" title="Super Bowl XLIV" label="Super Bowl XLIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q625210" start="21426" end="21441" title="Super Bowl XXXV" label="Super Bowl XXXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q537679" start="22227" end="22245" title="Ben Roethlisberger" label="Ben Roethlisberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539" start="22250" end="22264" title="Peyton Manning" label="Peyton Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149781" start="22512" end="22526" title="Russell Wilson" label="Russell Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q622675" start="22635" end="22646" title="2010 NFL season" label="2010 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q371433" start="22648" end="22662" title="Super Bowl XLV" label="Super Bowl XLV"/>
<link wikidata="Q302581" start="22831" end="22844" title="Aaron Rodgers" label="Aaron Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q849079" start="22900" end="22915" title="Super Bowl XLVI" label="Super Bowl XLVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q126291" start="23190" end="23206" title="Super Bowl XLVII" label="Super Bowl XLVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412102" start="23410" end="23423" title="John Harbaugh" label="John Harbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631300" start="23428" end="23440" title="Jim Harbaugh" label="Jim Harbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q828827" start="23542" end="23550" title="Power outage" label="blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190093" start="23730" end="23747" title="Super Bowl XLVIII" label="Super Bowl XLVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="23759" end="23769" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862290" start="23777" end="23792" title="MetLife Stadium" label="MetLife Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710023" start="24137" end="24152" title="Super Bowl XLIX" label="Super Bowl XLIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q17811505" start="24455" end="24469" title="Malcolm Butler" label="Malcolm Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642193" start="24700" end="24713" title="Super Bowl 50" label="Super Bowl 50"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="24755" end="24770" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823140" start="24974" end="24984" title="Von Miller" label="Von Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q591678" start="25031" end="25041" title="Cam Newton" label="Cam Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642194" start="25099" end="25112" title="Super Bowl LI" label="Super Bowl LI"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633579" start="25746" end="25760" title="Super Bowl LII" label="Super Bowl LII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876006" start="25891" end="25901" title="Nick Foles" label="Nick Foles"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196526" start="26442" end="26457" title="Super Bowl LVII" label="Super Bowl LVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="26465" end="26483" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q594428" start="26634" end="26642" title="NFC East" label="NFC East"/>
<link wikidata="Q20204362" start="26812" end="26827" title="Super Bowl LIII" label="Super Bowl LIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="26892" end="26908" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="27259" end="27273" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q448961" start="27350" end="27364" title="Julian Edelman" label="Julian Edelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q20204363" start="27444" end="27458" title="Super Bowl LIV" label="Super Bowl LIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q76973821" start="27831" end="27839" title="2019–20 NFL playoffs" label="playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q320484" start="27847" end="27863" title="Tennessee Titans" label="Tennessee Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q24233824" start="27951" end="27964" title="Super Bowl LV" label="Super Bowl LV"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="27986" end="28000" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334384" start="28120" end="28134" title="Rob Gronkowski" label="Rob Gronkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776474" start="28136" end="28149" title="Antonio Brown" label="Antonio Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236747" start="28151" end="28168" title="Leonard Fournette" label="Leonard Fournette"/>
<link wikidata="Q25810" start="28174" end="28185" title="Ryan Succop" label="Ryan Succop"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="28295" end="28304" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046340" start="28478" end="28490" title="Bruce Arians" label="Bruce Arians"/>
<link wikidata="Q720027" start="28508" end="28522" title="Bill Belichick" label="Bill Belichick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141343" start="28778" end="28790" title="Raymond James Stadium" label="home stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q30114464" start="28793" end="28805" title="Super Bowl LVI" label="A year later"/>
<link wikidata="Q621549" start="28809" end="28830" title="Inglewood, California" label="Inglewood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="28836" end="28852" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q223511" start="28866" end="28884" title="Cincinnati Bengals" label="Cincinnati Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196526" start="28986" end="29003" title="Super Bowl LVII" label="February 12, 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q756433" start="29008" end="29026" title="State Farm Stadium" label="State Farm Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="29030" end="29047" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196525" start="29198" end="29215" title="Super Bowl LVIII" label="February 11, 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q27768421" start="29252" end="29269" title="Allegiant Stadium" label="Allegiant Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="29320" end="29329" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603133" start="29676" end="29701" title="2004 New England Patriots season" label="2004 New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667998" start="29725" end="29740" title="Patrick Mahomes" label="Patrick Mahomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="29799" end="29810" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="29834" end="29853" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q91157899" start="29857" end="29871" title="Super Bowl LIX" label="Super Bowl LIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990858" start="30140" end="30154" title="Three-peat" label="three straight"/>
<link wikidata="Q26923572" start="30181" end="30192" title="Jalen Hurts" label="Jalen Hurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="30438" end="30459" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="30678" end="30703" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen television rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q926745" start="31475" end="31491" title="Super Bowl XXXIX" label="Super Bowl XXXIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196525" start="31673" end="31689" title="Super Bowl LVIII" label="Super Bowl LVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q912929" start="31965" end="31979" title="Super Bowl XVI" label="Super Bowl XVI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32133" end="32171" title="List of most watched television broadcasts in the United States#The highest-rated broadcasts of all time" label="list of top-rated programs of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770746" start="32203" end="32207" title="Super Bowl XVII" label="XVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073454" start="32209" end="32211" title="Super Bowl XX" label="XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710023" start="32217" end="32221" title="Super Bowl XLIX" label="XLIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122130" start="32247" end="32269" title="Super Bowl commercials" label="Super Bowl commercials"/>
<link wikidata="Q203383" start="32282" end="32299" title="1984 (advertisement)" label="1984 introduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983791" start="32356" end="32364" title="Bud Bowl" label="Bud Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835814" start="32389" end="32400" title="Dot-com commercials during Super Bowl XXXIV" label="dot-com ads"/>
<link wikidata="Q176843" start="32414" end="32430" title="Super Bowl XXXIV" label="Super Bowl XXXIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q30114464" start="32633" end="32647" title="Super Bowl LVI" label="Super Bowl LVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="32893" end="32896" title="Eastern Time" label="EST"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="32943" end="32952" title="primetime" label="primetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="32966" end="32976" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="33106" end="33124" title="television network" label="television network"/>
<link wikidata="Q847827" start="33194" end="33206" title="Super Bowl I" label="Super Bowl I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953776" start="33350" end="33353" title="NFL on NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953770" start="33409" end="33412" title="NFL on CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q617167" start="33631" end="33644" title="Super Bowl II" label="Super Bowl II"/>
<link wikidata="Q431972" start="33778" end="33792" title="AFL–NFL merger" label="AFL–NFL merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q110158175" start="33905" end="33908" title="NFL on ABC" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="33934" end="33955" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965838" start="34021" end="34035" title="Super Bowl XIX" label="Super Bowl XIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953774" start="34127" end="34130" title="NFL on Fox" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952794" start="34342" end="34363" title="NBC Sunday Night Football" label="Sunday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="34375" end="34379" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196525" start="34616" end="34632" title="Super Bowl LVIII" label="Super Bowl LVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q105081934" start="34890" end="34901" title="NFL on Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576569" start="35235" end="35250" title="Super Bowl XXVI" label="Super Bowl XXVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9660" start="35293" end="35313" title="1992 Winter Olympics" label="1992 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463422" start="35344" end="35360" title="Super Bowl XXVII" label="Super Bowl XXVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q621500" start="35372" end="35389" title="Super Bowl XXVIII" label="Super Bowl XXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q30114464" start="35439" end="35453" title="Super Bowl LVI" label="Super Bowl LVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q193074" start="35487" end="35507" title="2022 Winter Olympics" label="2022 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24233824" start="35552" end="35565" title="Super Bowl LV" label="Super Bowl LV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923210" start="35759" end="35770" title="blackout (broadcasting)" label="blacked out"/>
<link wikidata="Q378744" start="35859" end="35873" title="Super Bowl VII" label="Super Bowl VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="35897" end="35908" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345694" start="36002" end="36013" title="John Madden" label="John Madden"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="36436" end="36443" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q126291" start="36498" end="36514" title="Super Bowl XLVII" label="Super Bowl XLVII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662452" start="36544" end="36556" title="infomercial" label="paid program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950987" start="36575" end="36582" title="WIVB-TV" label="WIVB-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="36654" end="36656" title="The CW" label="CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953494" start="36681" end="36688" title="WNLO-TV" label="WNLO-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138669" start="36753" end="36768" title="coattail effect" label="coattail effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426710" start="37117" end="37130" title="marching band" label="marching band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="37143" end="37151" title="university" label="colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038092" start="37155" end="37167" title="High school (North America)" label="high schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q902899" start="37315" end="37328" title="halftime show" label="halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="37349" end="37385" title="national anthem of the United States" label="national anthem of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q463167" start="37393" end="37414" title="America the Beautiful" label="America the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069020" start="37431" end="37456" title="Lift Every Voice and Sing" label="Lift Every Voice and Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q389690" start="37536" end="37549" title="Super Bowl XI" label="Super Bowl XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q301864" start="37563" end="37573" title="Vikki Carr" label="Vikki Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q853768" start="37652" end="37668" title="Super Bowl XLIII" label="Super Bowl XLIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q24233824" start="37868" end="37881" title="Super Bowl LV" label="Super Bowl LV"/>
<link wikidata="Q458206" start="37992" end="38011" title="Black History Month" label="Black History Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="38030" end="38045" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989453" start="38053" end="38064" title="The Star Spangled Banner (Whitney Houston song)" label="performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512351" start="38091" end="38105" title="Super Bowl XXV" label="Super Bowl XXV"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="38126" end="38134" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190093" start="38222" end="38239" title="Super Bowl XLVIII" label="Super Bowl XLVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q165637" start="38249" end="38262" title="Renée Fleming" label="Renée Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q771139" start="38345" end="38384" title="Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award" label="Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q632774" start="38497" end="38511" title="Super Bowl XII" label="Super Bowl XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073454" start="38818" end="38822" title="Super Bowl XX" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069020" start="38832" end="38857" title="Lift Every Voice and Sing" label="Lift Every Voice and Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q771139" start="38866" end="38905" title="Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award" label="Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q463167" start="38927" end="38948" title="America the Beautiful" label="America the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="38992" end="39016" title="The Star-Spangled Banner" label="The Star-Spangled Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="39191" end="39194" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438494" start="39222" end="39237" title="In Living Color" label="In Living Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="39421" end="39436" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="39517" end="39519" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073479" start="39533" end="39549" title="Super Bowl XXXVI" label="Super Bowl XXXVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290594" start="39590" end="39620" title="Where the Streets Have No Name" label="Where the Streets Have No Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="39727" end="39747" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q541283" start="39800" end="39811" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy" label="controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="39844" end="39861" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q131324" start="39881" end="39894" title="Janet Jackson" label="Janet Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="40042" end="40045" title="FCC" label="FCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23749400" start="40081" end="40089" title="indecent" label="indecent"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="40134" end="40137" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953770" start="40195" end="40198" title="NFL on CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088127" start="40206" end="40212" title="Viacom (original)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="40490" end="40504" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="40506" end="40524" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="40526" end="40533" title="the Who" label="the Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="40535" end="40541" title="Prince (singer)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="40547" end="40564" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q134541" start="40654" end="40673" title="the Black Eyed Peas" label="the Black Eyed Peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42493" start="40675" end="40685" title="Katy Perry" label="Katy Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="40691" end="40700" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707637" start="40731" end="40741" title="Alan Roach" label="Alan Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q904928" start="40807" end="40820" title="Super Bowl XL" label="Super Bowl XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190093" start="40864" end="40870" title="Super Bowl XLVIII" label="XLVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710023" start="40872" end="40876" title="Super Bowl XLIX" label="XLIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642193" start="40881" end="40883" title="Super Bowl 50" label="50"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953771" start="41086" end="41105" title="NFL on Westwood One" label="NFL on Westwood One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646069" start="41115" end="41124" title="NFL Films" label="NFL Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436434" start="41131" end="41143" title="Scott Graham" label="Scott Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967051" start="41200" end="41231" title="I&amp;#x27;m going to Disney World!" label="I&amp;#x27;m going to Disney World!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808572" start="41296" end="41310" title="Super Bowl XXI" label="Super Bowl XXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q596953" start="41337" end="41347" title="Phil Simms" label="Phil Simms"/>
<link wikidata="Q91157899" start="41426" end="41440" title="Super Bowl LIX" label="Super Bowl LIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915506" start="41513" end="41531" title="Miami metropolitan area" label="Greater Miami area"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="41548" end="41559" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="41584" end="41608" title="Greater Los Angeles" label="Greater Los Angeles area"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="41775" end="41782" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41972" end="42011" title="History of the National Football League in Los Angeles#1995: Both Los Angeles franchises leave" label="departure of both its NFL teams in 1995"/>
<link wikidata="" start="42018" end="42080" title="History of the National Football League in Los Angeles#2016: The NFL returns" label="the Rams and the Chargers subsequently returned to Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q756452" start="42116" end="42133" title="Caesars Superdome" label="Caesars Superdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q619512" start="42206" end="42217" title="Miami Orange Bowl" label="Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="42231" end="42234" title="American Football League" label="AFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q582280" start="42932" end="42941" title="Rose Bowl (stadium)" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857419" start="43134" end="43146" title="Rice Stadium (Rice University)" label="Rice Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439096" start="43152" end="43166" title="Houston Oilers" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025406" start="43222" end="43231" title="Astrodome" label="Astrodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q692470" start="43274" end="43290" title="Stanford Stadium" label="Stanford Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43503" end="43539" title="Cleveland Browns relocation controversy#Aftermath and legacy" label="demanding public money or relocating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43594" end="43643" title="Super Bowl curse#The Home Field Advantage Curse" label="qualified for a Super Bowl at their home stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q80997764" start="43649" end="43674" title="2020 Tampa Bay Buccaneers" label="2020 Tampa Bay Buccaneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141343" start="43708" end="43729" title="Raymond James Stadium" label="Raymond James Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038543" start="43766" end="43787" title="2021 Los Angeles Rams" label="2021 Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q19520501" start="43836" end="43848" title="SoFi Stadium" label="SoFi Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q28448626" start="43929" end="43951" title="2017 Minnesota Vikings" label="2017 Minnesota Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q47412160" start="44188" end="44199" title="Minneapolis Miracle" label="Vikings won"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="44443" end="44459" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="44513" end="44542" title="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q692470" start="44585" end="44601" title="Stanford Stadium" label="Stanford Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="44613" end="44629" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925718" start="45049" end="45061" title="Metro Detroit" label="Detroit area"/>
<link wikidata="Q211662" start="45080" end="45098" title="Pontiac Silverdome" label="Pontiac Silverdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q847596" start="45102" end="45119" title="Pontiac, Michigan" label="Pontiac, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142586" start="45142" end="45152" title="Ford Field" label="Ford Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="45172" end="45183" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072186" start="45207" end="45235" title="Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome" label="Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929512" start="45262" end="45279" title="U.S. Bank Stadium" label="U.S. Bank Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="45288" end="45300" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q867160" start="45304" end="45321" title="Lucas Oil Stadium" label="Lucas Oil Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="45354" end="45364" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862290" start="45386" end="45401" title="MetLife Stadium" label="MetLife Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q864339" start="45704" end="45720" title="Sun Life Stadium" label="Sun Life Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q597607" start="45855" end="45869" title="Super Bowl XLI" label="Super Bowl XLI"/>
<link wikidata="Q20204363" start="45992" end="46006" title="Super Bowl LIV" label="Super Bowl LIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849318" start="46151" end="46168" title="Sun Devil Stadium" label="Sun Devil Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51685" start="46172" end="46186" title="Tempe, Arizona" label="Tempe, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q751738" start="46238" end="46265" title="Martin Luther King, Jr. Day" label="Martin Luther King, Jr. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="46358" end="46378" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q864339" start="46651" end="46669" title="Pro Player Stadium" label="Pro Player Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q956072" start="46839" end="46855" title="Qualcomm Stadium" label="Qualcomm Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="46859" end="46868" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="46932" end="46945" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986524" start="46962" end="46979" title="West Side Stadium" label="West Side Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="46999" end="47004" title="New York (state)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q864339" start="47118" end="47134" title="Sun Life Stadium" label="Sun Life Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q721455" start="47138" end="47160" title="Miami Gardens, Florida" label="Miami Gardens, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q544553" start="47210" end="47227" title="Arrowhead Stadium" label="Arrowhead Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="47231" end="47252" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737017" start="47440" end="47456" title="Kaufmann Stadium" label="Kaufmann Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q756433" start="47684" end="47713" title="University of Phoenix Stadium" label="University of Phoenix Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51682" start="47717" end="47734" title="Glendale, Arizona" label="Glendale, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q195839" start="48131" end="48172" title="Mardi Gras in New Orleans" label="New Orleans&amp;#x27; Mardi Gras celebrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q27768421" start="48209" end="48226" title="Allegiant Stadium" label="Allegiant Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q91157899" start="48263" end="48277" title="Super Bowl LIX" label="Super Bowl LIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271796" start="48586" end="48599" title="Roger Goodell" label="Roger Goodell"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="48647" end="48653" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="48666" end="48681" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046346" start="51882" end="51891" title="home team" label="home team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="52175" end="52179" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q837816" start="52184" end="52192" title="wordmark" label="wordmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234374" start="52215" end="52223" title="end zone" label="end zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687904" start="52405" end="52412" title="jersey (clothing)" label="jerseys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254455" start="53043" end="53052" title="Joe Gibbs" label="Joe Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330552" start="53088" end="53103" title="Richie Petitbon" label="Richie Petitbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758640" start="53108" end="53119" title="Norv Turner" label="Norv Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q926745" start="55239" end="55255" title="Super Bowl XXXIX" label="Super Bowl XXXIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798535" start="55407" end="55424" title="throwback uniform" label="throwback uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785065" start="55802" end="55814" title="third jersey" label="third jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453958" start="55818" end="55828" title="Color Rush" label="Color Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="55967" end="55990" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q956072" start="56966" end="56983" title="San Diego Stadium" label="San Diego Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57016" end="57060" title="History of the San Diego Chargers#Return to Los Angeles" label="their NFL franchise relocated to Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="57068" end="57083" title="London, England" label="London, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="57169" end="57184" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530067" start="57229" end="57253" title="NFL International Series" label="NFL International Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143" start="57410" end="57419" title="Time zone" label="Time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q941023" start="57508" end="57511" title="Eastern Time Zone" label="EST"/>
<link wikidata="Q30192" start="57567" end="57587" title="Greenwich Mean Time" label="local time in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536237" start="58005" end="58019" title="Tulane Stadium" label="Tulane Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="58028" end="58045" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095984" start="58121" end="58134" title="Tampa Stadium" label="Tampa Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q692470" start="58198" end="58214" title="Stanford Stadium" label="Stanford Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q619512" start="58294" end="58305" title="Miami Orange Bowl" label="Orange Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072186" start="58372" end="58400" title="Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome" label="Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058931" start="58482" end="58494" title="Georgia Dome" label="Georgia Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="58498" end="58505" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q211662" start="58576" end="58594" title="Pontiac Silverdome" label="Pontiac Silverdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q956072" start="58677" end="58694" title="San Diego Stadium" label="San Diego Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642195" start="58966" end="58983" title="Super Bowl Sunday" label="Super Bowl Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201637" start="59182" end="59190" title="Planters" label="Planters"/>
<link wikidata="Q212886" start="59355" end="59370" title="Stephen Colbert" label="Stephen Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421330" start="59636" end="59648" title="service mark" label="service mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429979" start="60278" end="60307" title="fair use (U.S. trademark law)" label="fair use in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="60337" end="60341" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q381157" start="60350" end="60361" title="Orrin Hatch" label="Orrin Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="61237" end="61256" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="61265" end="61299" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598725" start="61323" end="61349" title="Stanford Cardinal football" label="Stanford Cardinal football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650742" start="61354" end="61386" title="California Golden Bears football" label="California Golden Bears football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905753" start="61414" end="61422" title="Big Game (American football)" label="Big Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q847827" start="61525" end="61537" title="Super Bowl I" label="Super Bowl I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61558" end="61571" title="Mega millions lottery#The Big Game" label="Mega Millions"/>
<link wikidata="Q909800" start="61704" end="61732" title="List of Super Bowl champions" label="List of Super Bowl champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865607" start="61735" end="61783" title="History of National Football League championship" label="History of National Football League championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650849" start="61786" end="61819" title="List of NFL champions (1920–1969)" label="List of NFL champions (1920–1969)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598596" start="61822" end="61853" title="List of Super Bowl broadcasters" label="List of Super Bowl broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292465" start="61856" end="61887" title="List of Super Bowl head coaches" label="List of Super Bowl head coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149922" start="61890" end="61918" title="List of Super Bowl officials" label="List of Super Bowl officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931342" start="61921" end="61947" title="List of Super Bowl records" label="List of Super Bowl records"/>
<link wikidata="Q171408" start="61950" end="61958" title="Grey Cup" label="Grey Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032175" start="61964" end="61988" title="Canadian Football League" label="Canadian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591130" start="62015" end="62057" title="List of NFL franchise post-season droughts" label="List of NFL franchise post-season droughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591131" start="62060" end="62101" title="List of NFL franchise post-season streaks" label="List of NFL franchise post-season streaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635752" start="62104" end="62156" title="List of quarterbacks with multiple Super Bowl starts" label="List of quarterbacks with multiple Super Bowl starts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635752" start="62159" end="62199" title="List of Super Bowl starting quarterbacks" label="List of Super Bowl starting quarterbacks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62202" end="62252" title="List of players who have won the most NFL championships#List of players with most Super Bowl championships" label="List of players with most Super Bowl championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191899" start="62255" end="62265" title="NFL Honors" label="NFL Honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122130" start="62268" end="62290" title="Super Bowl advertising" label="Super Bowl advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988763" start="62293" end="62322" title="Super Bowl counterprogramming" label="Super Bowl counterprogramming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642215" start="62325" end="62341" title="Super Bowl curse" label="Super Bowl curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642216" start="62344" end="62364" title="Super Bowl indicator" label="Super Bowl indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="62732" end="62741" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="62867" end="62871" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="62936" end="62954" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27725" wikidata="Q1379273" url="?curid=27725" title="Surface area">
<text>The surface area (symbol A) of a solid object is a measure of the total area that the surface of the object occupies. The mathematical definition of surface area in the presence of curved surfaces is considerably more involved than the definition of arc length of one-dimensional curves, or of the surface area for polyhedra (i.e., objects with flat polygonal faces), for which the surface area is the sum of the areas of its faces. Smooth surfaces, such as a sphere, are assigned surface area using their representation as parametric surfaces. This definition of surface area is based on methods of infinitesimal calculus and involves partial derivatives and double integration.

A general definition of surface area was sought by Henri Lebesgue and Hermann Minkowski at the turn of the twentieth century. Their work led to the development of geometric measure theory, which studies various notions of surface area for irregular objects of any dimension. An important example is the Minkowski content of a surface.

==Definition==
While the areas of many simple surfaces have been known since antiquity, a rigorous mathematical &quot;definition&quot; of area requires a great deal of care.
This should provide a function

: formula_1

which assigns a positive real number to a certain class of surfaces that satisfies several natural requirements. The most fundamental property of the surface area is its additivity: &quot;the area of the whole is the sum of the areas of the parts&quot;. More rigorously, if a surface &quot;S&quot; is a union of finitely many pieces &quot;S&quot;1, …, &quot;S&quot;&quot;r&quot; which do not overlap except at their boundaries, then 
: formula_2

Surface areas of flat polygonal shapes must agree with their geometrically defined area. Since surface area is a geometric notion, areas of congruent surfaces must be the same and the area must depend only on the shape of the surface, but not on its position and orientation in space. This means that surface area is invariant under the group of Euclidean motions. These properties uniquely characterize surface area for a wide class of geometric surfaces called &quot;piecewise smooth&quot;. Such surfaces consist of finitely many pieces that can be represented in the parametric form

: formula_3

with a continuously differentiable function formula_4 The area of an individual piece is defined by the formula

: formula_5

Thus the area of &quot;S&quot;&quot;D&quot; is obtained by integrating the length of the normal vector formula_6 to the surface over the appropriate region &quot;D&quot; in the parametric &quot;uv&quot; plane. The area of the whole surface is then obtained by adding together the areas of the pieces, using additivity of surface area. The main formula can be specialized to different classes of surfaces, giving, in particular, formulas for areas of graphs &quot;z&quot; = &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;,&quot;y&quot;) and surfaces of revolution.

One of the subtleties of surface area, as compared to arc length of curves, is that surface area cannot be defined simply as the limit of areas of polyhedral shapes approximating a given smooth surface. It was demonstrated by Hermann Schwarz that already for the cylinder, different choices of approximating flat surfaces can lead to different limiting values of the area; this example is known as the Schwarz lantern.

Various approaches to a general definition of surface area were developed in the late nineteenth and the early twentieth century by Henri Lebesgue and Hermann Minkowski. While for piecewise smooth surfaces there is a unique natural notion of surface area, if a surface is very irregular, or rough, then it may not be possible to assign an area to it at all. A typical example is given by a surface with spikes spread throughout in a dense fashion. Many surfaces of this type occur in the study of fractals. Extensions of the notion of area which partially fulfill its function and may be defined even for very badly irregular surfaces are studied in geometric measure theory. A specific example of such an extension is the Minkowski content of the surface.

== Common formulas ==

===Ratio of surface areas of a sphere and cylinder of the same radius and height===

The below given formulas can be used to show that the surface area of a sphere and cylinder of the same radius and height are in the ratio 2 : 3, as follows.

Let the radius be &quot;r&quot; and the height be &quot;h&quot; (which is 2&quot;r&quot; for the sphere).

formula_7

The discovery of this ratio is credited to Archimedes.
== In chemistry ==
Surface area is important in chemical kinetics. Increasing the surface area of a substance generally increases the rate of a chemical reaction. For example, iron in a fine powder will combust, while in solid blocks it is stable enough to use in structures. For different applications a minimal or maximal surface area may be desired.
== In biology ==

The surface area of an organism is important in several considerations, such as regulation of body temperature and digestion. Animals use their teeth to grind food down into smaller particles, increasing the surface area available for digestion. The epithelial tissue lining the digestive tract contains microvilli, greatly increasing the area available for absorption. Elephants have large ears, allowing them to regulate their own body temperature. In other instances, animals will need to minimize surface area; for example, people will fold their arms over their chest when cold to minimize heat loss.

The surface area to volume ratio (SA:V) of a cell imposes upper limits on size, as the volume increases much faster than does the surface area, thus limiting the rate at which substances diffuse from the interior across the cell membrane to interstitial spaces or to other cells. Indeed, representing a cell as an idealized sphere of radius , the volume and surface area are, respectively, and . The resulting surface area to volume ratio is therefore . Thus, if a cell has a radius of 1 μm, the SA:V ratio is 3; whereas if the radius of the cell is instead 10 μm, then the SA:V ratio becomes 0.3. With a cell radius of 100, SA:V ratio is 0.03. Thus, the surface area falls off steeply with increasing volume.

== See also ==
* Perimeter length
* Projected area
* BET theory, technique for the measurement of the specific surface area of materials
* Spherical area
* Surface integral

== References ==


==External links==
*Surface Area Video at Thinkwell</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1379273" start="4" end="16" title="Surface area" label="surface area"/>
<link wikidata="Q207648" start="33" end="38" title="Solid geometry" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="72" end="76" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505239" start="86" end="93" title="Surface (mathematics)" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q670036" start="250" end="260" title="arc length" label="arc length"/>
<link wikidata="Q172937" start="315" end="324" title="polyhedra" label="polyhedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064117" start="360" end="365" title="Face (geometry)" label="faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="460" end="466" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071743" start="524" end="542" title="parametric surface" label="parametric surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="600" end="622" title="infinitesimal calculus" label="infinitesimal calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186475" start="636" end="654" title="partial derivative" label="partial derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q844937" start="660" end="678" title="double integration" label="double integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q206005" start="732" end="746" title="Henri Lebesgue" label="Henri Lebesgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q57246" start="751" end="768" title="Hermann Minkowski" label="Hermann Minkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526918" start="844" end="868" title="geometric measure theory" label="geometric measure theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082571" start="984" end="1001" title="Minkowski content" label="Minkowski content"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1261" end="1272" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q484298" start="1295" end="1302" title="Surface (topology)" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="1766" end="1770" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q154210" start="1823" end="1832" title="congruence (geometry)" label="congruent"/>
<link wikidata="Q852195" start="2020" end="2046" title="Euclidean group" label="group of Euclidean motions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071743" start="2253" end="2268" title="parametric surface" label="parametric form"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="2290" end="2317" title="continuously differentiable" label="continuously differentiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q849425" start="2929" end="2951" title="surface of revolution" label="surfaces of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q670036" start="3008" end="3018" title="arc length" label="arc length"/>
<link wikidata="Q61223" start="3180" end="3195" title="Hermann Schwarz" label="Hermann Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q56283202" start="3356" end="3371" title="Schwarz lantern" label="Schwarz lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q206005" start="3506" end="3520" title="Henri Lebesgue" label="Henri Lebesgue"/>
<link wikidata="Q57246" start="3525" end="3542" title="Hermann Minkowski" label="Hermann Minkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="3871" end="3878" title="fractal" label="fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526918" start="4024" end="4048" title="geometric measure theory" label="geometric measure theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082571" start="4097" end="4114" title="Minkowski content" label="Minkowski content"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="4312" end="4318" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="4323" end="4331" title="cylinder (geometry)" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="4560" end="4570" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q209082" start="4620" end="4637" title="chemical kinetics" label="chemical kinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394849" start="4706" end="4710" title="reaction rate" label="rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="4716" end="4733" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="4748" end="4752" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="4775" end="4782" title="combustion" label="combust"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="5058" end="5067" title="digestion" label="digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="5087" end="5092" title="teeth" label="teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q939486" start="5247" end="5257" title="microvilli" label="microvilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="5313" end="5321" title="Elephant" label="Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362" start="5334" end="5337" title="ear" label="ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q766786" start="5554" end="5582" title="surface area to volume ratio" label="surface area to volume ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="5595" end="5599" title="cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="5774" end="5787" title="cell membrane" label="cell membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="5874" end="5880" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q28474" start="6278" end="6294" title="Perimeter length" label="Perimeter length"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249432" start="6297" end="6311" title="Projected area" label="Projected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q795838" start="6314" end="6324" title="BET theory" label="BET theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46463" start="6400" end="6414" title="Spherical area" label="Spherical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q598146" start="6417" end="6433" title="Surface integral" label="Surface integral"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27727" wikidata="Q651431" url="?curid=27727" title="Solid state">
<text>Solid state, or solid matter, is one of the four fundamental states of matter.

Solid state may also refer to:

== Electronics ==
* Solid-state electronics, using semiconductors
* Solid state ionics
* Solid-state drive, a data storage device

== Music ==
* Solid State Records, a Christian music label
* Solid State Records (jazz label), active in the 1960s
* Solid State, a musical trio with DJ Dextrous
* &quot;Solid State&quot; (Leon Russell album), 1984
* &quot;Solid State&quot; (Jonathan Coulton album), 2017
* &quot;Solid State&quot;, an album by Sam Phillips

== Science ==
* Solid-state chemistry, the chemistry of solids
* Solid-state physics, the study of how atomic-scale properties lead to large-scale properties

== See also ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q651431" start="0" end="11" title="Solid state" label="Solid state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="16" end="21" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q651431" start="80" end="91" title="Solid state" label="Solid state"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="132" end="155" title="Solid-state electronics" label="Solid-state electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801421" start="180" end="198" title="Solid state ionics" label="Solid state ionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="201" end="218" title="Solid-state drive" label="Solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q305378" start="257" end="276" title="Solid State Records" label="Solid State Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712804" start="304" end="336" title="Solid State Records (jazz label)" label="Solid State Records (jazz label)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205292" start="393" end="404" title="DJ Dextrous" label="DJ Dextrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051003" start="407" end="451" title="Solid State (Leon Russell album)" label="&amp;quot;Solid State&amp;quot; (Leon Russell album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30605405" start="460" end="508" title="Solid State (Jonathan Coulton album)" label="&amp;quot;Solid State&amp;quot; (Jonathan Coulton album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q275185" start="554" end="566" title="Sam Phillips (musician)" label="Sam Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q908684" start="584" end="605" title="Solid-state chemistry" label="Solid-state chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="633" end="652" title="Solid-state physics" label="Solid-state physics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27730" wikidata="Q9301" url="?curid=27730" title="Serbo-Croatian">
<text>Serbo-Croatian ( ) – also called Serbo-Croat ( ), Serbo-Croat-Bosnian (SCB), Bosnian-Croatian-Serbian (BCS), and Bosnian-Croatian-Montenegrin-Serbian (BCMS) – is a South Slavic language and the primary language of Serbia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Montenegro. It is a pluricentric language with four mutually intelligible standard varieties, namely Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian, and Montenegrin.

South Slavic languages historically formed a dialect continuum. The turbulent history of the area, particularly due to the expansion of the Ottoman Empire, resulted in a patchwork of dialectal and religious differences. Due to population migrations, Shtokavian became the most widespread supradialect in the western Balkans, intruding westwards into the area previously occupied by Chakavian and Kajkavian. Bosniaks, Croats, and Serbs differ in religion and were historically often part of different cultural circles, although a large part of the nations have lived side by side under foreign overlords. During that period, the language was referred to under a variety of names, such as &quot;Slavic&quot; in general or &quot;Serbian&quot;, &quot;Croatian&quot; or &quot;Bosnian&quot; in particular. In a classicizing manner, it was also referred to as &quot;Illyrian&quot;.

The process of linguistic standardization of Serbo-Croatian was originally initiated in the mid-19th-century Vienna Literary Agreement by Croatian and Serbian writers and philologists, decades before a Yugoslav state was established. From the very beginning, there were slightly different literary Serbian and Croatian standards, although both were based on the same dialect of Shtokavian, Eastern Herzegovinian. In the 20th century, Serbo-Croatian served as the lingua franca of the country of Yugoslavia, being the sole official language in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia (when it was called &quot;Serbo-Croato-Slovenian&quot;), and afterwards the official language of four out of six republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The breakup of Yugoslavia affected language attitudes, so that social conceptions of the language separated along ethnic and political lines. Since the breakup of Yugoslavia, Bosnian has likewise been established as an official standard in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and there is an ongoing movement to codify a separate Montenegrin standard.

Like other South Slavic languages, Serbo-Croatian has a simple phonology, with the common five-vowel system and twenty-five consonants. Its grammar evolved from Common Slavic, with complex inflection, preserving seven grammatical cases in nouns, pronouns, and adjectives. Verbs exhibit imperfective or perfective aspect, with a moderately complex tense system. Serbo-Croatian is a pro-drop language with flexible word order, subject–verb–object being the default. It can be written in either localized variants of Latin (Gaj&#x27;s Latin alphabet, Montenegrin Latin) or Cyrillic (Serbian Cyrillic, Montenegrin Cyrillic), and the orthography is highly phonemic in all standards. Despite many linguistical similarities, the traits that separate all standardized varieties are clearly identifiable, although these differences are considered minimal.

==Name==
Serbo-Croatian is typically referred to by names of its standardized varieties: Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian and Montenegrin; it is rarely referred to by names of its sub-dialects, such as Bunjevac. In the language itself, it is typically known as &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot;, &quot;Croato-Serbian&quot;, or informally &quot;ours&quot;.

Throughout the history of the South Slavs, the vernacular, literary, and written languages (e.g. Chakavian, Kajkavian, Shtokavian) of the various regions and ethnicities developed and diverged independently. Prior to the 19th century, they were collectively called &quot;Illyria&quot;, &quot;Slavic&quot;, &quot;Slavonian&quot;, &quot;Bosnian&quot;, &quot;Dalmatian&quot;, &quot;Serbian&quot; or &quot;Croatian&quot;. Since the nineteenth century, the term &quot;Illyrian&quot; or &quot;Illyric&quot; was used quite often (thus creating confusion with the Illyrian language). Although the word &quot;Illyrian&quot; was used on a few occasions before, its widespread usage began after Ljudevit Gaj and several other prominent linguists met at Ljudevit Vukotinović&#x27;s house to discuss the issue in 1832. The term &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; was first used by Jacob Grimm in 1824, popularized by the Viennese philologist Jernej Kopitar in the following decades, and accepted by Croatian Zagreb grammarians in 1854 and 1859. At that time, Serb and Croat lands were still part of the Ottoman and Austrian Empires.

Officially, the language was called variously &quot;Serbo-Croat, Croato-Serbian, Serbian and Croatian, Croatian and Serbian, Serbian or Croatian, Croatian or Serbian.&quot; Unofficially, Serbs and Croats typically called the language &quot;Serbian&quot; or &quot;Croatian&quot;, respectively, without implying a distinction between the two, and again in independent Bosnia and Herzegovina, &quot;Bosnian&quot;, &quot;Croatian&quot;, and &quot;Serbian&quot; were considered to be three names of a single official language. Croatian linguist Dalibor Brozović advocated the term &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; as late as 1988, claiming that in an analogy with Indo-European, Serbo-Croatian does not only name the two components of the same language, but simply charts the limits of the region in which it is spoken and includes everything between the limits (&#x27;Bosnian&#x27; and &#x27;Montenegrin&#x27;). Today, use of the term &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; is controversial due to the prejudice that nation and language must match. It is still used for lack of a succinct alternative, though alternative names have emerged, such as &quot;Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian&quot; (BCS), which is often seen in political contexts such as the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.

== History ==

=== Early development ===
In the 9th century, Old Church Slavonic was adopted as the language of the liturgy in churches serving various Slavic nations. This language was gradually adapted to non-liturgical purposes and became known as the Croatian version of Old Slavonic. The two variants of the language, liturgical and non-liturgical, continued to be a part of the Glagolitic service as late as the middle of the 19th century. The earliest known Croatian Church Slavonic Glagolitic manuscripts are the &quot;Glagolita Clozianus&quot; and the &quot;Vienna Folia&quot; from the 11th century. The beginning of written Serbo-Croatian can be traced from the tenth century and on when Serbo-Croatian medieval texts were written in four scripts: Latin, Glagolitic, Early Cyrillic, and Bosnian Cyrillic (&quot;bosančica/bosanica&quot;). Serbo-Croatian competed with the more established literary languages of Latin and Old Slavonic. Old Slavonic developed into the Serbo-Croatian variant of Church Slavonic between the 12th and 16th centuries.
Among the earliest attestations of Serbo-Croatian are: the Humac tablet, dating from the 10th or 11th century, written in Bosnian Cyrillic and Glagolitic; the Plomin tablet, dating from the same era, written in Glagolitic; the Valun tablet, dated to the 11th century, written in Glagolitic and Latin; and the Inscription of Župa Dubrovačka, a Glagolitic tablet dated to the 11th century. The Baška tablet from the late 11th century was written in Glagolitic. It is a large stone tablet found in the small Church of St. Lucy, Jurandvor on the Croatian island of Krk that contains text written mostly in Chakavian in the Croatian angular Glagolitic script. The Charter of Ban Kulin of 1189, written by Ban Kulin of Bosnia, was an early Shtokavian text, written in Bosnian Cyrillic.

The luxurious and ornate representative texts of Serbo-Croatian Church Slavonic belong to the later era, when they coexisted with the Serbo-Croatian vernacular literature. The most notable are the &quot;Missal of Duke Novak&quot; from the Lika region in northwestern Croatia (1368), &quot;Evangel from Reims&quot; (1395, named after the town of its final destination), Hrvoje&#x27;s Missal from Bosnia and Split in Dalmatia (1404), and the first printed book in Serbo-Croatian, the Glagolitic Missale Romanum Glagolitice (1483).

During the 13th century Serbo-Croatian vernacular texts began to appear, the most important among them being the &quot;Istrian land survey&quot; of 1275 and the &quot;Vinodol Codex&quot; of 1288, both written in the Chakavian dialect. The Shtokavian dialect literature, based almost exclusively on Chakavian original texts of religious provenance (missals, breviaries, prayer books) appeared almost a century later. The most important purely Shtokavian vernacular text is the Vatican Croatian Prayer Book (). Both the language used in legal texts and that used in Glagolitic literature gradually came under the influence of the vernacular, which considerably affected its phonological, morphological, and lexical systems. From the 14th and the 15th centuries, both secular and religious songs at church festivals were composed in the vernacular. Writers of early Serbo-Croatian religious poetry (&quot;začinjavci&quot;) gradually introduced the vernacular into their works. These &quot;začinjavci&quot; were the forerunners of the rich literary production of the 16th-century literature, which, depending on the area, was Chakavian-, Kajkavian-, or Shtokavian-based. The language of religious poems, translations, miracle and morality plays contributed to the popular character of medieval Serbo-Croatian literature.

One of the earliest dictionaries, also in the Slavic languages as a whole, was the &quot;Bosnian–Turkish Dictionary&quot; of 1631 authored by Muhamed Hevaji Uskufi and was written in the Arebica script.

=== Standardization ===

In the mid-19th century, Serbian (led by self-taught writer and folklorist Vuk Stefanović Karadžić) and most Croatian writers and linguists (represented by the Illyrian movement and led by Ljudevit Gaj and Đuro Daničić), proposed the use of the most widespread dialect, Shtokavian, as the base for their common standard language. Karadžić standardised the Serbian Cyrillic alphabet, and Gaj and Daničić standardized the Croatian Latin alphabet, on the basis of vernacular speech phonemes and the principle of phonological spelling. In 1850 Serbian and Croatian writers and linguists signed the Vienna Literary Agreement, declaring their intention to create a unified standard. Thus a complex bi-variant language appeared, which the Serbs officially called &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; or &quot;Serbian or Croatian&quot; and the Croats &quot;Croato-Serbian&quot;, or &quot;Croatian or Serbian&quot;. Yet, in practice, the variants of the conceived common literary language served as different literary variants, chiefly differing in lexical inventory and stylistic devices. The common phrase describing this situation was that Serbo-Croatian or &quot;Croatian or Serbian&quot; was a single language. In 1861, after a long debate, the Croatian Sabor put up several proposed names to a vote of the members of the parliament; &quot;Yugoslavian&quot; was opted for by the majority and legislated as the official language of the Triune Kingdom. The Austrian Empire, suppressing Pan-Slavism at the time, did not confirm this decision and legally rejected the legislation, but in 1867 finally settled on &quot;Croatian or Serbian&quot; instead. During the Austro-Hungarian occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the language of all three nations in this territory was declared &quot;Bosnian&quot; until the death of administrator von Kállay in 1907, at which point the name was changed to &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot;.

With unification of the first the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes – the approach of Karadžić and the Illyrians became dominant. The official language was called &quot;Serbo-Croato-Slovenian&quot; (&quot;srpsko-hrvatsko-slovenački&quot;) in the 1921 constitution. In 1929, the constitution was suspended, and the country was renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, while the official language of Serbo-Croato-Slovene was reinstated in the 1931 constitution.

In June 1941, the Nazi puppet Independent State of Croatia began to rid the language of &quot;Eastern&quot; (Serbian) words, and shut down Serbian schools. The totalitarian dictatorship introduced a language law that promulgated Croatian linguistic purism as a policy that tried to implement a complete elimination of Serbisms and internationalisms.

On January 15, 1944, the Anti-Fascist Council of the People&#x27;s Liberation of Yugoslavia (AVNOJ) declared Croatian, Serbian, Slovene, and Macedonian to be equal in the entire territory of Yugoslavia. In 1945 the decision to recognize Croatian and Serbian as separate languages was reversed in favor of a single Serbo-Croatian or Croato-Serbian language. In the Communist-dominated second Yugoslavia, ethnic issues eased to an extent, but the matter of language remained blurred and unresolved.

In 1954, major Serbian and Croatian writers, linguists and literary critics, backed by Matica srpska and Matica hrvatska signed the Novi Sad Agreement, which in its first conclusion stated: &quot;Serbs, Croats and Montenegrins share a single language with two equal variants that have developed around Zagreb (western) and Belgrade (eastern)&quot;. The agreement insisted on the equal status of Cyrillic and Latin scripts, and of Ekavian and Ijekavian pronunciations. It also specified that &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; should be the name of the language in official contexts, while in unofficial use the traditional &quot;Serbian&quot; and &quot;Croatian&quot; were to be retained. Matica hrvatska and Matica srpska were to work together on a dictionary, and a committee of Serbian and Croatian linguists was asked to prepare a . During the sixties both books were published simultaneously in Ijekavian Latin in Zagreb and Ekavian Cyrillic in Novi Sad. Yet Croatian linguists claim that it was an act of unitarianism. The evidence supporting this claim is patchy: Croatian linguist Stjepan Babić complained that the television transmission from Belgrade always used the Latin alphabet— which was true, but was not proof of unequal rights, but of frequency of use and prestige. Babić further complained that the Novi Sad Dictionary (1967) listed side by side words from both the Croatian and Serbian variants wherever they differed, which one can view as proof of careful respect for both variants, and not of unitarism. Moreover, Croatian linguists criticized those parts of the Dictionary for being unitaristic that were written by Croatian linguists. And finally, Croatian linguists ignored the fact that the material for the came from the Croatian Philological Society. Regardless of these facts, Croatian intellectuals brought the Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Literary Language in 1967. On occasion of the publication&#x27;s 45th anniversary, the Croatian weekly journal &quot;Forum&quot; published the Declaration again in 2012, accompanied by a critical analysis.

West European scientists judge the Yugoslav language policy as an exemplary one: although three-quarters of the population spoke one language, no single language was official on a federal level. Official languages were declared only at the level of constituent republics and provinces, and very generously: Vojvodina had five (among them Slovak and Romanian, spoken by 0.5 per cent of the population), and Kosovo four (Albanian, Turkish, Romany and Serbo-Croatian). Newspapers, radio and television studios used sixteen languages, fourteen were used as languages of tuition in schools, and nine at universities. Only the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army used Serbo-Croatian as the sole language of command, with all other languages represented in the army&#x27;s other activities—however, this is not different from other armies of multilingual states, or in other specific institutions, such as international air traffic control where English is used worldwide. All variants of Serbo-Croatian were used in state administration and republican and federal institutions. Both Serbian and Croatian variants were represented in respectively different grammar books, dictionaries, school textbooks and in books known as (which detail spelling rules). Serbo-Croatian was a kind of soft standardisation. However, legal equality could not dampen the prestige Serbo-Croatian had: since it was the language of three quarters of the population, it functioned as an unofficial lingua franca. And within Serbo-Croatian, the Serbian variant, with twice as many speakers as the Croatian, enjoyed greater prestige, reinforced by the fact that Slovene and Macedonian speakers preferred it to the Croatian variant because their languages are also Ekavian. This is a common situation in other pluricentric languages, e.g. the variants of German differ according to their prestige, the variants of Portuguese too. Moreover, all languages differ in terms of prestige: &quot;the fact is that languages (in terms of prestige, learnability etc.) are not equal, and the law cannot make them equal&quot;.

==== Legal status ====
* 1921 constitution of the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, Article 3: &quot;The official language of the Kingdom is Serbo-Croato-Slovene.&quot; (Latin script: &quot;Službeni jezik Kraljevine je srpsko-hrvatski-slovenački.&quot;; Cyrillic script: Службени језик Краљевине је српско-хрватски-словеначки.).
* 1931 constitution of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, Article 3: &quot;The official language of the Kingdom is Serbo-Croato-Slovene&quot;.
* 1963 constitution of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: 
** Article 42: &quot;The languages of the peoples of Yugoslavia and their scripts shall be equal. Members of the peoples of Yugoslavia on the territories of republics other than their own shall have the right to school instruction in their own languages, in conformity with republican law. As an exception, in the Yugoslav People&#x27;s Army, commands, military drill and administration shall be in the Serbo-Croatian language.&quot;
** Article 131: &quot;The federal laws and other general acts of the federal organs shall be made public in the official gazette of the Federation, in the authentic texts in the languages of the peoples of Yugoslavia: in Serbo-Croatian and Croato-Serbian, Slovene and Macedonian. In official communication the organs of the Federation shall abide by the principle of equality of languages of the peoples of Yugoslavia.&quot;
* 1974 constitution of the Socialist Autonomous Province of Kosovo, Article 5: &quot;In the Socialist Autonomous Province of Kosovo, the equality of the Albanian, Serbo-Croatian and Turkish languages and their scripts is guaranteed.&quot;
* 1990 constitution of the (Socialist) Republic of Serbia, Article 8: &quot;In the Republic of Serbia, the Serbo-Croatian language and the Cyrillic alphabet are in official use, while the Latin alphabet is in official use in the manner established by law.&quot;
* 1993 constitution of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Article 4: &quot;In the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Serbo-Croatian or Croatian-Serbian language with the Ijekavian pronunciation is in official use. Both scripts — Latin and Cyrillic, are equal.&quot;
The 1946, 1953, and 1974 constitutions of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia did not name specific official languages at the federal level. The 1992 constitution of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in 2003 renamed Serbia and Montenegro, stated in Article 15: &quot;In the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Serbian language in its ekavian and ijekavian dialects and the Cyrillic script shall be official, while the Latin script shall be in official use as provided for by the Constitution and law.&quot;

=== Modern developments ===

In 2017, the &quot;Declaration on the Common Language&quot; (&quot;Deklaracija o zajedničkom jeziku&quot;) was signed by a group of NGOs and linguists from former Yugoslavia. It states that all standardized variants belong to a common polycentric language with equal status.

== Demographics ==
About million people declare their native language as either &#x27;Bosnian&#x27;, &#x27;Croatian&#x27;, &#x27;Serbian&#x27;, &#x27;Montenegrin&#x27;, or &#x27;Serbo-Croatian&#x27;.

Serbian is spoken by million people around the world, mostly in Serbia ( million), Bosnia and Herzegovina ( million), and Montenegro (). Besides these, Serbian minorities are found in Kosovo, North Macedonia and in Romania. In Serbia, there are about 760,000 second-language speakers of Serbian, including Hungarians in Vojvodina and the 400,000 estimated Roma. In Kosovo, Serbian is spoken by the members of the Serbian minority which approximates between 70,000 and 100,000. Familiarity of Kosovar Albanians with Serbian varies depending on age and education, and exact numbers are not available.

Croatian is spoken by million people in the world, including million in Croatia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina. A small Croatian minority that lives in Italy, known as Molise Croats, have somewhat preserved traces of Croatian. In Croatia, 170,000, mostly Italians and Hungarians, use it as a second language.

Bosnian is spoken by million people worldwide, chiefly Bosniaks, including million in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Serbia and in Montenegro.

Montenegrin is spoken by people globally. The notion of Montenegrin as a separate standard from Serbian is relatively recent. In the 2011 census, around 229,251 Montenegrins, of the country&#x27;s 620,000, declared Montenegrin as their native language. That figure is likely to increase, due to the country&#x27;s independence and strong institutional backing of the Montenegrin language.

Serbo-Croatian is also a second language of many Slovenians and Macedonians, especially those born during the time of Yugoslavia. According to the 2002 census, Serbo-Croatian and its variants have the largest number of speakers of the minority languages in Slovenia.

Outside the Balkans, there are over two million native speakers of the language(s), especially in countries which are frequent targets of immigration, such as Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Sweden, and the United States.

== Grammar ==
Serbo-Croatian is a highly inflected language. Traditional grammars list seven cases for nouns and adjectives: nominative, genitive, dative, accusative, vocative, locative, and instrumental, reflecting the original seven cases of Proto-Slavic, and indeed older forms of Serbo-Croatian itself. However, in modern Shtokavian the locative has almost merged into dative (the only difference is based on accent in some cases), and the other cases can be shown declining; namely:
* For all nouns and adjectives, the instrumental, dative, and locative forms are identical (at least orthographically) in the plural: &quot;ženama&quot;, &quot;ženama&quot;, &quot;ženama&quot;; &quot;očima&quot;, &quot;očima&quot;, &quot;očima&quot;; &quot;riječima&quot;, &quot;riječima&quot;, &quot;riječima&quot;.
* There is an accentual difference between the genitive singular and genitive plural of masculine and neuter nouns, which are otherwise homonyms (&quot;seljáka&quot;, &quot;seljaka&quot;) except that on occasion an &quot;a&quot; (which might or might not appear in the singular) is filled between the last letter of the root and the genitive plural ending (&quot;kapitalizma&quot;, &quot;kapitalizama&quot;).
* The old instrumental ending &quot;ju&quot; of the feminine consonant stems and in some cases the &quot;a&quot; of the genitive plural of certain other sorts of feminine nouns is fast yielding to &quot;i&quot;: &quot;noći&quot; instead of &quot;noćju&quot;, &quot;borbi&quot; instead of &quot;boraba&quot; and so forth.
* Almost every Shtokavian number is indeclinable, and numbers after prepositions have not been declined for a long time.

Like most Slavic languages, there are mostly three genders for nouns: masculine, feminine, and neuter, a distinction which is still present even in the plural (unlike Russian and, in part, the Čakavian dialect). They also have two numbers: singular and plural. However, some consider there to be three numbers (paucal or &quot;dual,&quot; too), since (still preserved in closely related Slovene) after two (&quot;dva&quot;, &quot;dvije&quot;/&quot;dve&quot;), three (&quot;tri&quot;) and four (&quot;četiri&quot;), and all numbers ending in them (e.g. twenty-two, ninety-three, one hundred four, but not twelve through fourteen) the genitive singular is used, and after all other numbers five (&quot;pet&quot;) and up, the genitive plural is used. (The number one [&quot;jedan&quot;] is treated as an adjective.) Adjectives are placed in front of the noun they modify and must agree in both case and number with it.

There are seven tenses for verbs: past, present, future, exact future, aorist, imperfect, and pluperfect; and three moods: indicative, imperative, and conditional. However, the latter three tenses are typically used only in Shtokavian writing, and the time sequence of the exact future is more commonly formed through an alternative construction.

In addition, like most Slavic languages, the Shtokavian verb also has one of two aspects: perfective or imperfective. Most verbs come in pairs, with the perfective verb being created out of the imperfective by adding a prefix or making a stem change. The imperfective aspect typically indicates that the action is unfinished, in progress, or repetitive; while the perfective aspect typically denotes that the action was completed, instantaneous, or of limited duration. Some Štokavian tenses (namely, aorist and imperfect) favor a particular aspect (but they are rarer or absent in Čakavian and Kajkavian). Actually, aspects &quot;compensate&quot; for the relative lack of tenses, because verbal aspect determines whether the act is completed or in progress in the referred time.

== Phonology ==
=== Vowels ===
The Serbo-Croatian vowel system is simple, with only five vowels in Shtokavian. All vowels are monophthongs. The oral vowels are as follows:

The vowels can be short or long, but the phonetic quality does not change depending on the length. In a word, vowels can be long in the stressed syllable and the syllables following it, never in the ones preceding it.

=== Consonants ===
The consonant system is more complicated, and its characteristic features are series of affricate and palatal consonants. As in English, voice is phonemic, but aspiration is not.

In consonant clusters all consonants are either voiced or voiceless. All the consonants are voiced if the last consonant is normally voiced or voiceless if the last consonant is normally voiceless. This rule does not apply to approximantsa consonant cluster may contain voiced approximants and voiceless consonants; as well as to foreign words (&quot;Washington&quot; would be transcribed as &quot;VašinGton&quot;), personal names and when consonants are not inside of one syllable.

 can be syllabic, playing the role of the syllable nucleus in certain words (occasionally, it can even have a long accent). For example, the tongue-twister &quot;navrh brda vrba mrda&quot; involves four words with syllabic . A similar feature exists in Czech, Slovak, and Macedonian. Very rarely other sonorants can be syllabic, like (in &quot;bicikl&quot;), (surname &quot;Štarklj&quot;), (unit &quot;njutn&quot;), as well as and in slang.

=== Pitch accent ===
Apart from Slovene, Serbo-Croatian is the only Slavic language with a pitch accent (simple tone) system. This feature is present in some other Indo-European languages, such as Norwegian, Ancient Greek, and Punjabi. Neo-Shtokavian Serbo-Croatian, which is used as the basis for standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin, and Serbian, has four &quot;accents&quot;, which involve either a rising or falling tone on either long or short vowels, with optional post-tonic lengths:

The tone stressed vowels can be approximated in English with &quot;set&quot; vs. &quot;setting?&quot; said in isolation for a short tonic &quot;e,&quot; or &quot;leave&quot; vs. &quot;leaving?&quot; for a long tonic &quot;i,&quot; due to the prosody of final stressed syllables in English.

General accent rules in the standard language:

# Monosyllabic words may have only a falling tone (or no accent at all – enclitics);
# Falling tone may occur only on the first syllable of polysyllabic words;
# Accent can never occur on the last syllable of polysyllabic words.

There are no other rules for accent placement, thus the accent of every word must be learned individually; furthermore, in inflection, accent shifts are common, both in type and position (the so-called &quot;mobile paradigms&quot;). The second rule is not strictly obeyed, especially in borrowed words.

Comparative and historical linguistics offers some clues for memorising the accent position: If one compares many standard Serbo-Croatian words to e.g. cognate Russian words, the accent in the Serbo-Croatian word will be one syllable before the one in the Russian word, with the rising tone. Historically, the rising tone appeared when the place of the accent shifted to the preceding syllable (the so-called &quot;Neo-Shtokavian retraction&quot;), but the quality of this new accent was different – its melody still &quot;gravitated&quot; towards the original syllable. Most Shtokavian (Neo-Shtokavian) dialects underwent this shift, but Chakavian, Kajkavian and the Old-Shtokavian dialects did not.

Accent diacritics are not used in the ordinary orthography, but only in the linguistic or language-learning literature (e.g. dictionaries, orthography and grammar books). However, there are very few minimal pairs where an error in accent can lead to misunderstanding.

== Orthography ==

Serbo-Croatian orthography is almost entirely phonetic. Thus, most words should be spelled as they are pronounced. In practice, the writing system does not take into account allophones which occur as a result of interaction between words:
* bit ćepronounced &quot;biće&quot; (and only written separately in Bosnian and Croatian)
* od togapronounced &quot;otoga&quot; (in many vernaculars)
* iz čegapronounced &quot;iščega&quot; (in many vernaculars)

Also, there are some exceptions, mostly applied to foreign words and compounds, that favor morphological/etymological over phonetic spelling:
* postdiplomski (postgraduate)pronounced 

One systemic exception is that the consonant clusters ds and dš are not respelled as ts and tš (although &quot;d&quot; tends to be unvoiced in normal speech in such clusters):
* predstava (show)
* odšteta (damages)

Only a few words are intentionally &quot;misspelled&quot;, mostly in order to resolve ambiguity:
* šeststo (six hundred)pronounced &quot;šesto&quot; (to avoid confusion with &quot;šesto&quot; [sixth], pronounced the same)
* prstni (adj., finger)pronounced &quot;prsni&quot; (to avoid confusion with &quot;prsni&quot; [adj., chest]), differentiated by tone in some areas (where the short rising tone contrasts with the short falling tone).

=== Writing systems ===

Through history, this language has been written in a number of writing systems:
* Glagolitic alphabet, chiefly in Croatia.
* Bosančica, Arebica (mostly in Bosnia and Herzegovina).
* Cyrillic script.
* various modifications of the Latin and Greek alphabets.

The oldest texts since the 11th century are in Glagolitic, and the oldest preserved text written completely in the Latin alphabet is , from 1345. The Arabic alphabet had been used by Bosniaks; Greek writing is out of use there, and Arabic and Glagolitic persisted so far partly in religious liturgies.

The Serbian Cyrillic alphabet was revised by Vuk Stefanović Karadžić in the 19th century.

The Croatian Latin alphabet () followed suit shortly afterwards, when Ljudevit Gaj defined it as standard Latin with five extra letters that had diacritics, apparently borrowing much from Czech, but also from Polish, and inventing the unique digraphs , and . These digraphs are represented as , and respectively in the , published by the former Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts in Zagreb. The latter digraphs, however, are unused in the literary standard of the language. All in all, this makes Serbo-Croatian the only Slavic language to officially use both the Latin and Cyrillic scripts, albeit the Latin version is more commonly used.

In both cases, spelling is phonetic and spellings in the two alphabets map to each other one-to-one:



The digraphs &quot;Lj&quot;, &quot;Nj&quot; and &quot;Dž&quot; represent distinct phonemes and are considered to be single letters. In crosswords, they are put into a single square, and in sorting, lj follows l and nj follows n, except in a few words where the individual letters are pronounced separately. For instance, &quot;to outlive&quot; is composed of the prefix &quot;out, over&quot; and the verb &quot;to live&quot;. The Cyrillic alphabet avoids such ambiguity by providing a single letter for each phoneme: .

&quot;Đ&quot; used to be commonly written as &quot;Dj&quot; on typewriters, but that practice led to too many ambiguities. It is also used on car license plates. Today &quot;Dj&quot; is often used again in place of &quot;Đ&quot; on the Internet as a replacement due to the lack of installed Serbo-Croat keyboard layouts.

Serbian, Bosnian and Montenegrin standards officially use both alphabets, while Croatian uses the Latin only.

Latin script has been rising in popularity in Serbia with the advent of the digital age and Internet in Serbia, whether due to restraints (Cyrillic letters use up twice the space and therefore cost on SMS), accessibility (intention to be readable internationally, as Latin is taught in all four countries speaking the language) or ease of use. This has been perceived by Serbian government officials as a suppression and threat for existence of the national script that is Cyrillic, with the Ministry of Culture and Information of Serbia pushing for more tight language laws on top of those stipulated by the existing Constitution.

Montenegrin alphabet, adopted in 2009, provides replacements of and with an addition of acute accent on and , forming and in both Latin and Cyrillic, but they remain largely unused, even by the Parliament of Montenegro which introduced them.

An experimental alphabet called &quot; fusing Latin and Cyrillic was devised by linguistic amateur Rajko Igić in 1986 and published in his 1987 book in a quixotic attempt to mend the linguistic differences and ambiguities between the two alphabets, carefully avoiding graphemes that look alike and following the principle of &#x27;one sound, one letter&#x27; already accomplished by the Cyrillic alphabet.

Unicode has separate characters for the digraphs lj (Ǉ, ǈ, ǉ), nj (Ǌ, ǋ, ǌ) and dž (Ǆ, ǅ, ǆ).

== Dialects ==
South Slavic historically formed a dialect continuum, i.e. each dialect has some similarities with the neighboring one, and differences grow with distance. However, migrations from the 16th to 18th centuries resulting from the spread of Ottoman Empire on the Balkans have caused large-scale population displacement that broke the dialect continuum into many geographical pockets. Migrations in the 20th century, primarily caused by urbanization and wars, also contributed to the reduction of dialectal differences.

The primary dialects are named after the most common question word for &quot;what&quot;: Shtokavian uses the pronoun &quot;što&quot; or &quot;šta&quot;, Chakavian uses &quot;ča&quot; or &quot;ca&quot;, Kajkavian (&quot;kajkavski&quot;), &quot;kaj&quot; or &quot;kej&quot;. In native terminology they are referred to as &quot;nar(j)ečje&quot;, which would be equivalent of &quot;group of dialects&quot;, whereas their many subdialects are referred to as &quot;dijalekti &quot;&quot;dialects&quot; or &quot;govori &quot;&quot;speeches&quot;.

The pluricentric Serbo-Croatian standard language and all four contemporary standard variants are based on the Eastern Herzegovinian subdialect of Neo-Shtokavian. Other dialects are not taught in schools or used by the state media. The Torlakian dialect is often added to the list, though sources usually note that it is a transitional dialect between Shtokavian and the Bulgaro-Macedonian dialects.

The Serbo-Croatian dialects differ not only in the question word they are named after, but also heavily in phonology, accentuation and intonation, case endings and tense system (morphology) and basic vocabulary. In the past, Chakavian and Kajkavian dialects were spoken on a much larger territory, but have been replaced by Štokavian during the period of migrations caused by Ottoman Turkish conquest of the Balkans in the 15th and the 16th centuries. These migrations caused the koinéisation of the Shtokavian dialects, that used to form the West Shtokavian (more closer and transitional towards the neighbouring Chakavian and Kajkavian dialects) and East Shtokavian (transitional towards the Torlakian and the whole Bulgaro-Macedonian area) dialect bundles, and their subsequent spread at the expense of Chakavian and Kajkavian. As a result, Štokavian now covers an area larger than all the other dialects combined, and continues to make its progress in the enclaves where non-literary dialects are still being spoken.

The differences among the dialects can be illustrated on the example of Schleicher&#x27;s fable. Diacritic signs are used to show the difference in accents and prosody, which are often quite significant, but which are not reflected in the usual orthography.


:Neo-Štokavian Ijekavian/Ekavian

: Óvca i kònji

:Óvca koja níje ìmala vȕnē vȉd(j)ela je kònje na br(ij)égu. Jèdan je òd njīh vȗkao téška kȍla, drȕgī je nòsio vèliku vrȅću, a trȅćī je nòsio čòv(j)eka.

:Óvca rȅče kònjima: «Sȑce me bòlī glȅdajūći čòv(j)eka kako jȁšē na kònju».

:A kònji rȅkoše: «Slȕšāj, ȏvco, nȃs sȑca bòlē kada vȉdīmo da čòv(j)ek, gospòdār, rȃdī vȕnu od ovácā i prȁvī òd(j)eću zá se. I ȍndā óvca nȇmā vȉše vȕnē.

:Čȗvši tō, óvca pȍb(j)eže ȕ polje.
: Old Štokavian (Orubica, Posavina):

:Óvca i kònji

:Óvca kòjā nî ìmala vȕnē vȉdla kònje na brîgu. Jèdān od njȉjū vũkō tȇška kȍla, drȕgī nosȉjo vȅlikū vrȅću, a trȅćī nosȉjo čovȉka.

: Óvca kȃza kȍnjima: «Svȅ me bolĩ kad glȅdām kako čòvik na kònju jȁšī».

:A kònji kāzȁše: «Slȕšāj, ȏvco, nãs sȑca bolũ kad vȉdīmo da čòvik, gȁzda, prȁvī vȕnu od ovãc i prȁvī rȍbu zá se od njẽ. I ȍndā ōvcȁ néma vȉšē vȕnē.

:Kad tȏ čȕ ōvcȁ, ȕteče ȕ polje.
: Čakavian (Matulji near Rijeka):

:Ovcȁ i konjı̏

:Ovcȁ kȃ ni imȅla vȕni vȉdela je konjȉ na brȇge. Jedȃn je vȗkal tȇški vȏz, drȕgi je nosîl vȅlu vrȅt&#x27;u, a trȅt&#x27;i je nosîl čovȅka.

:Ovcȁ je reklȁ konjȇn: «Sȑce me bolĩ dok glȅdan čovȅka kako jȁše na konjȅ».

:A konjȉ su reklȉ: «Poslȕšaj, ovcȁ, nȃs sȑca bolẽ kad vȉdimo da čovȅk, gospodãr dȅla vȕnu od ovãc i dȅla rȍbu zȃ se. I ȍnda ovcȁ nĩma vȉše vȕni.

:Kad je tȏ čȕla, ovcȁ je pobȅgla va pȍje.
: Kajkavian (Marija Bistrica):

:õfca i kȍjni

:õfca tera nı̃je imȅ̩la vȕne vȉdla je kȍjne na briẽgu. Jȇn od nîh je vlẽ̩ke̩l tẽška kȍla, drȕgi je nȍsil vȅliku vrȅ̩ču, a trẽjti je nȍsil čovȅ̩ka.

:õfca je rȇkla kȍjnem: «Sȑce me bolĩ kad vîdim čovȅka kak jȃše na kȍjnu».

:A kȍjni su rȇkli: «Poslȕhni, õfca, nȃs sȑca bolĩju kad vîdime da čȍve̩k, gospodãr, dȇ̩la vȕnu ot õfci i dȇ̩la oblȅ̩ku zȃ se. I ȏnda õfca nȇma vȉše vȕne.

:Kad je to čȗla, õfca je pobȇ̩gla f pȍlje.
: English language

: The Sheep and the Horses

:[On a hill,] a sheep that had no wool saw horses, one of them pulling a heavy wagon, one carrying a big load, and one carrying a man quickly.

: The sheep said to the horses: &quot;My heart pains me, seeing a man driving horses&quot;.

: The horses said: &quot;Listen, sheep, our hearts pain us when we see this: a man, the master, makes the wool of the sheep into a warm garment for himself. And the sheep has no wool&quot;.

: Having heard this, the sheep fled into the plain.

=== Division by &quot;jat&quot; reflex ===
A series of isoglosses crosscuts the main dialects. The modern reflexes of the long Common Slavic vowel &quot;jat&quot;, usually transcribed *ě, vary by location as /i/, /e/, and /ije/ or /je/. Local varieties of the dialects are labeled Ikavian, Ekavian, and Ijekavian, respectively, depending on the reflex. The long and short &quot;jat&quot; is reflected as long or short */i/ and /e/ in Ikavian and Ekavian, but Ijekavian dialects introduce a &quot;ije&quot;/&quot;je&quot; alternation to retain a distinction.

Standard Croatian and Bosnian are based on Ijekavian, whereas Serbian uses both Ekavian and Ijekavian forms (Ijekavian for Bosnian Serbs, Ekavian for most of Serbia). Influence of standard language through state media and education has caused non-standard varieties to lose ground to the literary forms.

The jat-reflex rules are not without exception. For example, when short &quot;jat&quot; is preceded by &quot;r&quot;, in most Ijekavian dialects developed into /re/ or, occasionally, /ri/. The prefix &quot;prě-&quot; (&quot;trans-, over-&quot;) when long became &quot;pre-&quot; in eastern Ijekavian dialects but to &quot;prije-&quot; in western dialects; in Ikavian pronunciation, it also evolved into &quot;pre-&quot; or &quot;prije-&quot; due to potential ambiguity with &quot;pri-&quot; (&quot;approach, come close to&quot;). For verbs that had &quot;-ěti &quot; in their infinitive, the past participle ending &quot;-ěl&quot; evolved into &quot;-io&quot; in Ijekavian Neo-Štokavian.

The following are some examples:

== Present sociolinguistic situation ==

The nature and classification of Serbo-Croatian has been the subject of long-standing sociolinguistic debate. The question is whether Serbo-Croatian should be called a single language or a cluster of closely related languages.

=== Comparison with other pluricentric languages ===
Linguist Enisa Kafadar argues that there is only one Serbo-Croatian language with several varieties. This has made it possible to include all four varieties in new grammars of the language. Daniel Bunčić concludes that it is a pluricentric language, with four standard variants spoken in Serbia, Croatia, Montenegro, and Bosnia-Herzegovina. The mutual intelligibility between their speakers &quot;exceeds that between the standard variants of English, French, German, or Spanish&quot;. &quot;There is no doubt of the near 100% mutual intelligibility of (standard) Croatian and (standard) Serbian, as is obvious from the ability of all groups to enjoy each others&#x27; films, TV and sports broadcasts, newspapers, rock lyrics etc.&quot; Other linguists have argued that the differences between the variants of Serbo-Croatian are less significant than those between the variants of English, German, Dutch, and Hindustani.

Among pluricentric languages, Serbo-Croatian was the only one with a pluricentric standardisation within one state. The dissolution of Yugoslavia has made Serbo-Croatian even more of a typical pluricentric language, since the variants of other pluricentric languages are also spoken in different states.

As in other pluricentric languages, all Serbo-Croatian standard varieties are based on the same dialect (the Eastern Herzegovinian subdialect of the Shtokavian dialect) and consequently, according to the sociolinguistic definitions, constitute a single pluricentric language (and not, for example, several Ausbau languages). According to linguist John Bailyn, &quot;An examination of all the major &#x27;levels&#x27; of language shows that BCS is clearly a single language with a single grammatical system.&quot;

In 2017, numerous prominent writers, scientists, journalists, activists and other public figures from Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia signed the Declaration on the Common Language, which states that in Croatia, Serbia, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Montenegro a common polycentric standard language is used, consisting of several standard varieties, such as German, English or Spanish.

=== Contemporary names ===
The use of &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; as a linguistic label has been the subject of long-standing controversy. Linguist Wayles Browne calls it a &quot;term of convenience&quot; and notes the difference of opinion as to whether it comprises a single language or a cluster of languages. Ronelle Alexander refers to the national standards as three separate languages, but also notes that the reasons for this are complex and generally non-linguistic. She calls BCS (her term for Serbo-Croatian) a single language for communicative linguistic purposes, but three separate languages for symbolic non-linguistic purposes.

The current Serbian constitution of 2006 refers to the official language as &quot;Serbian&quot;, while the Montenegrin constitution of 2007 proclaimed &quot;Montenegrin&quot; as the primary official language, but also grants other languages and dialects the right of official use.
* Most Bosniaks refer to their language as &quot;Bosnian&quot;.
* Most Croats refer to their language as &quot;Croatian&quot;.
* Most Serbs refer to their language as &quot;Serbian&quot;.
* Montenegrins refer to their language either as &quot;Serbian&quot; or &quot;Montenegrin&quot;.
* Ethnic Bunjevci refer to their language as &quot;Croatian&quot;, or &quot;Bunjevac&quot;, or as a sub-dialect of Serbo-Croatian.

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has specified different Universal Decimal Classification (UDC) numbers for Croatian &quot;(UDC 862,&quot; abbreviation hr) and Serbian &quot;(UDC 861&quot;, abbreviation sr), while the cover term &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; is used to refer to the combination of original signs (&quot;UDC 861/862,&quot; abbreviation sh). Furthermore, the &quot;ISO 639&quot; standard designates the Bosnian language with the abbreviations bos and bs.

While it operated, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, which had English and French as official languages, translated court proceedings and documents into what it referred to as &quot;Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian&quot;, usually abbreviated as BCS. Translators were employed from all regions of the former Yugoslavia and all national and regional variations were accepted, regardless of the nationality of the person on trial (sometimes against a defendant&#x27;s objections), on the grounds of mutual intelligibility.

For utilitarian purposes, Serbo-Croatian is often called &quot;&quot;naš jezik&quot; (&quot;our language&quot;) or &quot;&quot;naški&quot; (sic. &quot;ourish&quot; or &quot;ourian&quot;) by native speakers. This term is frequently used to describe Serbo-Croatian by those who wish to avoid nationalistic and linguistic discussions. Native speakers traditionally describe their language as &quot;&quot;jedan ali ne jedinstven&quot;—&quot;one but not uniform&quot;.

=== Views of linguists in the former Yugoslavia ===

==== Serbian linguists ====
In 2021, the Board for Standardization of the Serbian Language issued an opinion that Serbo-Croatian is one language, and that it should be referred to as &quot;Serbian language&quot;, while &quot;Croatian&quot;, &quot;Bosnian&quot; and &quot;Montenegrin&quot; are to be considered merely local names for Serbian language. This opinion was widely criticized by Croatian government and representatives of the Croatian minority in Serbia. Serbian linguist Ranko Bugarski called this opinion &quot;absurd&quot; and &quot;legacy of the 19th century linguistics&quot;. He said that Serbo-Croatian should be considered one language in a scientific sense under the &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; label, but four different languages in an administrative sense. Legally, Croatian, Bosnian and Montenegrin are all officially recognized minority languages in Serbia. the Serbian Government also officially recognized Bunjevac language as a standard minority language in 2018 and was approved by the Serbian Ministry of Education for learning in schools.

==== Croatian linguists ====
A common opinion of the Croatian linguists is that there has never been a Serbo-Croatian language, but two different standard languages that overlapped sometime in the course of history. However, Croatian linguist Snježana Kordić has been leading an academic discussion on this issue in the Croatian journal &quot;Književna republika&quot; from 2001 to 2010. In the discussion, she shows that linguistic criteria such as mutual intelligibility, the huge overlap in the linguistic system, and the same dialect basis of the standard language are evidence that Croatian, Serbian, Bosnian and Montenegrin are four national variants of the pluricentric Serbo-Croatian language. Igor Mandić states: &quot;During the last ten years, it has been the longest, the most serious and most acrid discussion (…) in 21st-century Croatian culture&quot;. Inspired by that discussion, a monograph on language and nationalism has been published.

The view of the majority of Croatian linguists that there is no single Serbo-Croatian language but several different standard languages has been sharply criticized by German linguist Bernhard Gröschel in his monograph &quot;Serbo-Croatian Between Linguistics and Politics&quot;.

A more detailed overview, incorporating arguments from Croatian philology and contemporary linguistics, would be as follows:

: &quot;Serbo-Croatian is a language&quot;
: One still finds many references to Serbo-Croatian, and proponents of Serbo-Croatian who deny that Croats, Serbs, Bosniaks and Montenegrins speak different languages. The usual argument generally goes along the following lines:
:* Standard Croatian, Serbian, Bosnian, and Montenegrin are completely mutually intelligible. In addition, they use two alphabets that perfectly match each other (Latin and Cyrillic), thanks to Ljudevit Gaj and Vuk Karadžić. Croats exclusively use Latin script and Serbs equally use both Cyrillic and Latin. Although Cyrillic is taught in Bosnia, most Bosnians, especially non-Serbs (Bosniaks and Croats), favor Latin.
:*The list of 100 words of the basic Croatian, Serbian, Bosnian, and Montenegrin vocabulary, as set out by Morris Swadesh, shows that all 100 words are identical. According to Swadesh, 81 per cent are sufficient to be considered as a single language.
:* Typologically and structurally, these standard variants have virtually the same grammar, i.e. morphology and syntax.
:* Serbo-Croatian was standardised in the mid-19th century, and all subsequent attempts to dissolve its basic unity have not succeeded.
:* The affirmation of distinct Croatian, Serbian, Bosnian, and Montenegrin languages is &quot;politically&quot; motivated.
:* According to phonology, morphology and syntax, these standard variants are essentially one language because they are based on the same, Štokavian dialect.

: &quot;Serbo-Croatian is not a language&quot;
:* Similar arguments are made for other official standards which are drawn from identical or nearly identical material bases and which therefore constitute pluricentric languages, such as Malaysian (Malaysian Malay), and Indonesian (together called Malay), or Standard Hindi and Urdu (together called Hindustani or Hindi-Urdu). 
:** However, some argue that these arguments have flaws. Phonology, morphology, and syntax are not the only dimensions of a language: other fields (semantics, pragmatics, stylistics, lexicology, etc.) also differ slightly. However, it is the case with other pluricentric languages. A comparison is made to the closely related North Germanic languages (or dialects, if one prefers), though these are not fully mutually intelligible as the Serbo-Croatian standards are. A closer comparison may be General American and Received Pronunciation in English, which are closer to each other than the latter is to other dialects which are subsumed under &quot;British English&quot;.
:* That the standardization of the Croatian language was a long process spanning several centuries, and that it was mostly based, aside Chakavian and Kajkavian influences, on the Dubrovnik subdialect which as a specific western idiom of the Eastern Herzegovinian dialect has linguistic origin in Western Shtokavian and is significantly different to the general Eastern Herzegovinian itself, and on Western Shtokavian (alike Serbian which is based only on Eastern Shtokavian which includes Eastern Herzegovinian). Since the Croatian as recorded in old Croatian literature from Dubrovnik which would gain a prestige status (e.g. Držić and Gundulić&#x27;s works in the 16th and 17th centuries) is virtually the same as the contemporary standard Croatian (understandable archaisms apart), it is evident that the 19th-century formal standardization was just the final touch in the process that, as far as Croatian is concerned, had lasted more than three centuries. The radical break with the past, characteristic of modern Serbian (whose vernacular was likely not as similar to Croatian as it is today), is a trait completely at variance with Croatian linguistic history. In short, formal standardization processes for Croatian and Serbian had coincided chronologically (and, one could add, ideologically), but they have not produced a unified standard language. Gundulić did not write in &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot;, nor did August Šenoa. Marko Marulić and Marin Držić wrote in a sophisticated idiom of Croatian some 300–350 years before &quot;Serbo-Croatian ideology&quot; appeared. Marulić explicitly called his Čakavian-written &quot;Judita&quot; as &quot;u uerish haruacchi slosena&quot; (&quot;arranged in Croatian stanzas&quot;) in 1501, and the Štokavian grammar and dictionary of Bartol Kašić written in 1604 unambiguously identifies the ethnonyms &quot;Slavic&quot; and &quot;Illyrian&quot; with &quot;Croatian&quot;.

The topic of language for writers from Dalmatia and Republic of Dubrovnik prior to the 19th century made a distinction only between speakers of Italian or Slavic, since those were the two main groups that inhabited Dalmatian city-states at that time. Whether someone spoke Croatian or Serbian was not an important distinction then, as the two languages were not distinguished by most speakers. However, most intellectuals and writers from Dalmatia who used the Štokavian dialect and practiced the Catholic faith saw themselves as part of a Croatian nation as far back as the mid-16th to 17th centuries, some 300 years before Serbo-Croatian ideology appeared. Their loyalty was first and foremost to Catholic Christendom, but when they professed an ethnic identity, they referred to themselves as &quot;Slovin&quot; and &quot;Illyrian&quot; (a sort of forerunner of Catholic baroque pan-Slavism) and Croatthese 30-odd writers over the span of c. 350 years always saw themselves as Croats first and never as part of a Serbian nation. In the pre-national era, Catholic religious orientation did not necessarily equate with Croat ethnic identity in Dalmatia, but Serbian pretensional interpretations emerged anyway, although as Vatroslav Jagić pointed out in 1864:

Ivan Kukuljević Sakcinski as a proponent of the Illyrian movement before Jagić in 1854 also explained:

The opinion of Jagić and Sakcinski continued to be opposed by the Serbs, like modern linguists Milan Rešetar and Pavle Ivić, claiming that the name &quot;ilirski&quot; (Illyrian) was a common name for all Slavic vernaculars in Dalmatian cities, and that there exist written documents from Dubrovnik also calling it as Serbian (&quot;lingua serviana&quot;). However, such claims are criticized and rejected because are unfounded fabrications, the &quot;lingua serviana&quot; was a reference to the Cyrillic script (not language, as was the case with the Glagolitic script called as &quot;lingua croatica&quot;), and the citizens of Ragusa never called their language as Serbian, but did as Croatian.

=== Political connotations ===
In nationalist linguistics exist conflicting views on shared or related linguistical heritage. Those nationalists among the Croats conflictingly claim either that they speak an entirely separate language from Serbs and Bosniaks or that these two peoples have, due to the longer literary and lexicographic tradition of popular language among Croats, somehow &quot;borrowed&quot; their standard languages from them (e.g. Serbian literature until early-19th century was primarily written in Serbian recension of Church Slavonic and Slavonic-Serbian). There&#x27;s a common debate about positive or negative influence of the Croatian Vukovians, and perception that Vuk Karadžić invented the Greater Serbian linguistic ideology which is culturally appropriating Croatian language/dialects and literary tradition (although a great part of the criticism should be directed to the early Slavists instead). Bosniak nationalists claim that both Croats and Serbs have &quot;appropriated&quot; the Bosnian language, since Ljudevit Gaj and Vuk Karadžić preferred the Neo-Štokavian Ijekavian dialect, widely spoken in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the basis for language standardization. Whereas the nationalists among the Serbs claim either that any divergence in the standard language is artificial, and that the whole Shtokavian dialect is Serbian (and hence the Croatian, Bosnian and Montenegrin standard languages are variations of the Serbian language), hence the Ragusan literature and authors (like Ivan Gundulić) is part of Serbian or joint Serbian and Croatian cultural heritage, and only the Chakavian and Kajkavian dialects are Croatian, in more extreme formulations accusing the Croats to have &quot;taken&quot; or &quot;stolen&quot; their language from the Serbs.

Proponents of unity among Southern Slavs claim that there is a single language with normal dialectal variations. The term &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; (or synonyms) is not officially used in any of the successor countries of former Yugoslavia.

In Serbia, the Serbian standard has an official status countrywide, while both Serbian and Croatian are official in the province of Vojvodina. A large Bosniak minority is present in the southwest region of Sandžak, but the &quot;official recognition&quot; of Bosnian is moot. Bosnian is an optional course in first and second grade of the elementary school, while it is also in official use in the municipality of Novi Pazar. However, its nomenclature is controversial, as there is incentive that it is referred to as &quot;Bosniak&quot; (&quot;bošnjački&quot;) rather than &quot;Bosnian&quot; (&quot;bosanski&quot;) (see Bosnian language#Controversy and recognition for details).

Croatian is the official language of Croatia, while Serbian is also official in municipalities with significant Serb population.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, all three standard languages are recorded as official. Confrontations have on occasion been absurd. The academic Muhamed Filipović, in an interview to Slovenian television, told of a local court in a Croatian district requesting a paid translator to translate from Bosnian to Croatian before the trial could proceed.

The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia referred to the language as &quot;Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian&quot;, usually abbreviated as BCS. Translators were employed from all regions of the former Yugoslavia and all national and regional variations were accepted, regardless of the nationality of the person on trial (sometimes against a defendant&#x27;s objections), on the grounds of mutual intelligibility.

=== ISO classification ===
Since the year 2000, ISO 639 classification recognizes &quot;Serbo-Croatian&quot; only as a &#x27;macrolanguage&#x27;, having removed its original codes from ISO 639-1 and ISO 639-2 standards. That left the ISO 639-3 &#x27;macrolanguage&#x27; (a book-keeping device in the ISO 639-3 standard to keep track of which ISO 639-3 codes correspond with which ISO 639-2 codes) stranded without a corresponding ISO 639-2 code.

== Words of Serbo-Croatian origin ==

*&quot;Cravat&quot;, from French &quot;cravate&quot; &quot;Croat&quot;, by analogy with Flemish &quot;Krawaat&quot; and German &quot;Krabate&quot;, from Serbo-Croatian &quot;Hrvat&quot;, as cravats were characteristic of Croatian dress
*&quot;Polje&quot;, from Serbo-Croatian &quot;polje&quot; &quot;field&quot;
*&quot;Slivovitz&quot;, from German &quot;Slibowitz&quot;, from Bulgarian &quot;slivovitza&quot; or Serbo-Croatian &quot;šljivovica&quot; &quot;plum brandy&quot;, from Old Slavic *sliva &quot;plum&quot; (cognate with English sloe)
*&quot;Tamburitza&quot;, Serbo-Croatian diminutive of &quot;tambura&quot;, from Turkish, from Persian &quot;ṭambūr&quot; &quot;tanbur&quot;
*&quot;Uvala&quot;, from Serbo-Croatian &quot;uvala&quot; &quot;hollow&quot;
*&quot;Vampire&quot;, from Serbo-Croatian &quot;vampir&quot; via German &quot;Vampir&quot; or French &quot;Vampire&quot;

== Sample text ==
Article 1 of the &quot;Universal Declaration of Human Rights&quot; in Serbo-Croatian, written in the Latin alphabet:
Article 1 of the &quot;Universal Declaration of Human Rights&quot; in Serbo-Croatian, written in the Cyrillic script:
Article 1 of the &quot;Universal Declaration of Human Rights&quot; in English:
== See also ==

* Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian
* Serbo-Croatian kinship

==Notes==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* Contents.
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==

* Banac, Ivo: &quot;Main Trends in the Croatian Language Question&quot;. Yale University Press, 1984.
* Bunčić, D., 2016. Serbo-Croatian/Serbian: Cyrillic and Latin. Biscriptality: A Sociolinguistic Typology, pp. 231–246.
* Franolić, Branko: &quot;A Historical Survey of Literary Croatian&quot;. Nouvelles éditions Latines, Paris, 1984.
* Franolić, B., 1983. The development of literary Croatian and Serbian. Buske Verlag.
* 
* 
* Ivić, Pavle: &quot;Die serbokroatischen Dialekte&quot;. the Hague, 1958.
* .
* Magner, Thomas F.: &quot;Zagreb Kajkavian dialect&quot;. Pennsylvania State University, 1966.
* .
* Murray Despalatović, Elinor: &quot;Ljudevit Gaj and the Illyrian Movement&quot;. Columbia University Press, 1975.
* Spalatin, C., 1966. Serbo-Croatian or Serbian and Croatian?: Considerations on the Croatian Declaration and Serbian Proposal of March 1967. Journal of Croatian Studies, 7, pp. 3–13.
* Scando-Slavica, Volume 68, 2022 - Issue 1. 2022. Scando-Slavica, Volume 68, 2022 - Issue 1 
* Vergunova, Ludmila: &quot;The geographic distribution of Proto-Slavic dialectisms and the genesis of the South Slavic languages.&quot; 1996. (UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN LIBRARY)
* Vukotić, Vuk: &quot;On the Discursive Construction of Dialectal Varieties: The Case of Central South Slavic ‘Supradialects’.&quot; Scando-Slavica, Volume 68, 2022 - Issue 1
* Zekovic, Sreten &amp; Cimeša, Boro: &quot;Elementa montenegrina&quot;, Chrestomatia 1/90. CIP, Zagreb 1991.
== External links ==

* &quot;Ethnologue&quot;the 15th edition of &quot;Ethnologue&quot; (released 2005) shows changes in this area:
** Previous &quot;Ethnologue&quot; entry for Serbo-Croatian
** &quot;Ethnologue&quot; 15th Edition report on western South Slavic languages
* Serbian and Croatian alphabets at Omniglot.
* &quot;Serbian, Croatian, Bosnian, Or Montenegrin? Or Just &#x27;Our Language&#x27;?&quot;, Radio Free Europe, February 21, 2009</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="0" end="14" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="33" end="44" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="50" end="69" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croat-Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="71" end="74" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="SCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="77" end="101" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Bosnian-Croatian-Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="103" end="106" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="BCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="113" end="149" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Bosnian-Croatian-Montenegrin-Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="151" end="155" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="BCMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q146665" start="164" end="185" title="South Slavic language" label="South Slavic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="214" end="220" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="222" end="229" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="231" end="253" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="259" end="269" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q250858" start="279" end="300" title="pluricentric language" label="pluricentric language"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="311" end="332" title="mutually intelligible" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="333" end="351" title="Standard language" label="standard varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="360" end="367" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="369" end="377" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="379" end="386" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="392" end="403" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="451" end="468" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="546" end="560" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="656" end="666" title="Shtokavian" label="Shtokavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630831" start="694" end="706" title="supradialect" label="supradialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q337565" start="788" end="797" title="Chakavian" label="Chakavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q838165" start="802" end="811" title="Kajkavian" label="Kajkavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="813" end="821" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="823" end="829" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="835" end="840" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658937" start="1265" end="1273" title="Illyrian (South Slavic)" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="1297" end="1323" title="linguistic standardization" label="linguistic standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280978" start="1391" end="1416" title="Vienna Literary Agreement" label="Vienna Literary Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487593" start="1672" end="1693" title="Eastern Herzegovinian dialect" label="Eastern Herzegovinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="1745" end="1758" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="1777" end="1787" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="1829" end="1850" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="1981" end="2021" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="2027" end="2048" title="breakup of Yugoslavia" label="breakup of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2086" end="2130" title="Language secessionism#In Serbo-Croatian" label="social conceptions of the language separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141634" start="2323" end="2329" title="codification (linguistics)" label="codify"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452986" start="2427" end="2436" title="Serbo-Croatian phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398813" start="2504" end="2511" title="Serbo-Croatian grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870419" start="2525" end="2538" title="History of the Slavic languages" label="Common Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="2553" end="2563" title="inflection" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="2582" end="2598" title="grammatical case" label="grammatical case"/>
<link wikidata="Q371427" start="2650" end="2662" title="imperfective aspect" label="imperfective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424306" start="2666" end="2683" title="perfective aspect" label="perfective aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q661936" start="2745" end="2762" title="pro-drop language" label="pro-drop language"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="2789" end="2808" title="subject–verb–object" label="subject–verb–object"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="2878" end="2883" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q754989" start="2885" end="2910" title="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet" label="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403931" start="2912" end="2929" title="Montenegrin alphabet" label="Montenegrin Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="2934" end="2942" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="2944" end="2960" title="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Serbian Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403931" start="2962" end="2982" title="Montenegrin Cyrillic" label="Montenegrin Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="2993" end="3004" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033526" start="3015" end="3023" title="Phonemic orthography" label="phonemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33185" start="3408" end="3416" title="Bunjevac dialect" label="Bunjevac"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="3586" end="3597" title="South Slavs" label="South Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="3603" end="3613" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q35976" start="4112" end="4129" title="Illyrian language" label="Illyrian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658937" start="4141" end="4205" title="Illyrian (South Slavic)" label="the word &amp;quot;Illyrian&amp;quot; was used on a few occasions before"/>
<link wikidata="Q352617" start="4240" end="4252" title="Ljudevit Gaj" label="Ljudevit Gaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437113" start="4298" end="4318" title="Ljudevit Vukotinović" label="Ljudevit Vukotinović"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="4416" end="4427" title="Jacob Grimm" label="Jacob Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q84444" start="4477" end="4491" title="Jernej Kopitar" label="Jernej Kopitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="4543" end="4549" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4638" end="4645" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="4650" end="4665" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="5035" end="5057" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18446" start="5209" end="5225" title="Dalibor Brozović" label="Dalibor Brozović"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="5894" end="5951" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083" start="6002" end="6013" title="9th century" label="9th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="6015" end="6034" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="6070" end="6077" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="6106" end="6112" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="6338" end="6348" title="Glagolitic" label="Glagolitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="6712" end="6717" title="Latin script" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="6719" end="6729" title="Glagolitic script" label="Glagolitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q442244" start="6731" end="6745" title="Early Cyrillic" label="Early Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q894350" start="6751" end="6767" title="Bosnian Cyrillic" label="Bosnian Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="6874" end="6879" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33251" start="6956" end="6971" title="Church Slavonic" label="Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167009" start="7068" end="7080" title="Humac tablet" label="Humac tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205082" start="7168" end="7181" title="Plomin tablet" label="Plomin tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912801" start="7236" end="7248" title="Valun tablet" label="Valun tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037171" start="7318" end="7348" title="Inscription of Župa Dubrovačka" label="Inscription of Župa Dubrovačka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330496" start="7401" end="7413" title="Baška tablet" label="Baška tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4170102" start="7514" end="7543" title="Church of St. Lucy, Jurandvor" label="Church of St. Lucy, Jurandvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059" start="7570" end="7573" title="Krk" label="Krk"/>
<link wikidata="Q337565" start="7611" end="7620" title="Chakavian dialect" label="Chakavian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7637" end="7655" title="Angular Glagolitic letters" label="angular Glagolitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261016" start="7668" end="7688" title="Charter of Ban Kulin" label="Charter of Ban Kulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q389903" start="7709" end="7718" title="Ban Kulin" label="Ban Kulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q833590" start="7993" end="7999" title="Missal" label="Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263744" start="8159" end="8179" title="Hrvoje&amp;#x27;s Missal" label="Hrvoje&amp;#x27;s Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507302" start="8283" end="8310" title="Missale Romanum Glagolitice" label="Missale Romanum Glagolitice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759584" start="8487" end="8500" title="Vinodol Codex" label="Vinodol Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="8559" end="8577" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q833590" start="8668" end="8674" title="missal" label="missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q225672" start="8677" end="8687" title="breviary" label="breviaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q225672" start="8689" end="8701" title="Breviary" label="prayer books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917131" start="8796" end="8824" title="Vatican Croatian Prayer Book" label="Vatican Croatian Prayer Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="8992" end="9004" title="phonology" label="phonological"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="9006" end="9019" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q178433" start="9025" end="9032" title="lexicology" label="lexical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="9198" end="9207" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="9208" end="9214" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q240911" start="9534" end="9541" title="miracle play" label="miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q929047" start="9546" end="9559" title="morality play" label="morality play"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026528" start="9780" end="9801" title="Muhamed Hevaji Uskufi" label="Muhamed Hevaji Uskufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393238" start="9825" end="9832" title="Arebica" label="Arebica"/>
<link wikidata="Q202815" start="9942" end="9965" title="Vuk Stefanović Karadžić" label="Vuk Stefanović Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="10027" end="10044" title="Illyrian movement" label="Illyrian movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q352617" start="10056" end="10068" title="Ljudevit Gaj" label="Ljudevit Gaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q342145" start="10073" end="10085" title="Đuro Daničić" label="Đuro Daničić"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="10137" end="10147" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="10223" end="10248" title="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q754989" start="10287" end="10310" title="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin Alphabet" label="Croatian Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280978" start="10461" end="10486" title="Vienna Literary Agreement" label="Vienna Literary Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q371576" start="11098" end="11112" title="Croatian Parliament" label="Croatian Sabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057076" start="11288" end="11302" title="Triune Kingdom" label="Triune Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="11308" end="11323" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645587" start="11513" end="11566" title="Austro-Hungarian occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Austro-Hungarian occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q371464" start="11686" end="11696" title="Benjamin von Kállay" label="von Kállay"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="11808" end="11850" title="Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="12121" end="12142" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="12268" end="12296" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187186" start="12467" end="12493" title="Croatian linguistic purism" label="Croatian linguistic purism"/>
<link wikidata="Q311464" start="12682" end="12687" title="AVNOJ" label="AVNOJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q641691" start="12953" end="12962" title="League of Communists of Yugoslavia" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="12973" end="12990" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="second Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q617343" start="13174" end="13187" title="Matica srpska" label="Matica srpska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289247" start="13192" end="13207" title="Matica hrvatska" label="Matica hrvatska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289409" start="13219" end="13237" title="Novi Sad Agreement" label="Novi Sad Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13252" end="13268" title="The Novi Sad Agreement#The text of the Novi Sad Agreement" label="first conclusion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13466" end="13478" title="The Novi Sad Agreement#The text of the Novi Sad Agreement" label="equal status"/>
<link wikidata="Q490988" start="14921" end="14989" title="Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Literary Language" label="Declaration on the Status and Name of the Croatian Literary Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="15800" end="15827" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="17304" end="17346" title="Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="17620" end="17641" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="17755" end="17795" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q646035" start="18684" end="18723" title="Socialist Autonomous Province of Kosovo" label="Socialist Autonomous Province of Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q269864" start="18923" end="18953" title="Socialist Republic of Serbia" label="(Socialist) Republic of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274468" start="19185" end="19219" title="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="19613" end="19643" title="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="19661" end="19682" title="Serbia and Montenegro" label="Serbia and Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q29018604" start="20001" end="20035" title="Declaration on the Common Language" label="Declaration on the Common Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436031" start="20138" end="20155" title="Yugosphere" label="former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="20643" end="20649" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="20651" end="20666" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="20674" end="20681" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="20779" end="20788" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="20824" end="20830" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631779" start="20872" end="20888" title="Kosovo Serbs" label="Serbian minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242155" start="20951" end="20968" title="Kosovar Albanians" label="Kosovar Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q960850" start="21226" end="21239" title="Molise Croats" label="Molise Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="21313" end="21321" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="21326" end="21336" title="Hungarians" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="21350" end="21365" title="second language" label="second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="21423" end="21431" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="21923" end="21938" title="second language" label="second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15863" start="21947" end="21957" title="Slovenians" label="Slovenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="21962" end="21973" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q318917" start="22466" end="22484" title="inflected language" label="inflected language"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="22518" end="22523" title="Grammatical case" label="cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="22528" end="22532" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="22538" end="22547" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q131105" start="22550" end="22560" title="Nominative case" label="nominative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="22562" end="22570" title="Genitive case" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q145599" start="22572" end="22578" title="Dative case" label="dative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="22580" end="22590" title="Accusative case" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q185077" start="22592" end="22600" title="Vocative case" label="vocative"/>
<link wikidata="Q202142" start="22602" end="22610" title="Locative case" label="locative"/>
<link wikidata="Q192997" start="22616" end="22628" title="Instrumental case" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="22669" end="22681" title="Proto-Slavic language" label="Proto-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="22751" end="22761" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="23286" end="23294" title="singular (grammatical number)" label="singular"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="23308" end="23314" title="plural" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23445" end="23458" title="Serbo-Croatian phonology#Fleeting a" label="&amp;quot;a&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="24133" end="24140" title="Grammatical gender" label="genders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="24249" end="24256" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q337565" start="24275" end="24291" title="Chakavian dialect" label="Čakavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="24313" end="24320" title="Grammatical number" label="numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="24393" end="24399" title="paucal" label="paucal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="24469" end="24476" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="25015" end="25021" title="Grammatical tense" label="tenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994301" start="25033" end="25037" title="past tense" label="past"/>
<link wikidata="Q192613" start="25039" end="25046" title="present tense" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="25048" end="25054" title="future tense" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q216497" start="25070" end="25076" title="aorist" label="aorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q108524486" start="25078" end="25087" title="imperfect" label="imperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q623742" start="25093" end="25103" title="pluperfect" label="pluperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="25115" end="25120" title="Grammatical mood" label="moods"/>
<link wikidata="Q11997264" start="25122" end="25132" title="indicative" label="indicative"/>
<link wikidata="Q22716" start="25134" end="25144" title="Imperative mood" label="imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q625581" start="25150" end="25161" title="conditional mood" label="conditional"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="25428" end="25435" title="Grammatical aspect" label="aspects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424306" start="25437" end="25447" title="Perfective aspect" label="perfective"/>
<link wikidata="Q371427" start="25451" end="25463" title="Imperfective aspect" label="imperfective"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="25566" end="25572" title="Prefix (linguistics)" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="26178" end="26183" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q932126" start="26254" end="26265" title="monophthong" label="monophthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="26543" end="26552" title="consonant" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582" start="26627" end="26636" title="affricate" label="affricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q231978" start="26641" end="26648" title="Palatal consonant" label="palatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q494510" start="26676" end="26681" title="voice (phonetics)" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="26685" end="26693" title="phoneme" label="phonemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q320433" start="26699" end="26709" title="aspiration (phonetics)" label="aspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q957073" start="26722" end="26739" title="consonant cluster" label="consonant cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q51606" start="26945" end="26956" title="approximant" label="approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q230052" start="27344" end="27358" title="tongue-twister" label="tongue-twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="27456" end="27461" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="27463" end="27469" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="27475" end="27485" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="27637" end="27642" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="27677" end="27684" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441804" start="27736" end="27748" title="pitch accent" label="pitch accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="27757" end="27761" title="Tone (linguistics)" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="27809" end="27832" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="27842" end="27851" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="27853" end="27866" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="27872" end="27879" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182402" start="28050" end="28072" title="Tone contour" label="rising or falling tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="28382" end="28389" title="prosody (linguistics)" label="prosody"/>
<link wikidata="Q213458" start="28552" end="28560" title="enclitic" label="enclitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703347" start="28917" end="28932" title="mobile paradigm" label="mobile paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="29165" end="29172" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="29914" end="29926" title="minimal pair" label="minimal pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="30177" end="30186" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="31402" end="31421" title="Glagolitic alphabet" label="Glagolitic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="31434" end="31441" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q894350" start="31445" end="31454" title="Bosančica" label="Bosančica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393238" start="31456" end="31463" title="Arebica" label="Arebica"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="31475" end="31497" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="31502" end="31517" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="31550" end="31555" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="31560" end="31565" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="31625" end="31635" title="Glagolitic" label="Glagolitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="31761" end="31769" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q202815" start="31926" end="31949" title="Vuk Stefanović Karadžić" label="Vuk Stefanović Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q352617" start="32042" end="32054" title="Ljudevit Gaj" label="Ljudevit Gaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="32078" end="32083" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="32117" end="32126" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="32160" end="32165" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="32181" end="32187" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="32214" end="32222" title="digraph (orthography)" label="digraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264085" start="32317" end="32354" title="Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts" label="Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="32358" end="32364" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="32724" end="32732" title="digraph (orthography)" label="digraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="32802" end="32809" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303697" start="32909" end="32916" title="sorting" label="sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q22706" start="33386" end="33399" title="license plate" label="license plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362708" start="33695" end="33715" title="Romanization of Serbian" label="rising in popularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="33749" end="33760" title="digital age" label="digital age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099390" start="33765" end="33783" title="Internet in Serbia" label="Internet in Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="33874" end="33877" title="SMS" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16664624" start="34165" end="34200" title="Ministry of Culture and Information (Serbia)" label="Ministry of Culture and Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287641" start="34291" end="34303" title="Constitution of Serbia" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403931" start="34306" end="34326" title="Montenegrin alphabet" label="Montenegrin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216042" start="34394" end="34406" title="acute accent" label="acute accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579497" start="34500" end="34524" title="Parliament of Montenegro" label="Parliament of Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286268" start="34648" end="34658" title="Rajko Igić" label="Rajko Igić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545446" start="34817" end="34825" title="grapheme" label="grapheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q202064" start="34884" end="34889" title="Phone (phonetics)" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="34895" end="34901" title="Letter (alphabet)" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="34956" end="34963" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35101" end="35118" title="Dialect continuum#South Slavic continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="35303" end="35317" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="35498" end="35510" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="35671" end="35681" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q337565" start="35735" end="35744" title="Chakavian dialect" label="Chakavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q838165" start="35784" end="35817" title="Kajkavian dialect" label="Kajkavian (&amp;quot;kajkavski&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36217" end="36226" title="Abstand and ausbau languages#Distance between ausbau languages" label="are based"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487593" start="36234" end="36255" title="Eastern Herzegovinian dialect" label="Eastern Herzegovinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078803" start="36359" end="36376" title="Torlakian dialect" label="Torlakian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q648016" start="37618" end="37641" title="Schleicher&amp;#x27;s fable" label="Schleicher&amp;#x27;s fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514103" start="38290" end="38297" title="Orubica" label="Orubica"/>
<link wikidata="Q975995" start="38299" end="38307" title="Posavina" label="Posavina"/>
<link wikidata="Q518871" start="38722" end="38729" title="Matulji" label="Matulji"/>
<link wikidata="Q921910" start="39179" end="39194" title="Marija Bistrica" label="Marija Bistrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q201884" start="40218" end="40226" title="isogloss" label="isogloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="40290" end="40303" title="Proto-Slavic language" label="Common Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q331368" start="40316" end="40319" title="yat" label="jat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11051" start="42981" end="42991" title="Hindustani language" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487593" start="43408" end="43440" title="Eastern Herzegovinian dialect" label="Eastern Herzegovinian subdialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="43448" end="43458" title="Shtokavian" label="Shtokavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27902" start="43605" end="43621" title="Ausbau languages" label="Ausbau languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q29018604" start="43977" end="44011" title="Declaration on the Common Language" label="Declaration on the Common Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q250858" start="44094" end="44123" title="Polycentric language" label="polycentric standard language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975944" start="44359" end="44372" title="Wayles Browne" label="Wayles Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="45144" end="45152" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="45186" end="45193" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="45208" end="45214" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="45248" end="45256" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="45271" end="45276" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="45310" end="45317" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19109" start="45327" end="45339" title="Montenegrins (ethnic group)" label="Montenegrins"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="45380" end="45387" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="45403" end="45414" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q591964" start="45431" end="45439" title="Bunjevci" label="Bunjevci"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="45473" end="45481" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33185" start="45498" end="45506" title="Bunjevac dialect" label="Bunjevac"/>
<link wikidata="Q243350" start="45635" end="45667" title="Universal Decimal Classification" label="Universal Decimal Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q33547" start="45955" end="45962" title="ISO 639" label="ISO 639"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="46069" end="46126" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254109" start="47147" end="47196" title="Board for Standardization of the Serbian Language" label="Board for Standardization of the Serbian Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278383" start="47495" end="47514" title="Croatian government" label="Croatian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290108" start="47542" end="47569" title="Croats of Serbia" label="Croatian minority in Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12048878" start="47588" end="47602" title="Ranko Bugarski" label="Ranko Bugarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285499" start="47990" end="48008" title="Serbian Government" label="Serbian Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q33185" start="48036" end="48053" title="Bunjevac speech" label="Bunjevac language"/>
<link wikidata="Q16664620" start="48118" end="48147" title="Ministry of Education (Serbia)" label="Serbian Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q442048" start="48417" end="48432" title="Snježana Kordić" label="Snježana Kordić"/>
<link wikidata="Q442048" start="49072" end="49109" title="Croatian language and nationalism" label="monograph on language and nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q825140" start="49314" end="49331" title="Bernhard Gröschel" label="Bernhard Gröschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q754989" start="49972" end="49977" title="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="49982" end="49990" title="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165235" start="50161" end="50169" title="Bosnians" label="Bosnians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064662" start="50186" end="50191" title="Serbs of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="50193" end="50201" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431089" start="50206" end="50212" title="Croats of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="50766" end="50774" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="50776" end="50783" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="50785" end="50792" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="50798" end="50809" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="50874" end="50883" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="50885" end="50895" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="50900" end="50906" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="50997" end="51014" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Štokavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q15065" start="51252" end="51261" title="Malaysian language" label="Malaysian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="51285" end="51295" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="51313" end="51318" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="51324" end="51338" title="Standard Hindi" label="Standard Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="51343" end="51347" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11051" start="51365" end="51389" title="Hindustani language" label="Hindustani or Hindi-Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q178433" start="51576" end="51586" title="lexicology" label="lexicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="51719" end="51743" title="North Germanic languages" label="North Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308526" start="51888" end="51904" title="General American" label="General American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985" start="51909" end="51931" title="Received Pronunciation" label="Received Pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="52043" end="52058" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626118" start="52245" end="52265" title="Dubrovnik subdialect" label="Dubrovnik subdialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487593" start="52307" end="52328" title="Eastern Herzegovinian" label="Eastern Herzegovinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13221620" start="52617" end="52636" title="Croatian literature" label="Croatian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="52642" end="52651" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q380525" start="52693" end="52698" title="Marin Držić" label="Držić"/>
<link wikidata="Q317588" start="52703" end="52711" title="Ivan Gundulić" label="Gundulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q347672" start="53487" end="53499" title="August Šenoa" label="August Šenoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q336571" start="53501" end="53514" title="Marko Marulić" label="Marko Marulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q380525" start="53519" end="53530" title="Marin Držić" label="Marin Držić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686088" start="53699" end="53705" title="Judita" label="Judita"/>
<link wikidata="Q809479" start="53850" end="53862" title="Bartol Kašić" label="Bartol Kašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="54029" end="54037" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="54042" end="54063" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Republic of Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="54134" end="54141" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658937" start="54145" end="54151" title="Illyrian (South Slavic)" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182267" start="54872" end="54883" title="pan-Slavism" label="pan-Slavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="54889" end="54894" title="Croats" label="Croat"/>
<link wikidata="Q560132" start="55214" end="55229" title="Vatroslav Jagić" label="Vatroslav Jagić"/>
<link wikidata="Q697783" start="55252" end="55277" title="Ivan Kukuljević Sakcinski" label="Ivan Kukuljević Sakcinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q680821" start="55300" end="55317" title="Illyrian movement" label="Illyrian movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q877241" start="55451" end="55464" title="Milan Rešetar" label="Milan Rešetar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280227" start="55469" end="55479" title="Pavle Ivić" label="Pavle Ivić"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="55909" end="55926" title="Glagolitic script" label="Glagolitic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586126" start="56506" end="56524" title="Serbian literature" label="Serbian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q33251" start="56596" end="56611" title="Church Slavonic" label="Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639124" start="56616" end="56632" title="Slavonic-Serbian" label="Slavonic-Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834056" start="56708" end="56726" title="Croatian Vukovians" label="Croatian Vukovians"/>
<link wikidata="Q202815" start="56748" end="56760" title="Vuk Karadžić" label="Vuk Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q746607" start="56774" end="56788" title="Greater Serbia" label="Greater Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="57073" end="57089" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="57191" end="57213" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57540" end="57558" title="Republic of Ragusa#Ragusan literature" label="Ragusan literature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57577" end="57590" title="Ivan Gundulić#Ethnicity" label="Ivan Gundulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="58224" end="58233" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q579132" start="58298" end="58305" title="Sandžak" label="Sandžak"/>
<link wikidata="Q202453" start="58506" end="58516" title="Novi Pazar" label="Novi Pazar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58714" end="58758" title="Bosnian language#Controversy and recognition" label="Bosnian language#Controversy and recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327480" start="59044" end="59061" title="Muhamed Filipović" label="Muhamed Filipović"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="59253" end="59310" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33547" start="59724" end="59731" title="ISO 639" label="ISO 639"/>
<link wikidata="Q152559" start="59801" end="59814" title="macrolanguage" label="macrolanguage"/>
<link wikidata="Q715516" start="59861" end="59870" title="ISO 639-1" label="ISO 639-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q721667" start="59875" end="59884" title="ISO 639-2" label="ISO 639-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q845956" start="59910" end="59919" title="ISO 639-3" label="ISO 639-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245189" start="60168" end="60174" title="Cravat (early)" label="Cravat"/>
<link wikidata="Q946033" start="60404" end="60409" title="Polje" label="Polje"/>
<link wikidata="Q368610" start="60480" end="60489" title="Slivovitz" label="Slivovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q129018" start="60698" end="60702" title="sloe" label="sloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423158" start="60711" end="60721" title="Tamburitza" label="Tamburitza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424319" start="60831" end="60837" title="tanbur" label="tanbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039805" start="60851" end="60856" title="Uvala (landform)" label="Uvala"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="60928" end="60935" title="Vampire" label="Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="61084" end="61121" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="61162" end="61176" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="61279" end="61294" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q221190" start="61393" end="61458" title="Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian" label="Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452985" start="61461" end="61483" title="Serbo-Croatian kinship" label="Serbo-Croatian kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="63099" end="63109" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="63481" end="63498" title="Radio Free Europe" label="Radio Free Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27737" wikidata="Q204989" url="?curid=27737" title="Saint Kitts">
<text>Saint Kitts, officially Saint Christopher, is an island in the West Indies. The west side of the island borders the Caribbean Sea, and the eastern coast faces the Atlantic Ocean. Saint Kitts and the neighbouring island of Nevis constitute one country: the Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis. Saint Kitts and Nevis are separated by a shallow channel known as &quot;The Narrows&quot;.

Saint Kitts became home to the first Caribbean British and French colonies in the mid-1620s. Along with the island of Nevis, Saint Kitts was a member of the British West Indies until gaining independence on 19 September 1983.

The island is one of the Leeward Islands in the Lesser Antilles. It is situated about southeast of Miami, Florida, US. The land area of Saint Kitts is about , being approximately long and on average about across.

Saint Kitts has a population of about 40,000, the majority of whom are of African descent. The primary language is English, with a literacy rate of approximately 98%. Residents call themselves &quot;Kittitians&quot;. The island is named after the Christian Saint Christopher; &quot;Kit&quot; was formerly a common diminutive of &quot;Christopher&quot;.

Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, is the largest fortress ever built in the Eastern Caribbean. The island of Saint Kitts is home to the Warner Park Cricket Stadium, which was used to host 2007 Cricket World Cup matches. This made Saint Kitts and Nevis the smallest nation to ever host a World Cup event. Saint Kitts is also home to several institutions of higher education, including Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine, Windsor University School of Medicine, and the University of Medicine and Health Sciences.

==Geography==

The capital of the two-island nation, and also its largest port, is the town of Basseterre on Saint Kitts. There is a modern facility for handling large cruise ships there. A ring road goes around the perimeter of the island with smaller roads branching off it; the interior of the island is too steep for habitation.

Saint Kitts is away from Sint Eustatius to the north and from Nevis to the south. St. Kitts has three distinct groups of volcanic peaks: the North West or Mount Misery Range; the Middle or Verchilds Range and the South East or Olivees Range. The highest peak is Mount Liamuiga, formerly Mount Misery, a dormant volcano high.

===Geology===
The youngest volcanic centre is Mt. Liamuiga, in diameter and rising to an elevation of . Its last eruption was 1,620 years ago, corresponding with the Steel Dust series of pyroclastic deposits on the western flank. The Mansion Series of pyroclastic deposits and andesite with basalt layers occur on the northern flank, along with mudflows. This volcano has a crater wide and deep, plus two distinct parasitic domes consisting primarily of andesite, Brimstone Hill and Sandy Point Hill which is coalesced with Farm Flat. Brimstone Hill is noted for having limestone on its flanks, which was dragged upward with the formation of the dome 44,400 years ago. Mt. Liamuiga partially overlays the Middle Range to the southeast. This Middle Range is another stratovolcano 976 m in height with a small summit crater containing a lake. Next in line is the South East Range, 1 Myr in age, consisting of four peaks. Ottley&#x27;s dome and Monkey Hill dome are on the flanks, while the older volcanoes represented by Canada Hills, and Conaree Hills lie past the airport and Basseterre on the southeast flank. The Salt Dome Peninsula contains the oldest volcanic deposits, 2.3–2.77 Myr in age, consisting of at least nine Pelean domes rising up to in height, which includes Williams Hill and St. Anthony&#x27;s Peak.

==History==


During the last ice age, the sea level was up to lower and St. Kitts and Nevis were one island along with Saba and Sint Eustatius (also known as Statia).

St. Kitts was originally settled by pre-agricultural, pre-ceramic &quot;Archaic people&quot;, who migrated south down the archipelago from Florida. In a few hundred years they disappeared, to be replaced by the ceramic-using and agriculturalist Saladoid people around 100 BC, who migrated to St. Kitts north up the archipelago from the banks of the Orinoco River in Venezuela. Around 800 AD, they were replaced by the Igneri people, members of the Arawak group.

Around 1300 AD, the Kalinago, or Carib people arrived on the islands. These agriculturalists quickly dispersed the Igneri, and forced them northwards to the Greater Antilles. They named Saint Kitts &quot;Liamuiga&quot; meaning &quot;fertile island&quot;, and would likely have expanded further north if not for the arrival of Europeans.

A Spanish expedition under Christopher Columbus arrived and claimed the island for Spain in 1493.

The first English colony was established in 1623, followed by a French colony in 1625. The English and French briefly united to pre-empt a Kalinago ambush. They massacred the local Kalinago, and then partitioned the island, with the English colonists in the middle and the French on either end. In 1629, a Spanish force sent to clear the islands of foreign settlement seized St. Kitts. The English settlement was rebuilt following the 1630 peace between England and Spain.

The island alternated repeatedly between English (then British) and French control during the 17th and 18th centuries, as one power took the whole island, only to have it switch hands due to treaties or military action. Actions included the Siege of Brimstone Hill and the Battle of Saint Kitts. Parts of the island were heavily fortified, as exemplified by the UNESCO World Heritage Site at Brimstone Hill and the now-crumbling Fort Charles.

Since 1783, Saint Kitts has been affiliated with the Kingdom of Great Britain, which became the United Kingdom.

===Slavery===
The island originally produced tobacco, but farmers switched to sugarcane in 1640 because of stiff competition from the colony of Virginia. The labour-intensive cultivation of sugar cane was the reason for the large-scale importation of African slaves. The importation began almost immediately upon the arrival of Europeans to the region even though sugarcane wasn&#x27;t cultivated for another two hundred years on the island, leading some to discredit the earliest claims of imported African labour.

The purchasing of enslaved Africans was outlawed in the British Empire by an Act of Parliament in 1807. Slavery was abolished by an Act of Parliament which became law on 1 August 1834. This emancipation was followed by four years of forced enslavement, put in place to protect the &quot;planters&quot; (plantation owners) from losing their free labour force.

1 August is now celebrated as a public holiday and is called Emancipation Day. In 1883, Saint Kitts, Nevis, and Anguilla were all linked under one presidency, located on Saint Kitts, to the dismay of the Nevisians and Anguillans. Anguilla left this arrangement in 1971, after an armed raid on Saint Kitts in 1967.

Sugar production continued to dominate the local economy until 2005, when, after 365 years of having a monoculture, the government closed the sugar industry. This decision was made because of huge losses and European Union plans to greatly cut sugar prices.

==Government==

For purposes of governing, the island is divided into nine parishes:
* Christ Church Nichola Town
* Saint Anne Sandy Point
* Saint George Basseterre
* Saint John Capisterre
* Saint Mary Cayon
* Saint Paul Capisterre
* Saint Peter Basseterre
* Saint Thomas Middle Island
* Trinity Palmetto Point

==Economy==
Saint Kitts &amp; Nevis uses the Eastern Caribbean dollar, which maintains a fixed exchange rate of 2.7-to-one with the United States dollar. The US dollar is almost as widely accepted on the island as the Eastern Caribbean dollar.

For hundreds of years, Saint Kitts operated as a sugar monoculture, but due to decreasing profitability, the government closed the industry in 2005. Tourism is a major and growing source of income to the island, although the number and density of resorts is less than on many other Caribbean islands. Transportation, non-sugar agriculture, manufacturing and construction are the other growing sectors of the economy.

Saint Kitts is dependent on tourism to drive its economy. Tourism has been increasing since 1978. In 2009, there were 587,479 arrivals to Saint Kitts compared to 379,473 in 2007, a growth of just under 40% in a two-year period. As tourism grows, the demand for vacation property increases in conjunction.

Saint Kitts &amp; Nevis also acquires foreign direct investment from their unique citizenship-by-investment programme, outlined in their Citizenship Act of 1984. Interested parties can acquire citizenship if they pass the government&#x27;s strict background checks and make an investment into an approved real estate development. Purchasers who pass government due diligence and make a minimum investment of US$400,000, into qualifying government-approved real estate, are entitled to apply for citizenship of the Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis. Many projects are approved under the citizenship-by-investment programme.

The country hosts an annual St. Kitts Music Festival.

==Transportation==
Robert L. Bradshaw International Airport serves Saint Kitts. 

The Basseterre Ferry Terminal facilitates travel between Saint Kitts and sister island Nevis.

The narrow-gauge (30 inches) St. Kitts Scenic Railway circles the island and offers passenger service from its headquarters near the airport, although the service is geared more for tourists than as day-to-day transportation for residents. Built between 1912 and 1926 to transport sugar cane from farms to the sugar factory in Basseterre, since 2003 the railway has offered a 3.5-hour, 30-mile circle tour of the island on specially designed double-decker open-air coaches, with 12 miles of the trip being by bus.

==Notable natives and residents==

Saint Kitts is or was the residence of:

* Sir Kennedy Alphonse Simmonds, first Prime Minister of Saint Kitts and Nevis. Dr. Simmonds instigated Porte Zante and the South East Peninsula Road on Frigate Bay in Saint Kitts which is named in his honour: Dr. Kennedy Simmonds Highway.
*Joan Armatrading, a British singer-songwriter.
* George Astaphan, born in St. Kitts, was a physician who gave steroids to the sprinter Ben Johnson.
* Imruh Bakari, born in St. Kitts, film maker and writer.
* Hutchens C. Bishop, pre-civil-rights-era clergyman who led the 1917 Negro Silent Protest Parade in New York, U.S.
* Robert Bradshaw, first Premier of Saint Kitts and Nevis.
* Archibald Burt, born in Saint Kitts, first Chief Justice of Western Australia.
* Burt Caesar, born in Saint Kitts, actor, broadcaster and director.
* Pogus Caesar, British artist, author, television producer and director.
* Linda Carty, possessing both United States and British citizenship and on death row in Texas.
* Kim Collins, a former world champion sprinter (2003).
* Felix Dexter, an actor, comedian, and writer.
* Pavel Durov, co-founder of VK and Telegram.
* Nikolai Durov, co-founder of VK and Telegram.
* Bertil Fox, born in Saint Kitts, became a professional bodybuilder and was convicted of murder.
* James Grainger, Scottish doctor and planter, who published the georgic poem &quot;The Sugar Cane&quot; in 1764 and also wrote about diseases among the slaves.
* Keith Gumbs, an international football player who currently plays as a striker for the Liga Indonesia side Sriwijaya FC.
* Sir James Harford, Administrator of Saint Christopher from 1940 to 1946.
* Atiba Harris, a Kittitian footballer who currently plays for FC Dallas, United States, in Major League Soccer.
* Virgil Hodge, a sprinter specialising in the 200 metres event.
* Konris Maynard, a Calypso musician and politician.
* Major-General Sir Robert Nickle, governor of Saint Christopher from 1830.
* Caryl Phillips, born in St. Kitts, novelist, playwright and essayist.
* Tiandra Ponteen, a sprinter specialising in the 200 metres and the 400 metres.
* Marcus Rashford, professional footballer for Manchester United and England. Born in Manchester of Kittitian descent.
* Hercules Robinson, 1st Baron Rosmead, governor of Saint Christopher from 1855 to 1859.
* Sir Cuthbert Sebastian, Governor-General of St Kitts-Nevis from 1 January 1996 to 31 December 2012, his retirement.
* Joseph Matthew Sebastian, a Caribbean trade union leader and politician.
* Shirley Skerrit-Andrew, former High Commissioner to Canada.
* Julius Soubise, a freed Afro-Caribbean slave who became a well-known fop in the UK during the 1760s and 1770s.
* Neil Strauss, an American author and journalist.
* Roger Ver, businessman who renounced his U.S. citizenship.
* Nathaniel Wells, born in St Kitts, British planter, politician and the first black High Sheriff in Britain
* Desai Williams, a former sprinter who won a bronze medal in the 1984 Olympics.
* Ned Young, born in Saint Kitts, was a sailor, mutineer from the HMS &quot;Bounty&quot; incident and co-founder of the mutineers&#x27; Pitcairn Island settlement.
* The Hon Dr Timothy Harris, Prime Minister of Saint Kitts and Nevis (2015–2022).
* The Hon Dr. Terrance Drew, Prime Minister of Saint Kitts and Nevis (2022–present).
* Angela Griffin, a British actress and television presenter. Born in Leeds of Kittitian descent.
* Mikyle Louis, first Kittitian to play Test cricket for the West Indies.

==Gallery ==
==See also==
* Chief Justice of the Leeward Islands
* Culture of St. Kitts and Nevis
* Map of Saint Kitts
* Nevis, St. Kitts&#x27; sister island

==References==
==External links==
* Official Government of Saint Kitts &amp; Nevis website
* Saint Kitts &amp; Nevis News
* Saint Kitts &amp; Nevis Media Portal
* Mustrad.org.uk: &quot;Christmas Sports in Saint Kitts&quot;
* St. Kitts Tourism Authority Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q204989" start="0" end="11" title="Saint Kitts" label="Saint Kitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q204989" start="24" end="41" title="Saint Kitts" label="Saint Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="49" end="55" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="63" end="74" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="116" end="125" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="163" end="177" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q207794" start="222" end="227" title="Nevis" label="Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="270" end="291" title="Saint Kitts and Nevis" label="Saint Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495992" start="365" end="376" title="The Narrows (Saint Kitts and Nevis)" label="The Narrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="542" end="561" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="637" end="652" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="660" end="675" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="711" end="716" title="Miami, Florida" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="718" end="725" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="900" end="915" title="African diaspora" label="African descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="941" end="948" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q193507" start="1083" end="1100" title="Saint Christopher" label="Saint Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q200521" start="1180" end="1217" title="Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park" label="Brimstone Hill Fortress National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1221" end="1247" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640640" start="1351" end="1378" title="Warner Park Sporting Complex" label="Warner Park Cricket Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127675" start="1403" end="1425" title="2007 Cricket World Cup" label="2007 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936368" start="1502" end="1517" title="World cup competition" label="World Cup event"/>
<link wikidata="Q25040058" start="1599" end="1644" title="Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine" label="Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024721" start="1646" end="1683" title="Windsor University School of Medicine" label="Windsor University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q890460" start="1693" end="1735" title="University of Medicine and Health Sciences" label="University of Medicine and Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q41295" start="1833" end="1843" title="Basseterre" label="Basseterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="1906" end="1917" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180" start="2097" end="2111" title="Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q207794" start="2134" end="2139" title="Nevis" label="Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="2193" end="2201" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269774" start="2444" end="2456" title="Mount Liamuiga" label="Mt. Liamuiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q512121" start="2585" end="2596" title="Pyroclastic rock" label="pyroclastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q175768" start="2743" end="2750" title="mudflow" label="mudflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q181908" start="2852" end="2860" title="andesite" label="andesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2968" end="2977" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="3163" end="3176" title="stratovolcano" label="stratovolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="3279" end="3282" title="Myr" label="Myr"/>
<link wikidata="Q534282" start="3331" end="3335" title="lava dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703194" start="3621" end="3633" title="Pelean eruption" label="Pelean domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587066" start="3691" end="3714" title="St. Anthony&amp;#x27;s Peak" label="St. Anthony&amp;#x27;s Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="3742" end="3754" title="Last Glacial Period" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q25528" start="3837" end="3841" title="Saba (island)" label="Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q26180" start="3846" end="3860" title="Sint Eustatius" label="Sint Eustatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="4097" end="4104" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781198" start="4115" end="4130" title="agriculturalist" label="agriculturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405634" start="4131" end="4139" title="Saladoid" label="Saladoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="4235" end="4248" title="Orinoco River" label="Orinoco River"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="4252" end="4261" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q735922" start="4304" end="4310" title="Igneri" label="Igneri"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="4334" end="4340" title="Arawak peoples" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="4369" end="4377" title="Kalinago" label="Kalinago"/>
<link wikidata="Q128011" start="4506" end="4522" title="Greater Antilles" label="Greater Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="4689" end="4696" title="Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="4714" end="4734" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4796" end="4803" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="4804" end="4810" title="colony" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4850" end="4856" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q6352828" start="4947" end="4975" title="Kalinago Genocide of 1626" label="massacred the local Kalinago"/>
<link wikidata="Q168442" start="5081" end="5088" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1625-1630)" label="In 1629"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="5092" end="5105" title="New Spain" label="Spanish force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872428" start="5154" end="5160" title="Battle of St. Kitts (1629)" label="seized"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023851" start="5221" end="5231" title="Treaty of Madrid (1630)" label="1630 peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="5301" end="5308" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="5315" end="5322" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q69461" start="5328" end="5334" title="Early modern France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q11794849" start="5497" end="5524" title="Siege_of_Brimstone_Hill" label="the Siege of Brimstone Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431266" start="5529" end="5554" title="Battle_of_Saint_Kitts" label="the Battle of Saint Kitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="5622" end="5648" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q200521" start="5652" end="5666" title="Brimstone Hill" label="Brimstone Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470917" start="5689" end="5701" title="Fort Charles (Saint Kitts)" label="Fort Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="5757" end="5781" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="5800" end="5814" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="5862" end="5869" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="5895" end="5904" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="5961" end="5969" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="6068" end="6075" title="Ethnic groups of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="6076" end="6081" title="slave" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="6338" end="6369" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="purchasing of enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="6390" end="6404" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="6438" end="6445" title="Slavery" label="Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368985" start="6755" end="6771" title="Emancipation Day" label="Emancipation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q207794" start="6795" end="6800" title="Nevis" label="Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228" start="6806" end="6814" title="Anguilla" label="Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="7112" end="7123" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q227870" start="7151" end="7165" title="sugar industry" label="sugar industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7217" end="7231" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976993" start="7343" end="7349" title="Parish (administrative division)" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q176164" start="7355" end="7381" title="Christ Church Nichola Town" label="Christ Church Nichola Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473654" start="7384" end="7406" title="Saint Anne Sandy Point" label="Saint Anne Sandy Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540744" start="7409" end="7432" title="Saint George Basseterre" label="Saint George Basseterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q668498" start="7435" end="7456" title="Saint John Capisterre" label="Saint John Capisterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538034" start="7459" end="7475" title="Saint Mary Cayon" label="Saint Mary Cayon"/>
<link wikidata="Q952735" start="7478" end="7499" title="Saint Paul Capisterre Parish" label="Saint Paul Capisterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725609" start="7502" end="7524" title="Saint Peter Basseterre" label="Saint Peter Basseterre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752101" start="7527" end="7553" title="Saint Thomas Middle Island" label="Saint Thomas Middle Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q376738" start="7556" end="7578" title="Trinity Palmetto Point" label="Trinity Palmetto Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q26365" start="7625" end="7649" title="Eastern Caribbean dollar" label="Eastern Caribbean dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="7712" end="7732" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="7874" end="7879" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="7880" end="7891" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="7974" end="7981" title="Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="8126" end="8140" title="Transportation" label="Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589440" start="9203" end="9227" title="St. Kitts Music Festival" label="St. Kitts Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933813" start="9249" end="9289" title="Robert L. Bradshaw International Airport" label="Robert L. Bradshaw International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="9411" end="9423" title="Narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19887863" start="9436" end="9460" title="St. Kitts Scenic Railway" label="St. Kitts Scenic Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q953225" start="10000" end="10029" title="Kennedy Simmonds" label="Sir Kennedy Alphonse Simmonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q263194" start="10239" end="10255" title="Joan Armatrading" label="Joan Armatrading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536473" start="10288" end="10303" title="George Astaphan" label="George Astaphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q52614" start="10374" end="10385" title="Ben Johnson (Canadian sprinter)" label="Ben Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921376" start="10389" end="10401" title="Imruh Bakari" label="Imruh Bakari"/>
<link wikidata="Q34123934" start="10447" end="10465" title="Hutchens Chews Bishop" label="Hutchens C. Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514632" start="10515" end="10542" title="Silent Parade" label="Negro Silent Protest Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q984064" start="10563" end="10578" title="Robert Bradshaw (politician)" label="Robert Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786233" start="10622" end="10636" title="Archibald Burt" label="Archibald Burt"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277223" start="10703" end="10714" title="Burt Caesar" label="Burt Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207725" start="10772" end="10784" title="Pogus Caesar" label="Pogus Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551443" start="10846" end="10857" title="Linda Carty" label="Linda Carty"/>
<link wikidata="Q311298" start="10942" end="10953" title="Kim Collins" label="Kim Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442188" start="10998" end="11010" title="Felix Dexter" label="Felix Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q149067" start="11046" end="11057" title="Pavel Durov" label="Pavel Durov"/>
<link wikidata="Q116933" start="11073" end="11075" title="VK (service)" label="VK"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="11080" end="11088" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7035781" start="11092" end="11105" title="Nikolai Durov" label="Nikolai Durov"/>
<link wikidata="Q116933" start="11121" end="11123" title="VK (service)" label="VK"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="11128" end="11136" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895682" start="11140" end="11150" title="Bertil Fox" label="Bertil Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134850" start="11238" end="11252" title="James Grainger" label="James Grainger"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417668" start="11320" end="11334" title="The Sugar Cane" label="The Sugar Cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192784" start="11399" end="11410" title="Keith Gumbs" label="Keith Gumbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9010689" start="11526" end="11539" title="James Harford" label="James Harford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307109" start="11597" end="11609" title="Atiba Harris" label="Atiba Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379889" start="11710" end="11722" title="Virgil Hodge" label="Virgil Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429812" start="11775" end="11789" title="Konris Maynard" label="Konris Maynard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348037" start="11828" end="11859" title="Robert Nickle (army)" label="Major-General Sir Robert Nickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940723" start="11904" end="11918" title="Caryl Phillips" label="Caryl Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800168" start="11976" end="11991" title="Tiandra Ponteen" label="Tiandra Ponteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22951255" start="12057" end="12072" title="Marcus Rashford" label="Marcus Rashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="12102" end="12119" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q336750" start="12176" end="12212" title="Hercules Robinson, 1st Baron Rosmead" label="Hercules Robinson, 1st Baron Rosmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q374910" start="12269" end="12287" title="Cuthbert Sebastian" label="Cuthbert Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285393" start="12383" end="12407" title="Joseph Matthew Sebastian" label="Joseph Matthew Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q110567140" start="12458" end="12480" title="Shirley Skerrit-Andrew" label="Shirley Skerrit-Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189874" start="12520" end="12534" title="Julius Soubise" label="Julius Soubise"/>
<link wikidata="Q519984" start="12633" end="12645" title="Neil Strauss" label="Neil Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600251" start="12684" end="12693" title="Roger Ver" label="Roger Ver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969914" start="12745" end="12760" title="Nathaniel Wells" label="Nathaniel Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q485844" start="12854" end="12868" title="Desai Williams" label="Desai Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834119" start="12935" end="12944" title="Ned Young" label="Ned Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q749811" start="12999" end="13030" title="Mutiny on the Bounty" label="HMS &amp;quot;Bounty&amp;quot; incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779748" start="13069" end="13084" title="Pitcairn Island" label="Pitcairn Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529064" start="13099" end="13124" title="Timothy Harris" label="The Hon Dr Timothy Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q113443525" start="13181" end="13206" title="Terrance Drew" label="The Hon Dr. Terrance Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762451" start="13266" end="13280" title="Angela Griffin" label="Angela Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28600215" start="13364" end="13376" title="Mikyle Louis" label="Mikyle Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="13423" end="13434" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22091852" start="13465" end="13501" title="Chief Justice of the Leeward Islands" label="Chief Justice of the Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193628" start="13504" end="13534" title="Culture of St. Kitts and Nevis" label="Culture of St. Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13537" end="13555" title=":File:Sc-map.png" label="Map of Saint Kitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q207794" start="13558" end="13563" title="Nevis" label="Nevis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27739" wikidata="Q131375" url="?curid=27739" title="Shogi">
<text>, also known as Japanese chess, is a strategy board game for two players. It is one of the most popular board games in Japan and is in the same family of games as Western chess, chaturanga, xiangqi, Indian chess, and janggi. &quot;Shōgi&quot; means general&#x27;s (&quot;shō&quot; ) board game (&quot;gi&quot; ).

Shogi was the earliest historical chess-related game to allow captured pieces to be returned to the board by the capturing player. This &quot;drop rule&quot; is speculated to have been invented in the 15th century and possibly connected to the practice of 15th-century mercenaries switching loyalties when captured instead of being killed.

The earliest predecessor of the game, chaturanga, originated in India in the 6th century, and the game was likely transmitted to Japan via China or Korea sometime after the Nara period. Shogi in its present form was played as early as the 16th century, while a direct ancestor without the drop rule was recorded from 1210 in a historical document &quot;&quot;, which is an edited copy of &quot;Shōchūreki&quot; and &quot;Kaichūreki&quot; from the late Heian period (c. 1120).

== Equipment ==
Two players face each other across a board composed of rectangles in a grid of 9 &quot;ranks&quot; (rows, ) by 9 &quot;files&quot; (columns, ) yielding an 81-square board. In Japanese they are called and , but in English they are conventionally referred to as Black and White, with Black being the first player.
The board is nearly always rectangular, and the rectangles are undifferentiated by marking or color. Pairs of dots mark the players&#x27; promotion zones.

Each player has a set of 20 flat wedge-shaped pentagonal pieces of slightly different sizes. Except for the kings, opposing pieces are undifferentiated by marking or color. Pieces face &quot;forward&quot; by having the pointed side of each piece oriented toward the opponent&#x27;s side – this shows who controls the piece during play. The pieces from largest (most important) to smallest (least important) are:

* 1 king
* 1 rook
* 1 bishop
* 2 gold generals
* 2 silver generals
* 2 knights
* 2 lances
* 9 pawns

Several of these names were chosen to correspond to their rough equivalents in international chess, and not as literal translations of the Japanese names.

Each piece has its name written on its surface in the form of two &quot;kanji&quot; (Chinese characters used as syllabograms or as logograms to record texts in Old Japanese), usually in black ink. On the reverse side of each piece, other than the king and gold general, are one or two other characters, in amateur sets often in a different color (usually red); this side is turned face up during play to indicate that the piece has been promoted.

In some cases, the backsides of the King pieces (the narrow side which faces back toward the player during normal play) will display kanji containing additional information about the piece manufacturers.

Following is a table of the pieces with their Japanese representations and English equivalents. The abbreviations are used for game notation and often when referring to the pieces in speech in Japanese.


English speakers sometimes refer to promoted bishops as &quot;horses&quot; and promoted rooks as &quot;dragons&quot;, after their Japanese names, and generally use the Japanese term &quot;tokin&quot; for promoted pawns. Silver generals and gold generals are commonly referred to simply as &quot;silvers&quot; and &quot;golds&quot;, respectively.

The characters inscribed on the reverse sides of the pieces to indicate promotion may be in red ink, and are usually cursive. The characters on the backs of the pieces that promote to gold generals are cursive variants of &#x27;gold&#x27;, becoming more cursive (more abbreviated) as the value of the original piece decreases. These cursive forms have these equivalents in print: for promoted silver, for promoted knight, for promoted lance, and for promoted pawn (tokin). Another typographic convention has abbreviated versions of the original values, with a reduced number of strokes: for a promoted knight , for a promoted lance , and the as above for a promoted silver, but (a hiragana symbol for the syllable &quot;to&quot;) for &quot;tokin&quot;.

The suggestion that the Japanese characters have deterred Western players from learning shogi has led to &quot;Westernized&quot; or &quot;international&quot; pieces which use iconic symbols instead of characters. Most players soon learn to recognize the characters, however, partially because the traditional pieces are already iconic by size, with more powerful pieces being larger. As a result, Westernized pieces have never become popular. Bilingual pieces with both Japanese characters and English captions have been developed as have pieces with animal cartoons.

== Setup and gameplay ==
Each player sets up friendly pieces facing forward (toward the opponent).
* In the rank nearest the player:
** The king is placed in the center file;
** The two gold generals are placed in files adjacent to the king;
** The two silver generals are placed adjacent to each gold general;
** The two knights are placed adjacent to each silver general;
** The two lances are placed in the corners, adjacent to each knight.

:That is, the first rank is
:Or
* In the second rank, each player places:
** The bishop in the same file as the left knight;
** The rook in the same file as the right knight.
* In the third rank, the nine pawns are placed one per file.

A &quot;furigoma&quot; 振り駒 &#x27;piece toss&#x27; is used to decide who moves first. One of the players tosses five pawns. If the number of tokins (promoted pawns, と) facing up is higher than unpromoted pawns (歩), then the player who tossed the pawns plays &quot;gote&quot; 後手 &#x27;white&#x27; (that is, getting the second move).

After the piece toss &quot;furigoma,&quot; the game proceeds. If multiple games are played, then players alternate turns for who goes first in subsequent games. (The terms &quot;Black&quot; and &quot;White&quot; are used to differentiate sides although there is no difference in the color of the pieces.) For each turn, a player may either move a piece that is currently on the board (and potentially promote it, capture an opposing piece, or both) or else drop a piece that has been previously captured onto a square of the board. These options are explained below.

== Rules ==
=== Objective ===

The usual goal of a game is for one player to checkmate the other player&#x27;s king, winning the game.

=== Movement ===
Most shogi pieces can move only to an adjacent square. A few may move across the board, and one jumps over intervening pieces.

The lance, bishop, and rook are &quot;ranging&quot; pieces: They can move any number of squares along a straight line limited only by intervening pieces and the edge of the board. If an opposing piece intervenes, it may be captured by removing it from the board and replacing it with the moving piece. If a friendly piece intervenes, the moving piece must stop short of that square; if the friendly piece is adjacent, the moving piece may not move in that direction at all.


A king (玉/王) moves one square in any direction, orthogonal or diagonal.

A rook (飛) moves any number of squares in an orthogonal direction.

A bishop (角) moves any number of squares in a diagonal direction. Because they cannot move orthogonally, the players&#x27; unpromoted bishops can reach only half the squares of the board, unless one is captured and then dropped.

A gold general (金) moves one square orthogonally, or one square diagonally forward, giving it six possible destinations. It cannot move diagonally backwards.

A silver general (銀) moves one square diagonally, or one square straight forward, giving it five possible destinations. Because an unpromoted silver can retreat more easily than a promoted one, it is common to leave a silver unpromoted at the far side of the board. (See Promotion).

A knight (桂) jumps at an angle intermediate to orthogonal and diagonal, amounting to one square straight forward plus one square diagonally forward, in a single move. Thus the knight has two possible forward destinations. Unlike international chess knights, shogi knights cannot move to the sides or in a backwards direction. The knight is the only piece that ignores intervening pieces on the way to its destination. It is not blocked from moving if the square in front of it is occupied, but neither can it capture a piece on that square. It is often useful to leave a knight unpromoted at the far side of the board. A knight &quot;must&quot; promote, however, if it reaches either of the two furthest ranks. (See Promotion.)

A lance (香) moves just like the rook except it cannot move backwards or to the sides. It is often useful to leave a lance unpromoted at the far side of the board. A lance &quot;must&quot; promote, however, if it reaches the furthest rank. (See Promotion.)

A pawn (歩) moves one square straight forward. It cannot retreat. Unlike international chess pawns, shogi pawns capture the same way as they move. A pawn &quot;must&quot; promote if it arrives at the furthest rank. (See Promotion.) In practice, however, a pawn is usually promoted whenever possible. There are two restrictions on where a pawn may be dropped. (See Drops.)

All pieces but the knight move either horizontally, vertically, or diagonally. These directions cannot be combined in a single move; one direction must be chosen.

Every piece blocks the movement of all other non-jumping pieces through the square it occupies.

If a piece occupies a legal destination for an opposing piece, it may be &quot;captured&quot; by removing it from the board and replacing it with the opposing piece. The capturing piece may not continue beyond that square on that turn. Shogi pieces capture the same as they move.

Normally, when moving a piece, a player snaps it to the board with the ends of the fingers of the same hand. This makes a sudden sound effect, bringing the piece to the attention of the opponent. This is also true for capturing and dropping pieces. On a traditional &quot;shogi-ban&quot;, the pitch of the snap is deeper, delivering a subtler effect.
=== Promotion ===
A player&#x27;s &quot;promotion zone&quot; consists of the furthest one-third of the board – the three ranks occupied by the opponent&#x27;s pieces at setup. The zone is typically delineated on shogi boards by two inscribed dots. When a piece is moved, if part of the piece&#x27;s path lies within the promotion zone (that is, if the piece moves into, out of, or wholly within the zone; but &quot;not&quot; if it is dropped into the zone – see Drops), then the player has the option to &quot;promote&quot; the piece at the end of the turn. Promotion is indicated by turning the piece over after it moves, revealing the character of the promoted piece.

Promoting a piece is usually not compulsory; however, if a pawn or lance is moved to the furthest rank, or a knight is moved to either of the two furthest ranks, that piece &quot;must&quot; promote (otherwise, it would have no legal move on subsequent turns). A silver general is never required to promote, and it is often advantageous to keep a silver general unpromoted (it is easier, for example, to extract an unpromoted silver from behind enemy lines: a promoted silver, with only one line of retreat, can be easily blocked.) Rooks, bishops and pawns are almost always promoted, as these pieces do not lose any of their powers upon promotion.

Promoting a piece changes the way it moves. The various pieces promote as follows:
* A silver general, knight, lance, or pawn has its normal power of movement replaced by that of a gold general.
* A rook or bishop keeps its original movement and gains the power to move one square in any direction (like a king). For a promoted bishop, this means it is able to reach any square on the board, given enough moves.
* A king or a gold general does not promote; nor can a piece that is already promoted.

When captured, a piece loses its promoted status. Otherwise promotion is permanent.

A promoted rook (literally dragon king (); shortended forms: and ) moves as a rook and as a king. It is commonly referred to as dragon.



A promoted bishop (literally dragon horse (); shortened form ) moves as a bishop and as a king. It is commonly referred to as horse.



A promoted silver (成銀 &quot;narigin&quot;; alternate forms: 全, cursive 金), a promoted knight (成桂 &quot;narikei&quot;; alternate forms: 圭, 今, cursive 金), a promoted lance (成香 &quot;narikyō&quot;; alternate forms: 杏, 仝, cursive 金) and a promoted pawn (と金 &quot;tokin&quot;; alternate forms: と, 个) all move the same way as a gold general. The promoted pawn is often called by its Japanese name tokin, even by non-Japanese players.







=== Drops ===

Captured pieces are retained in hand and can be brought back into play under the capturing player&#x27;s control. The Japanese term for &quot;piece(s) in hand&quot; is either 持ち駒 &quot;mochigoma&quot; or 手駒 &quot;tegoma.&quot; On any turn, instead of moving a piece on the board, a player may select a piece in hand and place it – unpromoted side up and facing the opposing side – on any empty square. The piece is then one of that player&#x27;s active pieces on the board and can be moved accordingly. This is called &quot;dropping&quot; the piece, or simply, a &quot;drop&quot;. A drop counts as a complete move.

A drop cannot capture a piece, nor does dropping within the promotion zone result in immediate promotion. Capture and/or promotion may occur normally, however, on subsequent moves of the piece.

Restrictions. There are three restrictions on dropping pieces; the last two of these apply only to pawns.

# Piece with No Moves ( &quot;ikidokorononaikoma&quot;): Pawns, lances and knights may not be dropped onto the last (9th) rank, and knights may not be dropped onto the penultimate (8th) rank; this is because such dropped pieces would have no legal moves on subsequent turns (as they can only move in the forward direction).
# Two Pawns ( &quot;nifu&quot;): A pawn may not be dropped onto a file (column) containing another unpromoted pawn of the same player (promoted pawns do not count). 
# Drop Pawn Mate ( &quot;uchifuzume&quot;): A pawn may not be dropped to give an immediate checkmate. (This rule only applies specifically to pawns, drops &quot;and&quot; checkmates − to clarify, a player &quot;may&quot; deliver an immediate checkmate by dropping a non-pawn piece, a player &quot;may&quot; checkmate a king with a pawn that is already on the board, and a pawn &quot;may&quot; be dropped to give an immediate check as long as it does not also result in checkmate.)

A corollary of the second restriction is that a player with an unpromoted pawn on every file is unable to drop a pawn anywhere. For this reason, it is common to sacrifice a pawn in order to gain flexibility for drops.

Captured pieces are typically kept on a wooden stand (駒台 &quot;komadai)&quot; which is traditionally placed so that its bottom-left corner aligns with the bottom-right corner of the board from the perspective of each player. It is not permissible to hide pieces from full view.

It is common for players to swap bishops, which oppose each other across the board, early in the game. This leaves each player with a bishop in hand to be dropped later. The ability for drops in shogi gives the game tactical richness and complexity. The fact that no piece ever goes entirely out of play accounts for the rarity of draws.

=== Check ===
When a player&#x27;s move threatens to capture the opposing king on the next turn, the move is said to &quot;give check&quot; to the king and the king is said to be &quot;in check.&quot; If a player&#x27;s king is in check, that player&#x27;s responding move must remove the check. Ways to remove a check include moving the king away from the threat, capturing the threatening piece, or placing another interposing piece between the king and the threatening piece.

To announce check in Japanese, one can say &quot;ōte&quot; (), however, this is an influence of international chess and is not required, even as a courtesy. It may be common to announce &quot;ōte&quot; in beginner matches or for local rules to dictate that you have to announce it. Announcing a check vocally is unheard of in competitive tournaments.

=== End of the game ===

The usual way for shogi games to end is for one side to checkmate the other side&#x27;s king, after which the losing player will be given the opportunity to admit defeat. Unlike western chess or xiangqi, checkmate is almost always the result in shogi since pieces never retire from play, which gives the players a sufficient number of pieces to deliver checkmate. That said, there are three other possible ways for a game to end: &quot;repetition&quot; ( &quot;sennichite&quot;), &quot;impasse&quot; ( &quot;jishōgi&quot;), and an &quot;illegal move&quot; ( &quot;hansokute&quot;). The first two – repetition and impasse – are particularly uncommon. Illegal moves are also uncommon in professional games although this may not be true with amateur players (especially beginners).

Unlike western chess, there is no tradition of offering a mutual draw by agreement.

==== Checkmate ====
If the king is in check and there is no possible move which could protect the king, the move is said to &quot;checkmate&quot; (&quot;tsumi&quot; 詰み) the king. Checkmate effectively means that the opponent wins the game as the player would have no remaining legal moves. (See also: tsumeshogi, hisshi.)
==== Resignation ====

The losing player will usually resign when the situation is thought to be hopeless and may declare the resignation at any time during their turn. Although a player may resign just after they are checkmated, playing up to the checkmate point rarely occurs in practice as players normally resign as soon as a loss is deemed inevitable. Similarly, if a player were to lose in an Entering King situation (see section below) by having less than 24 points (or by any of the other Impasse rules used by amateurs), then the player will usually resign before that point.

In traditional tournament play, a formal resignation is required – that is, a checkmate is not a sufficient condition for winning. The resignation is indicated by bowing and/or saying &#x27;I lost&#x27; (負けました &quot;makemashita&quot;) and/or placing the right hand over the piece stands. Placing the hand over the piece stand is a vestige of an older practice of gently dropping one&#x27;s pieces in hand over the board in order to indicate resignation. In western practice, a handshake may be used.

==== Illegal move ====
In professional and serious (tournament) amateur games, a player who makes an illegal move loses immediately. The loss stands even if play continued and the move was discovered later in game. However, if neither the opponent nor a third party points out the illegal move and the opponent later resigned, the resignation stands as the result.

Illegal moves include:

* Violating the &quot;Two Pawns&quot; (&quot;nifu&quot;) restriction (See §Drops above.)
* Violating the &quot;Drop Pawn Mate&quot; (&quot;uchifuzume&quot;) restriction
* Dropping or moving a piece to position where it cannot move (such as dropping a knight to an opponent&#x27;s last two ranks, etc.)
* Dropping a piece with its promoted value
* Playing out of turn, e.g. making more than one move or white moving first instead of moving second.
* Making perpetual check four times (cf. &quot;sennichite&quot;)
* Leaving one&#x27;s king in check, or moving one&#x27;s king into check
* Moving a piece contrary to how its movements are defined (for example, moving a gold like a silver, or moving an unpromoted bishop off its legal diagonal)

In friendly amateur games, this rule is sometimes relaxed, and the player may be able to take back the illegal move and replay a new legal move.

In particular, the Two Pawn violation is the most common illegal move played by professional players. The Two Pawn violation played by Takahiro Toyokawa (against Kōsuke Tamura) in the 2004 NHK Cup is infamous since it was broadcast on television. On the 109th move, Toyokawa (playing as Black) dropped a pawn to the 29 square while he already had a pawn in play on the board on the 23 square and, thus, lost the game.

==== Repetition (draw) ====
If the same game position occurs four times with the same player to move and the same pieces in hand for each player, then the game ends in a repetition draw (千日手 &quot;sennichite,&quot; lit. &quot;moves for a thousand days&quot;), as long as the positions are not due to perpetual check. Perpetual check (連続王手の千日手) is an illegal move (see above), which ends the game in a loss in tournament play.

In professional shogi, a repetition draw outcome is not a final result as draws essentially do not count. Each game can only end in either a win or loss. In the case of a repetition draw, professional shogi players will have to immediately play a subsequent game (or as many games as necessary) with sides reversed in order to obtain a true win outcome. (That is, the player who was White becomes Black, and vice versa.) Also, depending on the tournament, professional players play the subsequent game in the remainder of the allowed game time.

Thus, aiming for a repetition draw may be a possible professional strategy for the White player in order to play the second replay game as Black, which has a slight statistical advantage and/or greater initiative. For instance, Bishop Exchange Fourth File Rook is a passive strategy for White with the goal of a repetition draw (as it requires two tempo losses – swinging the rook and trading the bishops) while it is a very aggressive strategy if played by Black.

Repetition draws are rare in professional shogi occurring in about 1–2% of games and even rarer in amateur games. In professional shogi, repetition draws usually occur in the opening as certain positions are reached that are theoretically disadvantaged for both sides (reciprocal zugzwang). In amateur shogi, repetition draws tend to occur in the middle or endgame as a result of player errors.

==== Impasse ====
The game reaches an Impasse or Deadlock (持将棋 &quot;jishōgi&quot;) if both kings have advanced into their respective promotion zones – a situation known as 相入玉 (&quot;ai-nyū gyoku&quot; &quot;double entering kings&quot;) – and neither player can hope to mate the other or to gain any further material. An Impasse can result in either a win or a draw. If an Impasse happens, the winner is decided as follows: each player agrees to an Impasse, then each rook or bishop, promoted or not, scores 5 points for the owning player, and all other pieces except kings score 1 point each. A player scoring fewer than 24 points loses. (Note that in the start position, both players have 27 points each.) If neither player has fewer than 24, the game is no contest – a draw. In professional shogi, an Impasse result is always a draw since a player that cannot obtain the 24 points will simply resign. &quot;Jishōgi&quot; is considered an outcome in its own right rather than no contest, but there is no practical difference. As an Impasse needs to be agreed on for the rule to be invoked, a player may refuse to do so and attempt to win the game in future moves. If that happens, there is no official rule about the verdict of the game.

However, in amateur shogi, there are different practices most of which force a win resolution to the Impasse in order to avoid a draw result.

The first draw by Impasse occurred in 1731 in a bishop handicap game between the seventh Lifetime Meijin, , and his brother, Sōkei Ōhashi.

=====Entering King=====
As a practical matter, when an opponent&#x27;s king has entered a player&#x27;s own territory especially with supporting defending pieces, the opponent&#x27;s king is often very difficult to mate given the forward attacking nature of most shogi pieces. This state is referred to as entering king (入玉 &quot;nyū gyoku&quot;). If both players&#x27; kings are in entering king states, the game becomes more likely to result in an impasse.

In the adjacent diagram example, although White&#x27;s king is in a strong Bear-in-the-hole castle, Black&#x27;s king has entered White&#x27;s territory making it very difficult to mate. Therefore, this position favors Black.



An example of Entering King occurred in the fourth game of the 60th Ōi title match between Masayuki Toyoshima and Kazuki Kimura held on August 2021, 2019. After being unsuccessful in attacking Kimura and also in defending his own king within his camp, Toyoshima (playing as White) moved his king away from Kimura&#x27;s attacking pieces by fleeing up the second file, ultimately entering his king into Kimura&#x27;s camp by move 150. Although Toyoshima had achieved Entering King, he still had only 23 pointsone point shy of the required 24 points for an Impasse drawwhile Kimura (Black) had 31 points. Toyoshima then spent the next 134 moves trying to bring his point total, which fluctuated between 17 and 23, up to the necessary 24. By the 231st move, the game had reached a Double Entering Kings state, and by move 285 Kimura had successfully kept Toyoshima&#x27;s point total at bay. Here, Toyoshima with 20 points (and Kimura at 34 points) resigned. Incidentally, this game broke the record of longest game in a title match.
=====Amateur resolutions=====
For amateur games, there are various guidances with little standardization. Fairbairn reports a practice in the 1980s (considered a rule by the now defunct Shogi Association for The West) where the dispute is resolved by either player moving all friendly pieces into the promotion zone and then the game ends with points tallied.

Another resolution is the 27-Point (27点法) rule used for some amateur tournaments. One version of this is simply the player who has 27 or more points is the winner of the Impasse. Another version is a 27-Point Declaration rule. For instance, the Declaration rule on the online shogi site, 81Dojo, is that the player who wants to declare an Impasse win must (i) declare an intention to win via Impasse, (ii) have the king in the enemy camp (the promotion zone for that player), (iii) 10 other pieces must be in the promotion zone, (iv) not be in check, (v) have time remaining, and (vi) must have 28 points if Black or 27 points if White. If all of these conditions are met, then the Impasse declarer will win the game regardless of whether the opponent objects.

Yet another resolution to Impasse is the so-called Try Rule (トライルール &quot;torairūru&quot;). In this case, after both kings have entered their corresponding promotion zones, then the player who first moves the king to the opponent&#x27;s king&#x27;s start square (51 for Black, 59 for White) first will be the winner. As an example, the popular 将棋ウォーズ (Shogi Wars) app by HEROZ Inc. used the Try Rule up until 2014. (Now the app uses a variant of the 27-Point Declaration Rule – although it differs from the variant used on the 81Dojo site.) The idea of the &quot;Try Rule&quot; was taken from rugby football (see Try (rugby)).

==== Draws in tournaments ====
In professional tournaments, the rules typically require drawn games to be replayed with sides reversed, possibly with reduced time limits. They are rare compared to chess and xiangqi, occurring at a rate of 1–2% even in amateur games.

The 1982 &quot;Meijin&quot; title match between Makoto Nakahara and Hifumi Katoh was unusual in this regard with an impasse draw in the first (Double Fortress) game on April 13–14 (only the fifth draw in the then 40-year history of the tournament). This game (with Katoh as Black) lasted for 223 moves with 114 minutes spent pondering a single move. One of the reasons for the length of this game was that White (Nakahara) was very close to falling below the minimum of 24 points required for a draw. Thus, the end of the endgame was strategically about trying to keep White&#x27;s points above the 24-point threshold. In this match, &quot;sennichite&quot; occurred in the sixth and eighth games. Thus, this best-of-seven match lasted eight games and took over three months to finish; Black did not lose a single game and the eventual victor was Katoh at 4–3.
=== Time control ===

Professional games are timed as in international chess, but professional shogi players are almost never expected to keep time in their games. Instead a timekeeper is assigned, typically an apprentice professional. Time limits are much longer than in international chess (9 hours a side plus extra time in the prestigious &quot;Meijin&quot; title match), and in addition &quot;byōyomi&quot; (literally &quot;second counting&quot;) is employed. This means that when the ordinary time has run out, the player will from that point on have a certain amount of time to complete every move (a &quot;byōyomi&quot; period), typically upwards of one minute. The final ten seconds are counted down, and if the time expires the player to move loses the game immediately. Amateurs often play with electronic clocks that beep out the final ten seconds of a &quot;byōyomi&quot; period, with a prolonged beep for the last five.

== Player rank and handicaps ==

Amateur players are ranked from 15 &quot;kyū&quot; to 1 kyū and then from 1 &quot;dan&quot; to 8 dan. Amateur 8 dan was previously only honorarily given to famous people. While it is now possible to win amateur 8 dan by actual strength (winning amateur Ryu-oh 3 times), this has yet to be achieved.

Professional players operate with their own scale, from 6 kyū to 3 dan for pro-aspiring players and professional 4 dan to 9 dan for formal professional players. Amateur and professional ranks are offset (with amateur 4 dan being equivalent to professional 6 kyū).

=== Handicaps ===

Shogi has a handicap system (like go) in which games between players of disparate strengths are adjusted so that the stronger player is put in a more disadvantageous position in order to compensate for the difference in playing levels. In a handicap game, one or more of White&#x27;s pieces are removed from the setup, and instead White plays first.

The imbalance created by this method of handicapping is not as strong as it is in western chess because material advantage is not as powerful in shogi.
== Notation ==

There are two common systems used to notate piece movements in shogi game records. One is used in Japanese language texts while a second was created for western players by George Hodges and Glyndon Townhill in the English language. This system was updated by Hosking to be closer to the Japanese standard (two numerals). Other systems are used to notate shogi board positions. Unlike chess, the origin (11 square) is at the top right of a printed position rather than the bottom left.

In western piece movement notation, the format is the piece initial followed by the type of movement and finally the file and rank where the piece moved to. The piece initials are K (King), R (Rook), B (Bishop), G (Gold), S (Silver), N (Knight), L (Lance), and P (Pawn). Simple movement is indicated with -, captures with x, and piece drops with *. The files are indicated with numerals 1–9. The older Hodges standard used letters a–i for ranks, and the newer Hosking standard also uses numerals 1–9 for the ranks. Thus, Rx24 indicates &#x27;rook captures on 24&#x27;. Promoted pieces are notated with + prefixed to the piece initial (e.g. +Rx24). Piece promotion is also indicated with + (e.g. S-21+) while unpromotion is indicated with = (e.g. S-21=). Piece ambiguity is resolved by notating which square a piece is moving from (e.g. N65-53+ means &#x27;knight from 65 moves to 53 and promotes,&#x27; which distinguishes it from N45-53+).

The Japanese notation system uses Japanese characters for pieces and promotion indication and uses Japanese numerals instead of letters for ranks. Movement type aside from drops is not indicated, and the conventions for resolving ambiguity are quite different from the western system. As examples, the western Rx24 would be &#x27; in Japanese notation, +Rx24 would be &#x27;, S-21+ would be &#x27;, S-21= would be &#x27;, and N65-53+ would be &#x27; showing that the leftmost knight jumped (implicitly from the 65 square), which distinguishes it from &#x27; in which the rightmost knight jumped.

Although not strictly part of the notational calculus for games, game results are indicated in Japanese newspapers, websites, etc. with wins indicated by a white circle and losses indicated by a black circle.
== Strategy and tactics ==


Shogi is similar to chess but has a much larger game tree complexity because of the use of drops, greater number of pieces, and larger board size. In comparison, shogi games average about 140 (half-)moves per game (or 70 chess move-pairs) whereas chess games average about 80 moves per game (or 40 chess move-pairs) and minishogi averages about 40 moves per game (or 20 chess move-pairs).

Like chess, however, the game can be divided into the opening, middle game and endgame, each requiring a different strategy. The opening consists of arranging one&#x27;s defenses usually in a castle and positioning for attack; the mid game consists of attempting to break through the opposing defenses while maintaining one&#x27;s own; and the endgame starts when one side&#x27;s defenses have been compromised.

In the adjacent diagram, Black has chosen a Ranging Rook position (specifically Fourth File Rook) where the rook has been moved leftward away from its starting position. Additionally, Black is using a Silver Crown castle, which is a type of fortification structure constructed with one silver and two gold pieces and the king moved inside of the fortification – the &quot;silver crown&quot; name comes from the silver being positioned directly above the king&#x27;s head on the 27 square as if it were a crown. In the diagram, White has chosen a Static Rook position, in which the rook remains on its starting square. This Static Rook position is specifically a type of Counter-Ranging Rook position known as Bear-in-the-hole Static Rook that uses a Bear-in-the-hole castle. The Bear-in-the-hole fortification has the king moved all the way into very edge corner of the board on the 11 square as if it were a badger in a hole with a silver moved to the 22 square in order to close up the hole and additional reinforcing golds on 31 and 32 squares. This board position required 33 moves (or 12 move pairs as counted in western chess) to construct.

== Etiquette ==
Shogi players are expected to follow etiquette in addition to rules explicitly described. Commonly accepted etiquette include the following:
* Greetings to the opponent both before and after the game
* Avoiding disruptive actions both during the game and after, for instance:
** Not changing the move once realized on the board
** Fair withdrawal without any disruption, such as scattering pieces on the board to demonstrate frustration
* Announcing one&#x27;s resignation

Shogi piece sets may contain two types of king pieces, (king) and (jewel). In this case, the higher classed player, in either social or genuine shogi player rank, may take the king piece. For example, in titleholder system games, the current titleholder takes the king piece as the higher.

The higher-ranked (or older) player also sits facing the door of the room and is the person who takes the pieces out of the piece box.

Shogi does not have a touch-move rule as in western chess tournament play or chu shogi. However, in professional games, a piece is considered to be moved when the piece has been let go of. In both amateur and professional play, any piece may be touched in order to adjust its centralization within its square (to look tidy).

Taking back moves (待った &quot;matta&quot;) in professional games is prohibited. However, in friendly amateur games in Japan, it is often permitted.

Professional players are required to follow several ritualistic etiquette prescriptions such as kneeling exactly 15 centimeters from the shogi board, sitting in the formal seiza position, etc.

=== Game setup ===



Traditionally, the order of placing the pieces on the board is determined. There are two commonly used orders, the &quot;Ōhashi&quot; order 大橋流 and the &quot;Itō&quot; order 伊藤流. Placement sets pieces with multiples (generals, knights, lances) from left to right in all cases, and follows the order:

# King
# Gold generals
# Silver generals
# Knights
:In ito, the player now places:

:In ohashi, the player now places:
=== Furigoma ===
Among amateur tournaments, the higher-ranked player or defending champion performs the piece toss. In professional games, the furigoma is done on the behalf of the higher-ranked player/champion by the timekeeper who kneels by the side of the higher-ranked player and tosses the pawn pieces onto a silk cloth. In friendly amateur games, a player will ask the opponent to toss the pawns out of politeness. Otherwise, the person who tosses the pawns can be determined by Rock–paper–scissors.

== History ==


From &quot;The Chess Variant Pages&quot;:
It is not clear when chess was brought to Japan. The earliest generally accepted mention of shogi is (1058–1064) by Fujiwara Akihira. The oldest archaeological evidence is a group of 16 shogi pieces excavated from the grounds of Kōfuku-ji in Nara Prefecture. As it was physically associated with a wooden tablet written on in the sixth year of Tengi (1058), the pieces are thought to date from that period. These simple pieces were cut from a writing plaque in the same five-sided shape as modern pieces, with the names of the pieces written on them.

The dictionary of common folk culture, (c. 1210–1221), a collection based on the two works and , describes two forms of shogi, large &quot;(dai)&quot; shogi and small &quot;(shō)&quot; shogi. These are now called Heian shogi (or Heian small shogi) and Heian dai shogi. Heian small shogi is the version on which modern shogi is based, but the &quot;Nichūreki&quot; states that one wins if one&#x27;s opponent is reduced to a single king, indicating that drops had not yet been introduced. According to Yasuji Shimizu, chief researcher at the Archaeological Institute of Kashihara, Nara Prefecture, the names of the Heian shogi pieces keep those of chaturanga (general, elephant, horse, chariot and soldier), and add to them five treasures of Buddhism (jade, gold, silver, cassia bark, and incense).

Around the 13th century the game of dai shogi developed, created by increasing the number of pieces in Heian shogi, as was sho shogi, which added the rook, bishop, and drunken elephant from dai shogi to Heian shogi. The drunken elephant steps one square in any direction except directly backward, and promotes to the prince, which acts as a second king and must also be captured along with the original king for the other player to win. Around the 15th century, the rules of dai shogi were simplified, creating the game of chu shogi. Chu shogi, like its parent dai shogi, contains many distinct pieces, such as the queen (identical with Western chess) and the lion (which moves like a king, but twice per turn, potentially being able to capture twice, among other idiosyncrasies). The popularity of dai shogi soon waned in favour of chu shogi, until it stopped being played commonly. Chu shogi rivalled sho shogi in popularity until the introduction of drops in the latter, upon which standard shogi became ascendant, although chu shogi was still commonly played until about World War II, especially in Kyoto.

It is thought that the rules of standard shogi were fixed in the 16th century, when the drunken elephant was removed from the set of pieces present in sho shogi. There is no clear record of when drops were introduced, however.

In the Edo period, shogi variants were greatly expanded: tenjiku shogi, dai dai shogi, maka dai dai shogi, tai shogi, and taikyoku shogi were all invented. It is thought that these were played to only a very limited extent, however. Both standard shogi and Go were promoted by the Tokugawa shogunate. In 1612, the shogunate passed a law giving endowments to top shogi players (). During the reign of the eighth shōgun, Tokugawa Yoshimune, castle shogi tournaments were held once a year on the 17th day of Kannazuki, corresponding to November 17, which is Shogi Day on the modern calendar.

The title of &quot;meijin&quot; became hereditary in the Ōhashi and Itō families until the fall of the shogunate, when it came to be passed by recommendation. Today the title is used for the winner of the Meijin-sen competition, the first modern title match. From around 1899, newspapers began to publish records of shogi matches, and high-ranking players formed alliances with the aim of having their games published. In 1909, the was formed, and in 1924, the was formed. This was an early incarnation of the modern , or JSA, and 1924 is considered by the JSA to be the date it was founded.

In 1935, &quot;meijin&quot; Kinjirō Sekine stepped down, and the rank of meijin came to be awarded to the winner of a . became the first Meijin under this system in 1937. This was the start of the (see titleholder system). After the war other tournaments were promoted to title matches, culminating with the in 1988 for the modern line-up of seven. About 200 professional shogi players compete. Each year, the title holder defends the title against a challenger chosen from knockout or round matches.

After the Second World War, SCAP (occupational government mainly led by US) tried to eliminate all &quot;feudal&quot; factors from Japanese society and shogi was included in the possible list of items to be banned along with Bushido (philosophy of samurai) and other things. SCAP&#x27;s reason for banning shogi was that the game uniquely utilized captured pieces. SCAP insisted that this could lead to the idea of prisoner abuse. Kozo Masuda, then one of the top professional shogi players, when summoned to the SCAP headquarters for an investigation, criticized such understanding of shogi, instead insisting that chess that potentially contained the idea of prisoner abuse, because opposing pieces are removed permanently, while shogi gives prisoners the chance to get back into the game. Masuda also argued that chess contradicts the ideal of gender equality in western society because the king shields himself behind the queen and runs away. Masuda&#x27;s arguments are said to have eventually led to the exemption of shogi from the list of items to be banned.

== Tournament play ==
There are two organizations for shogi professional players in Japan: the JSA, and the , or LPSA. The JSA is the primary organization for men and women&#x27;s professional shogi while the LPSA is a group of women professionals who broke away from the JSA in 2007 to establish their own independent organization. Both organize tournaments for their members and have reached an agreement to cooperate with each other to promote shogi through events and other activities. Top professional players are fairly well-paid from tournament earnings. In 2016, the highest tournament earners were Yoshiharu Habu and Akira Watanabe who earned ¥91,500,000 and ¥73,900,000. (The tenth highest earner, Kouichi Fukaura, won ¥18,490,000.)

The JSA recognizes two categories of shogi professionals: , and . Sometimes &quot;kishi&quot; are addressed as , a term from Go used to distinguish &quot;kishi&quot; from other classes of players. JSA professional ranks and female professional ranks are not equivalent and each has their own promotion criteria and ranking system. In 2006, the JSA officially granted women &quot;professional status&quot;. This is not equivalent, however, to the more traditional way of &quot;gaining professional status&quot;, i.e., being promoted from the : leagues of strong amateur players aspiring to become a professional. Rather, it is a separate system especially designed for female professionals. Qualified amateurs, regardless of gender, may apply for the &quot;Shoreikai System&quot; and all those who successfully &quot;graduate&quot; are granted &quot;kishi&quot; status; however, no woman has yet to accomplish this feat (the highest women have reached is &quot;Shoreikai 3 &quot;dan&quot; league&quot; by Kana Satomi and Tomoka Nishiyama), so &quot;kishi&quot; is de facto only used to refer to male shogi professionals.

The JSA is the only body which can organize tournaments for professionals, e.g., the eight major tournaments in the titleholder system and other professional tournaments. In 1996, Yoshiharu Habu became the only &quot;kishi&quot; to hold seven major titles at the same time. For female professionals, both the JSA and LPSA organize tournaments, either jointly or separately. Tournaments for amateurs may be organized by the JSA and LPSA as well as local clubs, newspapers, private corporations, educational institutions or municipal governments for cities or prefectures under the guidance of the JSA or LPSA.

Since the 1990s, shogi has grown in popularity outside Japan, particularly in the People&#x27;s Republic of China, and especially in Shanghai. The January 2006 edition of stated that there were 120,000 shogi players in Shanghai. The spread of the game to countries where Chinese characters are not in common use, however, has been slower.

===In Europe===

European shogi tournaments vary in format, including both individual and team competitions. Major events are typically held annually, attracting players of all skill levels. The tournaments often feature different time controls, ranging from classical formats to faster-paced variants like blitz shogi. Notable tournaments include the European Shogi Championship and various national championships.

, there were over 1,200 active players in Europe.

== Computer shogi ==
Shogi has the highest game complexity of all popular chess variants. Computers have steadily improved in playing shogi since the 1970s. In 2007, champion Yoshiharu Habu estimated the strength of the 2006 world computer shogi champion Bonanza at the level of two-dan shoreikai.

The JSA prohibits its professionals from playing computers in public without prior permission, with the reason of promoting shogi and monetizing the computer–human events.

On October 12, 2010, after some 35 years of development, a computer finally beat a professional player, when the top ranked female champion Ichiyo Shimizu was beaten by the Akara2010 system in a game lasting just over 6 hours.

On July 24, 2011, computer shogi programs Bonanza and Akara crushed the amateur team of Kosaku and Shinoda in two games. The allotted time for the amateurs was one hour and then three minutes per move. The allotted time for the computer was 25 minutes and then 10 seconds per move.

On April 20, 2013, GPS Shogi defeated 8-dan professional shogi player Hiroyuki Miura in a 102-move game which lasted over 8 hours.

On December 13, 2015, the highest rated player on Shogi Club 24 was computer program Ponanza, rated 3455.

On April 10, 2016, Ponanza defeated Takayuki Yamasaki, 8-dan in 85 moves. Takayuki used 7 hours 9 minutes.

In October 2017, DeepMind claimed that its program AlphaZero, after a full nine hours of training, defeated Elmo in a 100-game match, winning 90, losing 8, and drawing two.

From a computational complexity point of view, generalized shogi is EXPTIME-complete.

== Video games ==
Hundreds of video games were released exclusively in Japan for several consoles.

Clubhouse Games: 51 Worldwide Classics was released internationally by Nintendo in 2020 for the Nintendo Switch console, offering both Shogi and mini Shogi variants using either traditional or bilingual pieces.

== Culture ==

According to professional player Yoshiharu Habu, in Japan shogi is viewed as not merely a game as entertainment or a mind sport but is instead an art that is a part of traditional Japanese culture along with haiku, tanka, noh, ikebana, and the Japanese tea ceremony. Its elevated status was established by the &quot;iemoto&quot; system supported by the historical shogunate.

The backwards &quot;uma&quot; (shogi horse symbol) is often featured on merchandise (such as on large decorative shogi piece sculptures, keychains, and other keepsakes) available for sale in Tendō. It also serves as a symbol of good luck. (Cf. Rabbit&#x27;s foot.) There are multiple theories on its origin. One is that &quot;uma&quot; (うま ) spelled in the Japanese syllabary backwards is まう &quot;mau&quot; (舞う), which means &quot;(to) dance&quot; and dancing horses are a good luck omen.

=== In popular culture ===
In the manga and anime series &quot;Naruto&quot;, shogi plays an essential part in Shikamaru Nara&#x27;s character development. He often plays it with his sensei, Asuma Sarutobi, apparently always beating him. When Asuma is fatally injured in battle, he reminds Shikamaru that the shogi king must always be protected, and draws a parallel between the king in shogi and the children who would grow up to take care of the Hidden Leaf (Konoha) in the future, as well as his yet-unborn daughter, Mirai, whom he wanted Shikamaru to guide.

Shogi has been a central plot point in the manga and anime &quot;Shion no Ō&quot;, the manga and anime &quot;March Comes in Like a Lion&quot;, and the manga and television drama &quot;81diver&quot;.

In the manga and anime &quot;Durarara!!&quot;, the information broker Izaya Orihara plays a twisted version of chess, go and shogi, where he mixes all three games into one as a representation of the battles in Ikebukuro.

In the video game &quot;Persona 5&quot;, the Star confidant, a girl named Hifumi Togo, is a high school shogi player looking to break into the ranks of the professionals. The player character will gain a knowledge stat when spending time with the confidant, supposedly from learning to play shogi. The abilities learned from ranking up the confidant comes from Japanese shogi terms.

In the manga and anime &quot;When Will Ayumu Make His Move?&quot;, second-year high school student Urushi Yaotome is the president of her school&#x27;s shogi club, though the club is considered illegitimate due to not having enough members, the only other member being first-year student Ayumu Tanaka.

== See also ==

* Mind sport
* Shogi tactics
* Shogi strategy
* Shogi variants
** Chu shogi
** Dai shogi
** Dōbutsu shōgi
* Tsumeshogi
* Chess variants
** Crazyhouse
* Computer shogi
* List of world championships in mind sports
* Janggi
* Xiangqi
==Notes==

== References ==

== Bibliography ==
* &quot;SHOGI Magazine&quot; (70 issues, January 1976 – November 1987) by The Shogi Association (edited by George Hodges)
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Shogi Shack
* Reijer Grimbergen&#x27;s Shogi Page
* Shogi.Net 
* Shogi Hub portal for current information about the shogi world (tournaments, news, etc.) 
* Shogi-L shogi mailing list
* Ricoh Shogi Page 
* Japanese–English shogi glossary
* Hans Geuns&#x27; Basic Shogi Vocabulary
* International Shogi Magazine

Rules
* Shogi Harbour: Level 1 Shogi Course by women&#x27;s professional player Karolina Styczyńska
* 40 shogi lessons on YouTube by HIDETCHI
* An Introduction to Shogi for Chess Players 
* Shogi by Hans Bodlaender and Fergus Duniho, &quot;The Chess Variant Pages&quot;
* Rules and Manners of Shogi by Tomohide Kawasaki (a.k.a. HIDETCHI)
* FESA - Shogi official playing rules 
* Shogi, the Japanese Chess by Jean-Louis Cazaux
* Shogi and Dobutsu-Animal shogi rules to download by Filip Marek

Online play
* 81Dojo English-language shogi play online
* Lishogi free and open source shogi server
* Shogi Dojo 24 shogi server in Japan
* Shogi Wars
* Shogi Quest
* PlayOK shogi
* GoldToken online turn-based shogi
* World Shogi League international online tournament associated with 81Dojo and the Japan Shogi Association
* HamShogi handicap shogi against the computer, instructions
* boardspace.net real time play against human or (weak) computer players.

Online tools
* 将棋DB2 shogi game record database 
* Kyokumenpedia game record databases as move decision tree with user-generated wiki annotations (associated with 81Dojo) 
* Shogi Playground record or play through games, mate problems, board positions
* Create Shogi Diagram on the Web</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131375" start="16" end="30" title="Shogi" label="Japanese chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150710" start="37" end="45" title="Strategy game" label="strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="46" end="56" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="163" end="176" title="chess" label="Western chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q206230" start="178" end="188" title="chaturanga" label="chaturanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q191448" start="190" end="197" title="xiangqi" label="xiangqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259050" start="199" end="211" title="Indian chess" label="Indian chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q715883" start="217" end="223" title="janggi" label="janggi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="583" end="594" title="Mercenary#15th to 18th centuries" label="mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q206230" start="693" end="703" title="chaturanga" label="chaturanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="803" end="808" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189178" start="828" end="839" title="Nara period" label="Nara period"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="1107" end="1119" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q138" start="2033" end="2037" title="King (chess)" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q137" start="2042" end="2046" title="rook (chess)" label="rook"/>
<link wikidata="Q134" start="2051" end="2057" title="bishop (chess)" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2062" end="2075" title="Fairy chess piece#G" label="gold generals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2080" end="2095" title="Fairy chess piece#K" label="silver generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q136" start="2100" end="2107" title="knight (chess)" label="knights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2112" end="2117" title="Fairy chess piece#L" label="lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q135" start="2123" end="2128" title="pawn (chess)" label="pawns"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="2358" end="2363" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="2371" end="2389" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373910" start="2398" end="2409" title="syllabogram" label="syllabogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="2417" end="2425" title="logogram" label="logogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736700" start="2446" end="2458" title="Old Japanese" label="Old Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q48332" start="4172" end="4180" title="hiragana" label="hiragana"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="4356" end="4367" title="Western world" label="Westernized"/>
<link wikidata="Q20819848" start="6473" end="6482" title="checkmate" label="checkmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q215067" start="7201" end="7211" title="Orthogonality" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7954" end="7963" title="#Promotion" label="Promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q136" start="8196" end="8223" title="Knight (chess)" label="international chess knights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8683" end="8692" title="#Promotion" label="Promotion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8940" end="8949" title="#Promotion" label="Promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q135" start="9025" end="9050" title="Pawn (chess)" label="international chess pawns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9172" end="9181" title="#Promotion" label="Promotion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9316" end="9321" title="#Drops" label="Drops"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10680" end="10685" title="#Drops" label="Drops"/>
<link wikidata="Q20819848" start="14347" end="14356" title="checkmate" label="checkmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q842046" start="14681" end="14686" title="Check (chess)" label="check"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346244" start="17277" end="17294" title="draw by agreement" label="draw by agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q20819848" start="17427" end="17436" title="checkmate" label="checkmate"/>
<link wikidata="Q975625" start="17598" end="17608" title="tsumeshogi" label="tsumeshogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032031" start="17610" end="17616" title="hisshi" label="hisshi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19170" end="19176" title="#Drops" label="§Drops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156594" start="19552" end="19567" title="perpetual check" label="perpetual check"/>
<link wikidata="Q30694234" start="19590" end="19600" title="sennichite" label="sennichite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633598" start="20120" end="20137" title="Takahiro Toyokawa" label="Takahiro Toyokawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11576922" start="20147" end="20160" title="Kōsuke Tamura" label="Kōsuke Tamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235354" start="20174" end="20181" title="NHK Cup (shogi)" label="NHK Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156594" start="20704" end="20719" title="perpetual check" label="perpetual check"/>
<link wikidata="Q17239765" start="21605" end="21637" title="Bishop Exchange Fourth File Rook" label="Bishop Exchange Fourth File Rook"/>
<link wikidata="Q228570" start="22112" end="22131" title="reciprocal zugzwang" label="reciprocal zugzwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11458588" start="23672" end="23692" title="Handicap (shogi)" label="bishop handicap game"/>
<link wikidata="Q798265" start="23713" end="23728" title="Lifetime Meijin" label="Lifetime Meijin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11597245" start="24299" end="24322" title="Bear-in-the-hole castle" label="Bear-in-the-hole castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459291" start="24521" end="24523" title="Ōi (shogi)" label="Ōi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633522" start="24544" end="24562" title="Masayuki Toyoshima" label="Masayuki Toyoshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518656" start="24567" end="24580" title="Kazuki Kimura" label="Kazuki Kimura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25008" end="25015" title="#Impasse" label="Impasse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25590" end="25599" title="John Fairbairn (writer)" label="Fairbairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188348" start="26133" end="26139" title="81Dojo" label="81Dojo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26951" end="26957" title=":ja:将棋ウォーズ" label="将棋ウォーズ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26978" end="26988" title="HEROZ Inc." label="HEROZ Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="27200" end="27214" title="rugby football" label="rugby football"/>
<link wikidata="Q578508" start="27220" end="27231" title="Try (rugby)" label="Try (rugby)"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="27432" end="27437" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q191448" start="27442" end="27449" title="xiangqi" label="xiangqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q798265" start="27512" end="27542" title="Meijin (shogi)" label="&amp;quot;Meijin&amp;quot; title match"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788061" start="27551" end="27566" title="Makoto Nakahara" label="Makoto Nakahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q11398957" start="27571" end="27583" title="Hifumi Katoh" label="Hifumi Katoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q48724139" start="27646" end="27661" title="Double Fortress" label="Double Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538947" start="28445" end="28471" title="professional shogi players" label="professional shogi players"/>
<link wikidata="Q798265" start="28706" end="28736" title="Meijin (shogi)" label="&amp;quot;Meijin&amp;quot; title match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131276" start="29372" end="29375" title="kyū" label="kyū"/>
<link wikidata="Q373498" start="29413" end="29416" title="dan (rank)" label="dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="29949" end="29951" title="Go (game)" label="go"/>
<link wikidata="Q11458588" start="30156" end="30169" title="Handicap (shogi)" label="handicap game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726908" start="30348" end="30361" title="handicap (chess)" label="western chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q903738" start="32745" end="32765" title="game tree complexity" label="game tree complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007746" start="33017" end="33026" title="minishogi" label="minishogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113035" start="33216" end="33223" title="shogi opening" label="opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q12669521" start="33279" end="33285" title="castle (shogi)" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24834943" start="33544" end="33556" title="Ranging Rook" label="Ranging Rook"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420174" start="33580" end="33596" title="Fourth File Rook" label="Fourth File Rook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33701" end="33720" title="Mino castle#Silver Crown" label="Silver Crown castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154177" start="34046" end="34057" title="Static Rook" label="Static Rook"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465615" start="34209" end="34237" title="Bear-in-the-hole Static Rook" label="Bear-in-the-hole Static Rook"/>
<link wikidata="Q11597245" start="34250" end="34273" title="Bear-in-the-hole castle" label="Bear-in-the-hole castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054513" start="35342" end="35360" title="titleholder system" label="titleholder system"/>
<link wikidata="Q18901030" start="35587" end="35602" title="touch-move rule" label="touch-move rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067132" start="35642" end="35651" title="chu shogi" label="chu shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426744" start="36211" end="36216" title="seiza" label="seiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q106631" start="37160" end="37179" title="Rock–paper–scissors" label="Rock–paper–scissors"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128224" start="37209" end="37232" title="The Chess Variant Pages" label="The Chess Variant Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070863" start="37469" end="37478" title="Kōfuku-ji" label="Kōfuku-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q131287" start="37482" end="37497" title="Nara Prefecture" label="Nara Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193591" start="37584" end="37589" title="Tengi" label="Tengi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698579" start="38005" end="38016" title="Heian shogi" label="Heian shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698574" start="38044" end="38059" title="Heian dai shogi" label="Heian dai shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q206230" start="38439" end="38449" title="chaturanga" label="chaturanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q204148" start="38563" end="38574" title="Cinnamomum cassia" label="cassia bark"/>
<link wikidata="Q851294" start="38627" end="38636" title="dai shogi" label="dai shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q850901" start="38714" end="38723" title="sho shogi" label="sho shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067132" start="39114" end="39123" title="chu shogi" label="chu shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="39694" end="39699" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="39937" end="39947" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699883" start="39987" end="40000" title="tenjiku shogi" label="tenjiku shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q869301" start="40002" end="40015" title="dai dai shogi" label="dai dai shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738578" start="40017" end="40035" title="maka dai dai shogi" label="maka dai dai shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q850680" start="40037" end="40046" title="tai shogi" label="tai shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676055" start="40052" end="40066" title="taikyoku shogi" label="taikyoku shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="40187" end="40189" title="Go (game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="40211" end="40229" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q319664" start="40349" end="40367" title="Tokugawa Yoshimune" label="Tokugawa Yoshimune"/>
<link wikidata="Q13788" start="40435" end="40444" title="Kannazuki" label="Kannazuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q798265" start="40725" end="40735" title="Meijin (shogi)" label="Meijin-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="40797" end="40806" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41141" end="41155" title="Kinjirō Sekine" label="Kinjirō Sekine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054513" start="41315" end="41333" title="titleholder system" label="titleholder system"/>
<link wikidata="Q471889" start="41643" end="41647" title="Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers" label="SCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q183738" start="41840" end="41847" title="Bushido" label="Bushido"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245805" start="42030" end="42044" title="prisoner abuse" label="prisoner abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406931" start="42046" end="42057" title="Kozo Masuda" label="Kozo Masuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="42462" end="42477" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q937659" start="43289" end="43303" title="Yoshiharu Habu" label="Yoshiharu Habu"/>
<link wikidata="Q866333" start="43308" end="43322" title="Akira Watanabe (shogi player)" label="Akira Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11560156" start="43390" end="43405" title="Kouichi Fukaura" label="Kouichi Fukaura"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="43551" end="43553" title="Go (game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509263" start="44430" end="44441" title="Kana Satomi" label="Kana Satomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54867715" start="44446" end="44462" title="Tomoka Nishiyama" label="Tomoka Nishiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="44489" end="44497" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054513" start="44663" end="44681" title="titleholder system" label="titleholder system"/>
<link wikidata="Q937659" start="44727" end="44741" title="Yoshiharu Habu" label="Yoshiharu Habu"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="45239" end="45270" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="45290" end="45298" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q903738" start="46008" end="46023" title="game tree complexity" label="game complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11271483" start="47018" end="47032" title="Hiroyuki Miura (shogi)" label="Hiroyuki Miura"/>
<link wikidata="Q15733006" start="47312" end="47320" title="DeepMind" label="DeepMind"/>
<link wikidata="Q44860007" start="47346" end="47355" title="AlphaZero" label="AlphaZero"/>
<link wikidata="Q30932015" start="47403" end="47407" title="Elmo (shogi engine)" label="Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="47476" end="47500" title="computational complexity theory" label="computational complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276570" start="47537" end="47553" title="EXPTIME-complete" label="EXPTIME-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="47586" end="47596" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="47645" end="47653" title="Video game console" label="consoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q937659" start="47916" end="47930" title="Yoshiharu Habu" label="Yoshiharu Habu"/>
<link wikidata="Q37707" start="48091" end="48096" title="haiku" label="haiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q258331" start="48098" end="48103" title="tanka" label="tanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q226887" start="48105" end="48108" title="noh" label="noh"/>
<link wikidata="Q178459" start="48110" end="48117" title="ikebana" label="ikebana"/>
<link wikidata="Q202298" start="48127" end="48148" title="Japanese tea ceremony" label="Japanese tea ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404873" start="48199" end="48205" title="iemoto" label="iemoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="48247" end="48256" title="shogunate" label="shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q385779" start="48450" end="48455" title="Tendō, Yamagata" label="Tendō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588406" start="48503" end="48521" title="Rabbit&amp;#x27;s foot" label="Rabbit&amp;#x27;s foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q26971382" start="48813" end="48819" title="Naruto" label="Naruto"/>
<link wikidata="Q30334" start="48860" end="48874" title="Shikamaru Nara" label="Shikamaru Nara"/>
<link wikidata="Q718482" start="48940" end="48954" title="Asuma Sarutobi" label="Asuma Sarutobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049406" start="49377" end="49387" title="Shion no Ō" label="Shion no Ō"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049046" start="49421" end="49447" title="March Comes in Like a Lion" label="March Comes in Like a Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022062" start="49496" end="49503" title="81diver" label="81diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q495094" start="49541" end="49551" title="Durarara!!" label="Durarara!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q542366" start="49722" end="49731" title="Ikebukuro" label="Ikebukuro"/>
<link wikidata="Q15225985" start="49758" end="49767" title="Persona 5" label="Persona 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q65235067" start="50147" end="50177" title="When Will Ayumu Make His Move?" label="When Will Ayumu Make His Move?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188693" start="50439" end="50449" title="Mind sport" label="Mind sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q30675554" start="50452" end="50465" title="Shogi tactics" label="Shogi tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500084" start="50468" end="50482" title="Shogi strategy" label="Shogi strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q985834" start="50485" end="50498" title="Shogi variant" label="Shogi variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067132" start="50503" end="50512" title="Chu shogi" label="Chu shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q851294" start="50516" end="50525" title="Dai shogi" label="Dai shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272695" start="50529" end="50542" title="Dōbutsu shōgi" label="Dōbutsu shōgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q975625" start="50545" end="50555" title="Tsumeshogi" label="Tsumeshogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q299191" start="50558" end="50571" title="Chess variant" label="Chess variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621281" start="50576" end="50586" title="Crazyhouse" label="Crazyhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157583" start="50589" end="50603" title="Computer shogi" label="Computer shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645825" start="50606" end="50648" title="List of world championships in mind sports" label="List of world championships in mind sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q715883" start="50651" end="50657" title="Janggi" label="Janggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191448" start="50660" end="50667" title="Xiangqi" label="Xiangqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4444768" start="51266" end="51285" title="Karolina Styczyńska" label="Karolina Styczyńska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5650368" start="51385" end="51400" title="Hans Bodlaender" label="Hans Bodlaender"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128224" start="51426" end="51449" title="The Chess Variant Pages" label="The Chess Variant Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813313" start="51979" end="52002" title="Japan Shogi Association" label="Japan Shogi Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27743" wikidata="Q40015" url="?curid=27743" title="Solar energy">
<text>Solar energy is the radiant energy from the Sun&#x27;s light and heat, which can be harnessed using a range of technologies such as solar electricity, solar thermal energy (including solar water heating) and solar architecture. It is an essential source of renewable energy, and its technologies are broadly characterized as either passive solar or active solar depending on how they capture and distribute solar energy or convert it into solar power. Active solar techniques include the use of photovoltaic systems, concentrated solar power, and solar water heating to harness the energy. Passive solar techniques include designing a building for better daylighting, selecting materials with favorable thermal mass or light-dispersing properties, and organizing spaces that naturally circulate air.

In 2011, the International Energy Agency said that &quot;the development of affordable, inexhaustible and clean solar energy technologies will have huge longer-term benefits. It will increase countries&#x27; energy security through reliance on an indigenous, inexhaustible, and mostly import-independent resource, enhance sustainability, reduce pollution, lower the costs of mitigating global warming ... these advantages are global&quot;.

==Potential==

The Earth receives 174 petawatts (PW) of incoming solar radiation (insolation) at the upper atmosphere. Approximately 30% is reflected back to space while the rest, 122 PW, is absorbed by clouds, oceans and land masses. The spectrum of solar light at the Earth&#x27;s surface is mostly spread across the visible and near-infrared ranges with a small part in the near-ultraviolet. Most of the world&#x27;s population live in areas with insolation levels of 150–300 watts/m2, or 3.5–7.0 kWh/m2 per day.

Solar radiation is absorbed by the Earth&#x27;s land surface, oceans – which cover about 71% of the globe – and atmosphere. Warm air containing evaporated water from the oceans rises, causing atmospheric circulation or convection. When the air reaches a high altitude, where the temperature is low, water vapor condenses into clouds, which rain onto the Earth&#x27;s surface, completing the water cycle. The latent heat of water condensation amplifies convection, producing atmospheric phenomena such as wind, cyclones and anticyclones. Sunlight absorbed by the oceans and land masses keeps the surface at an average temperature of 14 °C. By photosynthesis, green plants convert solar energy into chemically stored energy, which produces food, wood and the biomass from which fossil fuels are derived.

The total solar energy absorbed by Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, oceans and land masses is approximately 122 PW·year = 3,850,000 exajoules (EJ) per year. In 2002 (2019), this was more energy in one hour (one hour and 25 minutes) than the world used in one year. Photosynthesis captures approximately 3,000 EJ per year in biomass.

The potential solar energy that could be used by humans differs from the amount of solar energy present near the surface of the planet because factors such as geography, time variation, cloud cover, and the land available to humans limit the amount of solar energy that we can acquire. In 2021, Carbon Tracker Initiative estimated the land area needed to generate all our energy from solar alone was 450,000 km2 — or about the same as the area of Sweden, or the area of Morocco, or the area of California (0.3% of the Earth&#x27;s total land area).

Solar technologies are categorized as either passive or active depending on the way they capture, convert and distribute sunlight and enable solar energy to be harnessed at different levels around the world, mostly depending on the distance from the Equator. Although solar energy refers primarily to the use of solar radiation for practical ends, all types of renewable energy, other than geothermal power and tidal power, are derived either directly or indirectly from the Sun.

Active solar techniques use photovoltaics, concentrated solar power, solar thermal collectors, pumps, and fans to convert sunlight into useful output. Passive solar techniques include selecting materials with favorable thermal properties, designing spaces that naturally circulate air, and referencing the position of a building to the Sun. Active solar technologies increase the supply of energy and are considered supply side technologies, while passive solar technologies reduce the need for alternative resources and are generally considered demand-side technologies.

In 2000, the United Nations Development Programme, UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and World Energy Council published an estimate of the potential solar energy that could be used by humans each year. This took into account factors such as insolation, cloud cover, and the land that is usable by humans. It was stated that solar energy has a global potential of per year &quot;(see table below)&quot;.

== Thermal energy ==

Solar thermal technologies can be used for water heating, space heating, space cooling and process heat generation.

===Early commercial adaptation===
In 1878, at the Universal Exposition in Paris, Augustin Mouchot successfully demonstrated a solar steam engine but could not continue development because of cheap coal and other factors.

In 1897, Frank Shuman, a US inventor, engineer and solar energy pioneer built a small demonstration solar engine that worked by reflecting solar energy onto square boxes filled with ether, which has a lower boiling point than water and were fitted internally with black pipes which in turn powered a steam engine. In 1908 Shuman formed the Sun Power Company with the intent of building larger solar power plants. He, along with his technical advisor A.S.E. Ackermann and British physicist Sir Charles Vernon Boys, developed an improved system using mirrors to reflect solar energy upon collector boxes, increasing heating capacity to the extent that water could now be used instead of ether. Shuman then constructed a full-scale steam engine powered by low-pressure water, enabling him to patent the entire solar engine system by 1912.

Shuman built the world&#x27;s first solar thermal power station in Maadi, Egypt, between 1912 and 1913. His plant used parabolic troughs to power a engine that pumped more than of water per minute from the Nile River to adjacent cotton fields. Although the outbreak of World War I and the discovery of cheap oil in the 1930s discouraged the advancement of solar energy, Shuman&#x27;s vision, and basic design were resurrected in the 1970s with a new wave of interest in solar thermal energy. In 1916 Shuman was quoted in the media advocating solar energy&#x27;s utilization, saying:
===Water heating===
Solar hot water systems use sunlight to heat water. In middle geographical latitudes (between 40 degrees north and 40 degrees south), 60 to 70% of the domestic hot water use, with water temperatures up to , can be provided by solar heating systems. The most common types of solar water heaters are evacuated tube collectors (44%) and glazed flat plate collectors (34%) generally used for domestic hot water; and unglazed plastic collectors (21%) used mainly to heat swimming pools.

As of 2015, the total installed capacity of solar hot water systems was approximately 436 thermal gigawatt (GWth), and China is the world leader in their deployment with 309 GWth installed, taken up 71% of the market. Israel and Cyprus are the per capita leaders in the use of solar hot water systems with over 90% of homes using them. In the United States, Canada, and Australia, heating swimming pools is the dominant application of solar hot water with an installed capacity of 18 GWth as of 2005.

===Heating, cooling and ventilation===

In the United States, heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems account for 30% (4.65 EJ/yr) of the energy used in commercial buildings and nearly 50% (10.1 EJ/yr) of the energy used in residential buildings. Solar heating, cooling and ventilation technologies can be used to offset a portion of this energy. Use of solar for heating can roughly be divided into passive solar concepts and active solar concepts, depending on whether active elements such as sun tracking and solar concentrator optics are used.
Thermal mass is any material that can be used to store heat—heat from the Sun in the case of solar energy. Common thermal mass materials include stone, cement, and water. Historically they have been used in arid climates or warm temperate regions to keep buildings cool by absorbing solar energy during the day and radiating stored heat to the cooler atmosphere at night. However, they can be used in cold temperate areas to maintain warmth as well. The size and placement of thermal mass depend on several factors such as climate, daylighting, and shading conditions. When duly incorporated, thermal mass maintains space temperatures in a comfortable range and reduces the need for auxiliary heating and cooling equipment.

A solar chimney (or thermal chimney, in this context) is a passive solar ventilation system composed of a vertical shaft connecting the interior and exterior of a building. As the chimney warms, the air inside is heated, causing an updraft that pulls air through the building. Performance can be improved by using glazing and thermal mass materials in a way that mimics greenhouses.

Deciduous trees and plants have been promoted as a means of controlling solar heating and cooling. When planted on the southern side of a building in the northern hemisphere or the northern side in the southern hemisphere, their leaves provide shade during the summer, while the bare limbs allow light to pass during the winter. Since bare, leafless trees shade 1/3 to 1/2 of incident solar radiation, there is a balance between the benefits of summer shading and the corresponding loss of winter heating. In climates with significant heating loads, deciduous trees should not be planted on the Equator-facing side of a building because they will interfere with winter solar availability. They can, however, be used on the east and west sides to provide a degree of summer shading without appreciably affecting winter solar gain.

===Cooking===
Solar cookers use sunlight for cooking, drying, and pasteurization. They can be grouped into three broad categories: box cookers, panel cookers, and reflector cookers. The simplest solar cooker is the box cooker first built by Horace de Saussure in 1767. A basic box cooker consists of an insulated container with a transparent lid. It can be used effectively with partially overcast skies and will typically reach temperatures of . Panel cookers use a reflective panel to direct sunlight onto an insulated container and reach temperatures comparable to box cookers. Reflector cookers use various concentrating geometries (dish, trough, Fresnel mirrors) to focus light on a cooking container. These cookers reach temperatures of and above but require direct light to function properly and must be repositioned to track the Sun.

===Process heat===

Solar concentrating technologies such as parabolic dish, trough and Scheffler reflectors can provide process heat for commercial and industrial applications. The first commercial system was the Solar Total Energy Project (STEP) in Shenandoah, Georgia, US where a field of 114 parabolic dishes provided 50% of the process heating, air conditioning and electrical requirements for a clothing factory. This grid-connected cogeneration system provided 400 kW of electricity plus thermal energy in the form of 401 kW steam and 468 kW chilled water and had a one-hour peak load thermal storage. Evaporation ponds are shallow pools that concentrate dissolved solids through evaporation. The use of evaporation ponds to obtain salt from seawater is one of the oldest applications of solar energy. Modern uses include concentrating brine solutions used in leach mining and removing dissolved solids from waste streams. 

Clothes lines, clotheshorses, and clothes racks dry clothes through evaporation by wind and sunlight without consuming electricity or gas. In some states of the United States legislation protects the &quot;right to dry&quot; clothes. Unglazed transpired collectors (UTC) are perforated sun-facing walls used for preheating ventilation air. UTCs can raise the incoming air temperature up to and deliver outlet temperatures of . The short payback period of transpired collectors (3 to 12 years) makes them a more cost-effective alternative than glazed collection systems. As of 2003, over 80 systems with a combined collector area of had been installed worldwide, including an collector in Costa Rica used for drying coffee beans and a collector in Coimbatore, India, used for drying marigolds.

===Water treatment===
Solar distillation can be used to make saline or brackish water potable. The first recorded instance of this was by 16th-century Arab alchemists. A large-scale solar distillation project was first constructed in 1872 in the Chilean mining town of Las Salinas. The plant, which had solar collection area of , could produce up to per day and operate for 40 years. Individual still designs include single-slope, double-slope (or greenhouse type), vertical, conical, inverted absorber, multi-wick, and multiple effect. These stills can operate in passive, active, or hybrid modes. Double-slope stills are the most economical for decentralized domestic purposes, while active multiple effect units are more suitable for large-scale applications.

Solar water disinfection (SODIS) involves exposing water-filled plastic polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottles to sunlight for several hours. Exposure times vary depending on weather and climate from a minimum of six hours to two days during fully overcast conditions. It is recommended by the World Health Organization as a viable method for household water treatment and safe storage. Over two million people in developing countries use this method for their daily drinking water.

Solar energy may be used in a water stabilization pond to treat waste water without chemicals or electricity. A further environmental advantage is that algae grow in such ponds and consume carbon dioxide in photosynthesis, although algae may produce toxic chemicals that make the water unusable.

===Molten salt technology===

Molten salt can be employed as a thermal energy storage method to retain thermal energy collected by a solar tower or solar trough of a concentrated solar power plant so that it can be used to generate electricity in bad weather or at night. It was demonstrated in the Solar Two project from 1995 to 1999. The system is predicted to have an annual efficiency of 99%, a reference to the energy retained by storing heat before turning it into electricity, versus converting heat directly into electricity. The molten salt mixtures vary. The most extended mixture contains sodium nitrate, potassium nitrate and calcium nitrate. It is non-flammable and non-toxic, and has already been used in the chemical and metals industries as a heat-transport fluid. Hence, experience with such systems exists in non-solar applications.

The salt melts at . It is kept liquid at in an insulated &quot;cold&quot; storage tank. The liquid salt is pumped through panels in a solar collector where the focused irradiance heats it to . It is then sent to a hot storage tank. This is so well insulated that the thermal energy can be usefully stored for up to a week.

When electricity is needed, the hot salt is pumped to a conventional steam-generator to produce superheated steam for a turbine/generator as used in any conventional coal, oil, or nuclear power plant. A 100-megawatt turbine would need a tank about tall and in diameter to drive it for four hours by this design.

Several parabolic trough power plants in Spain and solar power tower developer SolarReserve use this thermal energy storage concept. The Solana Generating Station in the U.S. has six hours of storage by molten salt. In Chile, The Cerro Dominador power plant has a 110 MW solar-thermal tower, the heat is transferred to molten salts.
The molten salts then transfer their heat in a heat exchanger to water, generating superheated steam, which feeds a turbine that transforms the kinetic energy of the steam into electric energy using the Rankine cycle. In this way, the Cerro Dominador plant is capable of generating around 110 MW of power.
The plant has an advanced storage system enabling it to generate electricity for up to 17.5 hours without direct solar radiation, which allows it to provide a stable electricity supply without interruptions if required. The Project secured up to 950 GW·h per year sale. Another project is the María Elena plant is a 400 MW thermo-solar complex in the northern Chilean region of Antofagasta employing molten salt technology.

==Electricity production==
==Concentrated solar power==

Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) systems use lenses or mirrors and tracking systems to focus a large area of sunlight into a small beam. The concentrated heat is then used as a heat source for a conventional power plant. A wide range of concentrating technologies exists; the most developed are the parabolic trough, the solar tower collectors, the concentrating linear Fresnel reflector, and the Stirling dish. Various techniques are used to track the Sun and focus light. In all of these systems, a working fluid is heated by the concentrated sunlight, and is then used for power generation or energy storage. Designs need to account for the risk of a dust storm, hail, or another extreme weather event that can damage the fine glass surfaces of solar power plants. Metal grills would allow a high percentage of sunlight to enter the mirrors and solar panels while also preventing most damage.

==Architecture and urban planning==

Sunlight has influenced building design since the beginning of architectural history. Advanced solar architecture and urban planning methods were first employed by the Greeks and Chinese, who oriented their buildings toward the south to provide light and warmth.

The common features of passive solar architecture are orientation relative to the Sun, compact proportion (a low surface area to volume ratio), selective shading (overhangs) and thermal mass. When these features are tailored to the local climate and environment, they can produce well-lit spaces that stay in a comfortable temperature range. Socrates&#x27; Megaron House is a classic example of passive solar design. The most recent approaches to solar design use computer modeling tying together solar lighting, heating and ventilation systems in an integrated solar design package. Active solar equipment such as pumps, fans, and switchable windows can complement passive design and improve system performance.

Urban heat islands (UHI) are metropolitan areas with higher temperatures than that of the surrounding environment. The higher temperatures result from increased absorption of solar energy by urban materials such as asphalt and concrete, which have lower albedos and higher heat capacities than those in the natural environment. A straightforward method of counteracting the UHI effect is to paint buildings and roads white and to plant trees in the area. Using these methods, a hypothetical &quot;cool communities&quot; program in Los Angeles has projected that urban temperatures could be reduced by approximately 3 °C at an estimated cost of US$1  billion, giving estimated total annual benefits of US$530  million from reduced air-conditioning costs and healthcare savings.

==Agriculture and horticulture==

Agriculture and horticulture seek to optimize the capture of solar energy to optimize the productivity of plants. Techniques such as timed planting cycles, tailored row orientation, staggered heights between rows and the mixing of plant varieties can improve crop yields. While sunlight is generally considered a plentiful resource, the exceptions highlight the importance of solar energy to agriculture. During the short growing seasons of the Little Ice Age, French and English farmers employed fruit walls to maximize the collection of solar energy. These walls acted as thermal masses and accelerated ripening by keeping plants warm. Early fruit walls were built perpendicular to the ground and facing south, but over time, sloping walls were developed to make better use of sunlight. In 1699, Nicolas Fatio de Duillier even suggested using a tracking mechanism which could pivot to follow the Sun. Applications of solar energy in agriculture aside from growing crops include pumping water, drying crops, brooding chicks and drying chicken manure. More recently the technology has been embraced by vintners, who use the energy generated by solar panels to power grape presses.

Greenhouses convert solar light to heat, enabling year-round production and the growth (in enclosed environments) of specialty crops and other plants not naturally suited to the local climate. Primitive greenhouses were first used during Roman times to produce cucumbers year-round for the Roman emperor Tiberius. The first modern greenhouses were built in Europe in the 16th century to keep exotic plants brought back from explorations abroad. Greenhouses remain an important part of horticulture today. Plastic transparent materials have also been used to similar effect in polytunnels and row covers.

==Transport==
Development of a solar-powered car has been an engineering goal since the 1980s. The World Solar Challenge is a biannual solar-powered car race, where teams from universities and enterprises compete over across central Australia from Darwin to Adelaide. In 1987, when it was founded, the winner&#x27;s average speed was and by 2007 the winner&#x27;s average speed had improved to .
The North American Solar Challenge and the planned South African Solar Challenge are comparable competitions that reflect an international interest in the engineering and development of solar powered vehicles.

Some vehicles use solar panels for auxiliary power, such as for air conditioning, to keep the interior cool, thus reducing fuel consumption.

In 1975, the first practical solar boat was constructed in England. By 1995, passenger boats incorporating PV panels began appearing and are now used extensively. In 1996, Kenichi Horie made the first solar-powered crossing of the Pacific Ocean, and the &quot;Sun21&quot; catamaran made the first solar-powered crossing of the Atlantic Ocean in the winter of 2006–2007. There were plans to circumnavigate the globe in 2010.

In 1974, the unmanned AstroFlight Sunrise airplane made the first solar flight. On 29 April 1979, the &quot;Solar Riser&quot; made the first flight in a solar-powered, fully controlled, man-carrying flying machine, reaching an altitude of . In 1980, the &quot;Gossamer Penguin&quot; made the first piloted flights powered solely by photovoltaics. This was quickly followed by the &quot;Solar Challenger&quot; which crossed the English Channel in July 1981. In 1990 Eric Scott Raymond in 21 hops flew from California to North Carolina using solar power. Developments then turned back to unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) with the &quot;Pathfinder&quot; (1997) and subsequent designs, culminating in the &quot;Helios&quot; which set the altitude record for a non-rocket-propelled aircraft at in 2001. The &quot;Zephyr&quot;, developed by BAE Systems, is the latest in a line of record-breaking solar aircraft, making a 54-hour flight in 2007, and month-long flights were envisioned by 2010. From March 2015 to July 2016, Solar Impulse, an electric aircraft, successfully circumnavigated the globe. It is a single-seat plane powered by solar cells and capable of taking off under its own power. The design allows the aircraft to remain airborne for several days.

A solar balloon is a black balloon that is filled with ordinary air. As sunlight shines on the balloon, the air inside is heated and expands, causing an upward buoyancy force, much like an artificially heated hot air balloon. Some solar balloons are large enough for human flight, but usage is generally limited to the toy market as the surface-area to payload-weight ratio is relatively high.

===Squad Solar vehicle===

The Squad Solar is a Neighborhood Electric Vehicle that has a solar roof and can be plugged into a normal 120 volt outlet to be charged.

==Fuel production==
Solar chemical processes use solar energy to drive chemical reactions. These processes offset energy that would otherwise come from a fossil fuel source and can also convert solar energy into storable and transportable fuels. Solar induced chemical reactions can be divided into thermochemical or photochemical. A variety of fuels can be produced by artificial photosynthesis. The multielectron catalytic chemistry involved in making carbon-based fuels (such as methanol) from reduction of carbon dioxide is challenging; a feasible alternative is hydrogen production from protons, though use of water as the source of electrons (as plants do) requires mastering the multielectron oxidation of two water molecules to molecular oxygen. Some have envisaged working solar fuel plants in coastal metropolitan areas by 2050 the splitting of seawater providing hydrogen to be run through adjacent fuel-cell electric power plants and the pure water by-product going directly into the municipal water system. In addition, chemical energy storage is another solution to solar energy storage. 

Hydrogen production technologies have been a significant area of solar chemical research since the 1970s. Aside from electrolysis driven by photovoltaic or photochemical cells, several thermochemical processes have also been explored. One such route uses concentrators to split water into oxygen and hydrogen at high temperatures (). Another approach uses the heat from solar concentrators to drive the steam reformation of natural gas thereby increasing the overall hydrogen yield compared to conventional reforming methods. Thermochemical cycles characterized by the decomposition and regeneration of reactants present another avenue for hydrogen production. The Solzinc process under development at the Weizmann Institute of Science uses a 1 MW solar furnace to decompose zinc oxide (ZnO) at temperatures above . This initial reaction produces pure zinc, which can subsequently be reacted with water to produce hydrogen.

==Energy storage methods==
Thermal mass systems can store solar energy in the form of heat at domestically useful temperatures for daily or interseasonal durations. Thermal storage systems generally use readily available materials with high specific heat capacities such as water, earth and stone. Well-designed systems can lower peak demand, shift time-of-use to hours and reduce overall heating and cooling requirements.

Phase change materials such as paraffin wax and Glauber&#x27;s salt are another thermal storage medium. These materials are inexpensive, readily available, and can deliver domestically useful temperatures (approximately ). The &quot;Dover House&quot; (in Dover, Massachusetts) was the first to use a Glauber&#x27;s salt heating system, in 1948. Solar energy can also be stored at high temperatures using molten salts. Salts are an effective storage medium because they are low-cost, have a high specific heat capacity, and can deliver heat at temperatures compatible with conventional power systems. The Solar Two project used this method of energy storage, allowing it to store in its 68 m3 storage tank with an annual storage efficiency of about 99%.

Off-grid PV systems have traditionally used rechargeable batteries to store excess electricity. With grid-tied systems, excess electricity can be sent to the transmission grid, while standard grid electricity can be used to meet shortfalls. Net metering programs give household systems credit for any electricity they deliver to the grid. This is handled by &#x27;rolling back&#x27; the meter whenever the home produces more electricity than it consumes. If the net electricity use is below zero, the utility then rolls over the kilowatt-hour credit to the next month. Other approaches involve the use of two meters, to measure electricity consumed vs. electricity produced. This is less common due to the increased installation cost of the second meter. Most standard meters accurately measure in both directions, making a second meter unnecessary.

Pumped-storage hydroelectricity stores energy in the form of water pumped when energy is available from a lower elevation reservoir to a higher elevation one. The energy is recovered when demand is high by releasing the water, with the pump becoming a hydroelectric power generator.

==Development, deployment and economics==

Beginning with the surge in coal use, which accompanied the Industrial Revolution, energy consumption steadily transitioned from wood and biomass to fossil fuels. The early development of solar technologies starting in the 1860s was driven by an expectation that coal would soon become scarce. However, development of solar technologies stagnated in the early 20th  century in the face of the increasing availability, economy, and utility of coal and petroleum.

The 1973 oil embargo and 1979 energy crisis caused a reorganization of energy policies around the world. It brought renewed attention to developing solar technologies. Deployment strategies focused on incentive programs such as the Federal Photovoltaic Utilization Program in the US and the Sunshine Program in Japan. Other efforts included the formation of research facilities in the US (SERI, now NREL), Japan (NEDO), and Germany (Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE).

Commercial solar water heaters began appearing in the United States in the 1890s. These systems saw increasing use until the 1920s but were gradually replaced by cheaper and more reliable heating fuels. As with photovoltaics, solar water heating attracted renewed attention as a result of the oil crises in the 1970s, but interest subsided in the 1980s due to falling petroleum prices. Development in the solar water heating sector progressed steadily throughout the 1990s, and annual growth rates have averaged 20% since 1999. Although generally underestimated, solar water heating and cooling is by far the most widely deployed solar technology with an estimated capacity of 154  GW as of 2007.

The International Energy Agency has said that solar energy can make considerable contributions to solving some of the most urgent problems the world now faces:

The development of affordable, inexhaustible, and clean solar energy technologies will have huge longer-term benefits. It will increase countries&#x27; energy security through reliance on an indigenous, inexhaustible, and mostly import-independent resource, enhance sustainability, reduce pollution, lower the costs of mitigating climate change, and keep fossil fuel prices lower than otherwise. These advantages are global. Hence the additional costs of the incentives for early deployment should be considered learning investments; they must be wisely spent and need to be widely shared.
In 2011, a report by the International Energy Agency found that solar energy technologies such as photovoltaics, solar hot water, and concentrated solar power could provide a third of the world&#x27;s energy by 2060 if politicians commit to limiting climate change and transitioning to renewable energy. The energy from the Sun could play a key role in de-carbonizing the global economy alongside improvements in energy efficiency and imposing costs on greenhouse gas emitters. &quot;The strength of solar is the incredible variety and flexibility of applications, from small scale to big scale&quot;.

In 2021 Lazard estimated the levelized cost of new build unsubsidized utility scale solar electricity at less than 37 dollars per MWh and existing coal-fired power above that amount. The 2021 report also said that new solar was also cheaper than new gas-fired power, but not generally existing gas power.

=== Emerging technologies ===
==== Experimental solar power ====

Concentrated photovoltaics (CPV) systems employ sunlight concentrated onto photovoltaic surfaces for the purpose of electricity generation. Thermoelectric, or &quot;thermovoltaic&quot; devices convert a temperature difference between dissimilar materials into an electric current.

==== Floating solar arrays ====
==== Solar-assisted heat pump ====

A heat pump is a device that provides heat energy from a source of heat to a destination called a &quot;heat sink&quot;. Heat pumps are designed to move thermal energy opposite to the direction of spontaneous heat flow by absorbing heat from a cold space and releasing it to a warmer one. A solar-assisted heat pump represents the integration of a heat pump and thermal solar panels in a single integrated system. Typically these two technologies are used separately (or only placing them in parallel) to produce hot water. In this system the solar thermal panel performs the function of the low temperature heat source and the heat produced is used to feed the heat pump&#x27;s evaporator. The goal of this system is to get high COP and then produce energy in a more efficient and less expensive way.

It is possible to use any type of solar thermal panel (sheet and tubes, roll-bond, heat pipe, thermal plates) or hybrid (mono/polycrystalline, thin film) in combination with the heat pump. The use of a hybrid panel is preferable because it allows covering a part of the electricity demand of the heat pump and reduces the power consumption and consequently the variable costs of the system.

==== Solar aircraft ====
An electric aircraft is an aircraft that runs on electric motors rather than internal combustion engines, with electricity coming from fuel cells, solar cells, ultracapacitors, power beaming, or batteries.

Currently, flying manned electric aircraft are mostly experimental demonstrators, though many small unmanned aerial vehicles are powered by batteries. Electrically powered model aircraft have been flown since the 1970s, with one report in 1957. The first man-carrying electrically powered flights were made in 1973. Between 2015 and 2016, a manned, solar-powered plane, &quot;Solar Impulse 2&quot;, completed a circumnavigation of the Earth.

==See also==
* Heliostat
* List of solar energy topics
* List of solar-powered products
* Renewable heat
* Soil solarization
* Solar easement
* Solar energy use in rural Africa
* Solar updraft tower
* Solar power satellite
* Solar tracker
==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="0" end="12" title="Solar energy" label="Solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259526" start="20" end="34" title="radiant energy" label="radiant energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="44" end="47" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="55" end="60" title="sunlight" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="65" end="69" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="111" end="123" title="technologies" label="technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="132" end="149" title="solar electricity" label="solar electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q303288" start="151" end="171" title="solar thermal energy" label="solar thermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136659" start="183" end="202" title="solar water heating" label="solar water heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556075" start="208" end="226" title="solar architecture" label="solar architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="257" end="273" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q385817" start="332" end="345" title="passive solar" label="passive solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="495" end="514" title="photovoltaic system" label="photovoltaic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q285927" start="517" end="541" title="concentrated solar power" label="concentrated solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q54316" start="655" end="666" title="daylighting (architecture)" label="daylighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150682" start="703" end="715" title="thermal mass" label="thermal mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q584049" start="775" end="798" title="ventilation (architecture)" label="naturally circulate air"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="814" end="841" title="International Energy Agency" label="International Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700433" start="1009" end="1024" title="energy security" label="energy security"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="1123" end="1137" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="1146" end="1155" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="1176" end="1201" title="Climate change mitigation" label="mitigating global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="1280" end="1288" title="petawatt" label="petawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="1324" end="1334" title="insolation" label="insolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1349" end="1359" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="1481" end="1489" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="1561" end="1568" title="visible light" label="visible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="1573" end="1586" title="near-infrared" label="near-infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="1619" end="1635" title="near-ultraviolet" label="near-ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="1742" end="1745" title="kilowatt-hour" label="kWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615451" start="1951" end="1974" title="atmospheric circulation" label="atmospheric circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="1978" end="1988" title="convection" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q81041" start="2150" end="2161" title="water cycle" label="water cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q207721" start="2167" end="2178" title="latent heat" label="latent heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="2269" end="2276" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709543" start="2282" end="2293" title="anticyclone" label="anticyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="2401" end="2415" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="2516" end="2523" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="2535" end="2547" title="fossil fuels" label="fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2686" end="2695" title="Joule#Multiples" label="exajoules"/>
<link wikidata="Q30589082" start="3183" end="3208" title="Carbon Tracker Initiative" label="Carbon Tracker Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q712226" start="3296" end="3299" title="Square kilometre" label="km2"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3335" end="3341" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="3358" end="3365" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3382" end="3392" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215493" start="3828" end="3844" title="geothermal power" label="geothermal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q184037" start="3849" end="3860" title="tidal power" label="tidal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q285927" start="3962" end="3986" title="concentrated solar power" label="concentrated solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q837515" start="3988" end="4011" title="solar thermal collector" label="solar thermal collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q531186" start="4335" end="4346" title="supply side" label="supply side"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="4505" end="4541" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136247" start="4593" end="4613" title="World Energy Council" label="World Energy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q713092" start="5128" end="5144" title="Augustin Mouchot" label="Augustin Mouchot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444200" start="5278" end="5290" title="Frank Shuman" label="Frank Shuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063791" start="5762" end="5781" title="C. V. Boys" label="Charles Vernon Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q303288" start="6142" end="6169" title="Solar thermal energy" label="solar thermal power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q589934" start="6173" end="6178" title="Maadi" label="Maadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="6180" end="6185" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051219" start="6225" end="6241" title="parabolic trough" label="parabolic trough"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="6312" end="6322" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="6408" end="6417" title="Petroleum industry" label="cheap oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="7282" end="7289" title="GWth" label="thermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="7290" end="7298" title="gigawatt" label="gigawatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="7410" end="7416" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="7421" end="7427" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="7756" end="7797" title="HVAC" label="heating, ventilation and air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q385817" start="8111" end="8124" title="Passive solar building design" label="passive solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q303288" start="8138" end="8150" title="Solar thermal energy" label="active solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q938237" start="8206" end="8218" title="solar tracker" label="sun tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962572" start="8986" end="8999" title="solar chimney" label="solar chimney"/>
<link wikidata="Q760129" start="9216" end="9223" title="updraft" label="updraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="9368" end="9377" title="Deciduous" label="Deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064198" start="10186" end="10196" title="solar gain" label="solar gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="10265" end="10279" title="pasteurization" label="pasteurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q115525" start="10440" end="10458" title="Horace de Saussure" label="Horace de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556047" start="11256" end="11282" title="Solar Total Energy Project" label="Solar Total Energy Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="11729" end="11740" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432810" start="11974" end="11986" title="Clothes line" label="Clothes line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755179" start="11989" end="12001" title="clotheshorse" label="clotheshorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="12662" end="12672" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9885" start="12721" end="12731" title="Coimbatore" label="Coimbatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q496805" start="12829" end="12835" title="saline water" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="12839" end="12853" title="brackish water" label="brackish water"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="13014" end="13019" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436130" start="13163" end="13168" title="still" label="still"/>
<link wikidata="Q73984" start="13544" end="13556" title="disinfection" label="disinfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q145863" start="13604" end="13630" title="polyethylene terephthalate" label="polyethylene terephthalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="13828" end="13853" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q336191" start="14082" end="14093" title="waste water" label="waste water"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="14170" end="14175" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="14207" end="14221" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142963" start="14378" end="14400" title="thermal energy storage" label="thermal energy storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q13847726" start="14448" end="14459" title="Solar power tower" label="solar tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051219" start="14463" end="14475" title="solar trough" label="solar trough"/>
<link wikidata="Q285927" start="14481" end="14511" title="concentrated solar power plant" label="concentrated solar power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3964193" start="14614" end="14623" title="Solar Two" label="Solar Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q184373" start="14915" end="14929" title="sodium nitrate" label="sodium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="14931" end="14948" title="potassium nitrate" label="potassium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407392" start="14953" end="14968" title="calcium nitrate" label="calcium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164304" start="15587" end="15604" title="superheated steam" label="superheated steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051219" start="15812" end="15828" title="parabolic trough" label="parabolic trough"/>
<link wikidata="Q13847726" start="15855" end="15872" title="solar power tower" label="solar power tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555833" start="15883" end="15895" title="SolarReserve" label="SolarReserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555685" start="15941" end="15966" title="Solana Generating Station" label="Solana Generating Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16123" end="16135" title="Thermal energy storage#Molten salt technology" label="molten salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q215612" start="16340" end="16353" title="Rankine cycle" label="Rankine cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="16803" end="16808" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118" start="16821" end="16832" title="Antofagasta Region" label="Antofagasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q217236" start="17425" end="17438" title="working fluid" label="working fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="17578" end="17588" title="dust storm" label="dust storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37602" start="17590" end="17594" title="hail" label="hail"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="18026" end="18032" title="ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18037" end="18044" title="Feng shui#Archaeology" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q385817" start="18145" end="18158" title="passive solar" label="passive solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150682" start="18300" end="18312" title="Thermal mass (Building)" label="thermal mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="18464" end="18472" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q54316" start="18619" end="18633" title="Daylighting (architecture)" label="solar lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q837515" start="18635" end="18642" title="solar heating" label="heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312298" start="18647" end="18658" title="solar air conditioning" label="ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q385817" start="18684" end="18696" title="solar design" label="solar design"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="19090" end="19096" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179388" start="19109" end="19124" title="heat capacity" label="heat capacities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="19648" end="19659" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="19664" end="19676" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="20093" end="20107" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556855" start="20120" end="20127" title="Solar power in the United Kingdom" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q115774" start="20446" end="20471" title="Nicolas Fatio de Duillier" label="Nicolas Fatio de Duillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q938237" start="20495" end="20513" title="Solar tracker" label="tracking mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q897317" start="20750" end="20758" title="Winemakers" label="vintners"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="20830" end="20840" title="Greenhouse" label="Greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="21091" end="21100" title="cucumbers" label="cucumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="21134" end="21142" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924144" start="21406" end="21416" title="polytunnel" label="polytunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371761" start="21422" end="21431" title="row cover" label="row cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064133" start="21534" end="21555" title="World Solar Challenge" label="World Solar Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="21683" end="21689" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="21693" end="21701" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064367" start="21835" end="21865" title="North American Solar Challenge" label="North American Solar Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565796" start="21882" end="21911" title="South African Solar Challenge" label="South African Solar Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738748" start="22356" end="22369" title="Kenichi Horie" label="Kenichi Horie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811471" start="22631" end="22650" title="AstroFlight Sunrise" label="AstroFlight Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793929" start="22717" end="22728" title="Solar Riser" label="Solar Riser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22869" end="22885" title="Gossamer Albatross#Solar-powered variants" label="Gossamer Penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605983" start="22995" end="23011" title="Solar Challenger" label="Solar Challenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387473" start="23074" end="23092" title="Eric Scott Raymond" label="Eric Scott Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055404" start="23241" end="23251" title="NASA Pathfinder" label="Pathfinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353965" start="23314" end="23320" title="Helios Prototype" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q940317" start="23415" end="23421" title="QinetiQ Zephyr" label="Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="23442" end="23453" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q742889" start="23625" end="23638" title="Solar Impulse" label="Solar Impulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q519302" start="23643" end="23660" title="electric aircraft" label="electric aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="23739" end="23749" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q371064" start="23869" end="23882" title="solar balloon" label="solar balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="24027" end="24035" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551574" start="24076" end="24091" title="hot air balloon" label="hot air balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q112065501" start="24293" end="24304" title="Squad Solar" label="Squad Solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675278" start="24310" end="24339" title="Neighborhood Electric Vehicle" label="Neighborhood Electric Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188651" start="24744" end="24757" title="photochemical" label="photochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q654623" start="24797" end="24822" title="artificial photosynthesis" label="artificial photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="24909" end="24917" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="24937" end="24951" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="24994" end="25002" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929999" start="25531" end="25550" title="Hydrogen production" label="Hydrogen production"/>
<link wikidata="Q556466" start="25934" end="25951" title="steam reforming" label="steam reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182" start="26237" end="26266" title="Weizmann Institute of Science" label="Weizmann Institute of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q190077" start="26306" end="26316" title="zinc oxide" label="zinc oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150682" start="26483" end="26495" title="Thermal mass" label="Thermal mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441920" start="26596" end="26619" title="seasonal thermal energy storage" label="interseasonal durations"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="26697" end="26710" title="specific heat" label="specific heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393666" start="26786" end="26797" title="peak demand" label="peak demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q177540" start="26911" end="26923" title="paraffin wax" label="paraffin wax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26928" end="26947" title="Sodium sulfate#Thermal storage" label="Glauber&amp;#x27;s salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q204373" start="27135" end="27155" title="Dover, Massachusetts" label="Dover, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931010" start="27284" end="27295" title="molten salt" label="molten salt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27484" end="27493" title="The Solar Project#Solar Two" label="Solar Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="27643" end="27653" title="Photovoltaics" label="PV systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="27678" end="27700" title="rechargeable batteries" label="rechargeable batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608568" start="27805" end="27809" title="Grid-tied electrical system" label="grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685471" start="27875" end="27887" title="Net metering" label="Net metering"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="28485" end="28516" title="Pumped-storage hydroelectricity" label="Pumped-storage hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="28840" end="28844" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="28872" end="28893" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="28961" end="28972" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="29263" end="29272" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="29279" end="29295" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="29300" end="29318" title="1979 energy crisis" label="1979 energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856153" start="29674" end="29678" title="NREL" label="NREL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047780" start="29688" end="29692" title="New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization" label="NEDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233961" start="29699" end="29706" title="Solar power in Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q161057" start="29708" end="29757" title="Fraunhofer Society" label="Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136659" start="29987" end="30006" title="solar water heating" label="solar water heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="30463" end="30490" title="International Energy Agency" label="International Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q826700" start="31235" end="31262" title="International Energy Agency" label="International Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="31460" end="31474" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q795757" start="31479" end="31512" title="energy transition" label="transitioning to renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="31623" end="31640" title="Efficient energy use" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="31663" end="31677" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q637440" start="31821" end="31827" title="Lazard" label="Lazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q77896938" start="31842" end="31856" title="Levelized cost of energy" label="levelized cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q11569191" start="32325" end="32339" title="Thermogenerator" label="Thermoelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q131313" start="32537" end="32546" title="heat pump" label="heat pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q209233" start="32688" end="32702" title="thermal energy" label="thermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q837515" start="32897" end="32917" title="Solar thermal collector" label="thermal solar panels"/>
<link wikidata="Q27098513" start="33048" end="33057" title="Water heating" label="hot water"/>
<link wikidata="Q902090" start="33265" end="33268" title="Coefficient of performance" label="COP"/>
<link wikidata="Q192704" start="33303" end="33312" title="Energy conversion efficiency" label="efficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362339" start="33451" end="33457" title="Photovoltaic thermal hybrid solar collector" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q754943" start="33459" end="33463" title="Mono-crystalline silicon" label="mono"/>
<link wikidata="Q737038" start="33464" end="33479" title="Polycrystalline silicon" label="polycrystalline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661392" start="33481" end="33490" title="Thin-film solar cell" label="thin film"/>
<link wikidata="Q174915" start="33699" end="33713" title="Variable cost" label="variable costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q519302" start="33758" end="33775" title="electric aircraft" label="electric aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="33804" end="33819" title="Electric motor" label="electric motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="33832" end="33859" title="Internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q180253" start="33890" end="33900" title="Fuel cell" label="fuel cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="33902" end="33913" title="Solar cell" label="solar cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q754523" start="33915" end="33930" title="ultracapacitors" label="ultracapacitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856398" start="33932" end="33945" title="power beaming" label="power beaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="33950" end="33959" title="Electric battery" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="34062" end="34086" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34113" end="34148" title="Model aircraft#Electric power" label="Electrically powered model aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q742889" start="34338" end="34353" title="Solar Impulse 2" label="Solar Impulse 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347279" start="34420" end="34429" title="Heliostat" label="Heliostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019065" start="34432" end="34459" title="List of solar energy topics" label="List of solar energy topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639780" start="34462" end="34492" title="List of solar-powered products" label="List of solar-powered products"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313122" start="34495" end="34509" title="Renewable heat" label="Renewable heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750058" start="34512" end="34529" title="Soil solarization" label="Soil solarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556158" start="34532" end="34546" title="Solar easement" label="Solar easement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556694" start="34549" end="34581" title="Solar energy use in rural Africa" label="Solar energy use in rural Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403028" start="34584" end="34603" title="Solar updraft tower" label="Solar updraft tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981843" start="34606" end="34627" title="Solar power satellite" label="Solar power satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q938237" start="34630" end="34643" title="Solar tracker" label="Solar tracker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27745" wikidata="Q102145" url="?curid=27745" title="Standard temperature and pressure">
<text>Standard temperature and pressure (STP) or standard conditions for temperature and pressure are various standard sets of conditions for experimental measurements used to allow comparisons to be made between different sets of data. The most used standards are those of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), although these are not universally accepted. Other organizations have established a variety of other definitions.

In industry and commerce, the standard conditions for temperature and pressure are often necessary for expressing the volumes of gases and liquids and related quantities such as the rate of volumetric flow (the volumes of gases vary significantly with temperature and pressure): standard cubic meters per second (Sm3/s), and normal cubic meters per second (Nm3/s).

Many technical publications (books, journals, advertisements for equipment and machinery) simply state &quot;standard conditions&quot; without specifying them; often substituting the term with older &quot;normal conditions&quot;, or &quot;NC&quot;. In special cases this can lead to confusion and errors. Good practice always incorporates the reference conditions of temperature and pressure. If not stated, some room environment conditions are supposed, close to 1 atm pressure, (), and 0% humidity.

== Definitions ==

In chemistry, IUPAC changed its definition of standard temperature and pressure in 1982:
* Until 1982, STP was defined as a temperature of 273.15 K (0 °C, 32 °F) and an absolute pressure of exactly 1 atm (101.325 kPa).
* Since 1982, STP has been defined as a temperature of 273.15 K (0 °C, 32 °F) and an absolute pressure of exactly 1 bar (100 kPa, 105 Pa).

NIST uses a temperature of 20 °C (293.15 K, 68 °F) and an absolute pressure of 1 atm (14.696 psi, 101.325 kPa). This standard is also called normal temperature and pressure (abbreviated as NTP). However, a common temperature and pressure in use by NIST for thermodynamic experiments is 298.15 K (25 °C, 77 °F) and 1 bar (14.5038 psi, 100 kPa). NIST also uses 15 °C (288.15 K, 59 °F) for the temperature compensation of refined petroleum products, despite noting that these two values are not exactly consistent with each other.

The ISO 13443 standard reference conditions for natural gas and similar fluids are and 101.325 kPa;
by contrast, the American Petroleum Institute adopts .

=== Past uses ===
Before 1918, many professionals and scientists using the metric system of units defined the standard reference conditions of temperature and pressure for expressing gas volumes as being and . During those same years, the most commonly used standard reference conditions for people using the imperial or U.S. customary systems was and 14.696 psi (1 atm) because it was almost universally used by the oil and gas industries worldwide. The above definitions are no longer the most commonly used in either system of units.

=== Current use ===

Many different definitions of standard reference conditions are currently being used by organizations all over the world. The table below lists a few of them, but there are more. Some of these organizations used other standards in the past. For example, IUPAC has, since 1982, defined standard reference conditions as being 0 °C and 100 kPa (1 bar), in contrast to its old standard of 0 °C and 101.325 kPa (1 atm). The new value is the mean atmospheric pressure at an altitude of about 112 metres, which is closer to the worldwide median altitude of human habitation (194 m).

Natural gas companies in Europe, Australia, and South America have adopted 15 °C (59 °F) and 101.325 kPa (14.696 psi) as their standard gas volume reference conditions, used as the base values for defining the standard cubic meter. Also, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) each have more than one definition of standard reference conditions in their various standards and regulations.

Abbreviations:
* EGIA: Electricity and Gas Inspection Act (of Canada)
* SATP: Standard Ambient Temperature and Pressure
* SCF: Standard Cubic Foot

==International Standard Atmosphere==
In aeronautics and fluid dynamics the &quot;International Standard Atmosphere&quot; (ISA) is a specification of pressure, temperature, density, and speed of sound at each altitude. At standard mean sea level it specifies a temperature of , pressure of (1 atm), and a density of . It also specifies a temperature lapse rate of −6.5 °C (−11.7 °F) per km (approximately −2 °C (−3.6 °F) per 1,000 ft).

The International Standard Atmosphere is representative of atmospheric conditions at mid latitudes. In the US this information is specified the U.S. Standard Atmosphere which is identical to the &quot;International Standard Atmosphere&quot; at all altitudes up to 65,000 feet above sea level.

==Standard laboratory conditions==
Because many definitions of standard temperature and pressure differ in temperature significantly from standard laboratory temperatures (e.g. 0 °C vs. ~28 °C), reference is often made to &quot;standard laboratory conditions&quot; (a term deliberately chosen to be different from the term &quot;standard conditions for temperature and pressure&quot;, despite its semantic near identity when interpreted literally). However, what is a &quot;standard&quot; laboratory temperature and pressure is inevitably geography-bound, given that different parts of the world differ in climate, altitude and the degree of use of heat/cooling in the workplace. For example, schools in New South Wales, Australia use 25 °C at 100 kPa for standard laboratory conditions.
ASTM International has published Standard ASTM E41- Terminology Relating to Conditioning and hundreds of special conditions for particular materials and test methods. Other standards organizations also have specialized standard test conditions.

==Molar volume of a gas==
It is as important to indicate the applicable reference conditions of temperature and pressure when stating the molar volume of a gas as it is when expressing a gas volume or volumetric flow rate. Stating the molar volume of a gas without indicating the reference conditions of temperature and pressure has very little meaning and can cause confusion.

The molar volume of gases around STP and at atmospheric pressure can be calculated with an accuracy that is usually sufficient by using the ideal gas law. The molar volume of any ideal gas may be calculated at various standard reference conditions as shown below:
* &quot;V&quot;m = 8.3145 × 273.15 / 101.325 = 22.414 dm3/mol at 0 °C and 101.325 kPa
* &quot;V&quot;m = 8.3145 × 273.15 / 100.000 = 22.711 dm3/mol at 0 °C and 100 kPa
* &quot;V&quot;m = 8.3145 × 288.15 / 101.325 = 23.645 dm3/mol at 15 °C and 101.325 kPa
* &quot;V&quot;m = 8.3145 × 298.15 / 101.325 = 24.466 dm3/mol at 25 °C and 101.325 kPa
* &quot;V&quot;m = 8.3145 × 298.15 / 100.000 = 24.790 dm3/mol at 25 °C and 100 kPa
* &quot;V&quot;m = 10.7316 × 519.67 / 14.696 = 379.48 ft3/lbmol at 60 °F and 14.696 psi (or about 0.8366 ft3/gram mole)
* &quot;V&quot;m = 10.7316 × 519.67 / 14.730 = 378.61 ft3/lbmol at 60 °F and 14.73 psi

Technical literature can be confusing because many authors fail to explain whether they are using the ideal gas constant &quot;R&quot;, or the specific gas constant &quot;R&quot;s. The relationship between the two constants is &quot;R&quot;s = &quot;R&quot; / &quot;m&quot;, where &quot;m&quot; is the molecular mass of the gas.

The US Standard Atmosphere (USSA) uses 8.31432 m3·Pa/(mol·K) as the value of &quot;R&quot;. However, the USSA in 1976 does recognize that this value is not consistent with the values of the Avogadro constant and the Boltzmann constant.

==See also==
* Environmental chamber
* ISO 1 – standard reference temperature for geometric product specifications
* Reference atmospheric model
* Room temperature
* Standard sea-level conditions
* Standard state

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==External links==
* &quot;Standard conditions for gases&quot; from the IUPAC &quot;Gold Book&quot;.
* &quot;Standard pressure&quot; from the IUPAC &quot;Gold Book&quot;.
* &quot;STP&quot; from the IUPAC &quot;Gold Book&quot;.
* &quot;Standard state&quot; from the IUPAC &quot;Gold Book&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="0" end="33" title="Standard temperature and pressure" label="Standard temperature and pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="35" end="38" title="Standard temperature and pressure" label="STP"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="43" end="91" title="Standard temperature and pressure" label="standard conditions for temperature and pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="104" end="112" title="Technical standard" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="272" end="321" title="International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry" label="International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="338" end="384" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="511" end="519" title="Industry (manufacturing)" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="524" end="532" title="commerce" label="commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134348" start="698" end="713" title="volumetric flow" label="volumetric flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q10497232" start="787" end="819" title="standard cubic meters per second" label="standard cubic meters per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="1519" end="1530" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="1541" end="1542" title="Kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424019" start="1564" end="1581" title="absolute pressure" label="absolute pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q177974" start="1595" end="1598" title="Standard atmosphere (unit)" label="atm"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="1608" end="1611" title="Pascal (unit)" label="kPa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="1654" end="1665" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="1676" end="1677" title="Kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424019" start="1699" end="1716" title="absolute pressure" label="absolute pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q103510" start="1730" end="1733" title="Bar (unit)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="1748" end="1750" title="Pascal (unit)" label="Pa"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="1754" end="1758" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="NIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q103510" start="2070" end="2073" title="Bar (unit)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q626299" start="2083" end="2086" title="Pounds per square inch" label="psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="2092" end="2095" title="Pascal (unit)" label="kPa"/>
<link wikidata="Q466043" start="2400" end="2428" title="American Petroleum Institute" label="American Petroleum Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q641227" start="2748" end="2756" title="Imperial units" label="imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116609" start="2760" end="2774" title="United States customary units" label="U.S. customary"/>
<link wikidata="Q626299" start="2798" end="2801" title="pound-force per square inch" label="psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q350023" start="3785" end="3805" title="standard cubic meter" label="standard cubic meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="3817" end="3863" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="3875" end="3920" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="3931" end="3977" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="4287" end="4298" title="aeronautics" label="aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="4303" end="4317" title="fluid dynamics" label="fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q579176" start="4328" end="4361" title="International Standard Atmosphere" label="International Standard Atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598376" start="4468" end="4491" title="standard mean sea level" label="standard mean sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q177974" start="4539" end="4542" title="atmosphere (unit)" label="atm"/>
<link wikidata="Q66900467" start="4596" end="4606" title="lapse rate" label="lapse rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863422" start="4827" end="4851" title="U.S. Standard Atmosphere" label="U.S. Standard Atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q483242" start="5466" end="5476" title="laboratory" label="laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="5681" end="5696" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5698" end="5707" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q621977" start="5765" end="5783" title="ASTM International" label="ASTM International"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="5798" end="5806" title="Technical standard" label="Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115530" start="5918" end="5929" title="test method" label="test method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328899" start="5938" end="5960" title="standards organization" label="standards organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q487112" start="6149" end="6161" title="molar volume" label="molar volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q191785" start="6530" end="6543" title="ideal gas law" label="ideal gas law"/>
<link wikidata="Q200323" start="6708" end="6710" title="Decimetre" label="dm"/>
<link wikidata="Q182333" start="7389" end="7407" title="ideal gas constant" label="ideal gas constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q182854" start="7589" end="7603" title="molecular mass" label="molecular mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863422" start="7621" end="7643" title="U.S. Standard Atmosphere" label="US Standard Atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203" start="7807" end="7824" title="Avogadro constant" label="Avogadro constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="7833" end="7851" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q928058" start="7869" end="7890" title="Environmental chamber" label="Environmental chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457552" start="7893" end="7898" title="ISO 1" label="ISO 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153309" start="7971" end="7998" title="Reference atmospheric model" label="Reference atmospheric model"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="8001" end="8017" title="Room temperature" label="Room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598376" start="8020" end="8049" title="Standard sea-level conditions" label="Standard sea-level conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878074" start="8052" end="8066" title="Standard state" label="Standard state"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="8179" end="8184" title="IUPAC" label="IUPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="8249" end="8254" title="IUPAC" label="IUPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="8305" end="8310" title="IUPAC" label="IUPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="8372" end="8377" title="IUPAC" label="IUPAC"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27750" wikidata="Q869052" url="?curid=27750" title="Script kiddie">
<text>A script kiddie, skript kiddie, skiddie, kiddie, or skid is an unskilled individual who uses scripts or programs developed by others.

==Characteristics==
The term script kiddie was first used in 1988.
In a Carnegie Mellon report prepared for the US Department of Defence in 2000, script kiddies are defined as The more immature but unfortunately often just as dangerous exploiter of security lapses on the Internet. The typical script kiddy uses existing and frequently well known and easy-to-find techniques and programs or scripts to search for and exploit weaknesses in other computers on the Internet—often randomly and with little regard or perhaps even understanding of the potentially harmful consequences.

Script kiddies typically have at least one or more effective and easily downloadable programs capable of breaching computers and networks.

Script kiddies vandalize websites both for the thrill of it and to increase their reputation among their peers. Some more malicious script kiddies have used virus toolkits to create and propagate the Anna Kournikova and Love Bug viruses.
Script kiddies lack, or are only developing, programming skills sufficient to understand the effects and side effects of their actions. As a result, they leave significant traces which lead to their detection, or directly attack companies which have detection and countermeasures already in place, or in some cases, leave automatic crash reporting turned on.

Although script kiddie attacks might become increasingly more effective in the future, researchers have noted that other models, like the language model, can also be used to enhance protection against the improved script kiddie attacks. This continuous back and forth improvement suggests that the competition between cyber attackers and defenders will continue to increase.

==See also==
* Black hat hacker
* Computer security
* Exploit (computer security)
* Hacker (computer security)
*Hacktivism
* Lamer
* List of convicted computer criminals
* Luser
* Noob 
* Web shell, a tool that script kiddies frequently use

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* &quot;The Art of Intrusion: The Real Stories Behind the Exploits of Hackers, Intruders and Deceivers&quot; (2005) 

==External links==
* Honeynet.org - Know Your Enemy (Essay about script kiddies) preserved at Internet Archive
* Cracking the Hacker Mindset</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q869052" start="2" end="15" title="Script kiddie" label="script kiddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q869052" start="17" end="30" title="Script kiddie" label="skript kiddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q869052" start="32" end="39" title="Script kiddie" label="skiddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q869052" start="41" end="47" title="Script kiddie" label="kiddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q869052" start="52" end="56" title="Script kiddie" label="skid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="247" end="271" title="United States Department of Defense" label="US Department of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496143" start="1056" end="1071" title="Anna Kournikova (computer virus)" label="Anna Kournikova"/>
<link wikidata="Q856096" start="1076" end="1084" title="ILOVEYOU" label="Love Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332289" start="1845" end="1861" title="Black hat hacker" label="Black hat hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510521" start="1864" end="1881" title="Computer security" label="Computer security"/>
<link wikidata="Q11287" start="1884" end="1911" title="Exploit (computer security)" label="Exploit (computer security)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="1914" end="1940" title="Hacker (computer security)" label="Hacker (computer security)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22685" start="1942" end="1952" title="Hacktivism" label="Hacktivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q631956" start="1955" end="1960" title="Lamer" label="Lamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610645" start="1963" end="1999" title="List of convicted computer criminals" label="List of convicted computer criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q838191" start="2002" end="2007" title="Luser" label="Luser"/>
<link wikidata="Q718943" start="2010" end="2014" title="Noob" label="Noob"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839599" start="2018" end="2027" title="Web shell" label="Web shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="2322" end="2338" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27751" wikidata="Q2078" url="?curid=27751" title="SVG">
<text>Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) is an XML-based vector image format for defining two-dimensional graphics, having support for interactivity and animation. The SVG specification is an open standard developed by the World Wide Web Consortium since 1999.

SVG images are defined in a vector graphics format and stored in XML text files. SVG images can thus be scaled in size without loss of quality, and SVG files can be searched, indexed, scripted, and compressed. The XML text files can be created and edited with text editors or vector graphics editors, and are rendered by most web browsers. If used for images, SVG can host scripts or CSS, potentially leading to cross-site scripting attacks or other security vulnerabilities.

== History ==

SVG has been in development within the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) since 1999 after six competing proposals for vector graphics languages had been submitted to the consortium during 1998 (see below).

The early SVG Working Group decided not to develop any of the commercial submissions, but to create a new markup language that was informed by but not really based on any of them.

SVG was developed by the W3C SVG Working Group starting in 1998, after six competing vector graphics submissions were received that year:
* Web Schematics, from CCLRC
* PGML, from Adobe Systems, IBM, Netscape and Sun Microsystems
* VML, by Autodesk, Hewlett-Packard, Macromedia, Microsoft, and Vision 
* Hyper Graphics Markup Language (HGML), by Orange UK and PRP
* WebCGM, from Boeing, PTC, InterCAP Graphics Systems, Inso Corporation, CCLRC, and Xerox
* DrawML, from Excosoft AB
The working group was chaired at the time by Chris Lilley of the W3C.

Early adoption was limited due to lack of support in older versions of Internet Explorer. However, as of 2011, all major desktop browsers began to support SVG. Native browser support offers various advantages, such as not requiring plugins, allowing SVG to be mixed with other content, and improving rendering and scripting reliability. Mobile support for SVG exists in various forms, with different devices and browsers supporting SVG Tiny 1.1 or 1.2. SVG can be produced using vector graphics editors and rendered into raster formats. In web-based applications, Inline SVG allows embedding SVG content within HTML documents.

The SVG specification was updated to version 1.1 in 2011. Scalable Vector Graphics 2 became a W3C Candidate Recommendation on 15 September 2016. SVG 2 incorporates several new features in addition to those of SVG 1.1 and SVG Tiny 1.2.

=== Version 1.x ===

* SVG 1.0 became a W3C Recommendation on 4 September 2001.
* SVG 1.1 became a W3C Recommendation on 14 January 2003. The SVG 1.1 specification is modularized in order to allow subsets to be defined as profiles. Apart from this, there is very little difference between SVG 1.1 and SVG 1.0.
** SVG Tiny and SVG Basic (the Mobile SVG Profiles) became W3C Recommendations on 14 January 2003. These are described as profiles of SVG 1.1.
* SVG Tiny 1.2 became a W3C Recommendation on 22 December 2008. It was initially drafted as a profile of the planned SVG Full 1.2 (which has since been dropped in favor of SVG 2), but was later refactored as a standalone specification. It is generally poorly supported.
* SVG 1.1 Second Edition, which includes all the errata and clarifications, but no new features to the original SVG 1.1 was released on 16 August 2011.
* SVG Tiny 1.2 Portable/Secure, a more secure subset of the SVG Tiny 1.2 profile introduced as an IETF draft standard on 29 July 2020. Also known as SVG Tiny P/S. SVG Tiny 1.2 Portable/Secure is a requirement of the BIMI draft standard.

=== Version 2 ===

SVG 2 removes or deprecates some features of SVG 1.1 and incorporates new features from HTML5 and Web Open Font Format (WOFF):

* For example, SVG 2 removes several font elements such as codice_1 and codice_2 (replaced by the WOFF).
* The codice_3 attribute is deprecated in favor of CSS.
* HTML5 features such as codice_4 and codice_5 attributes have been added.
* Text handling features from SVG Tiny 1.2 are annotated as to be included, but not yet formalized in text. Some other 1.2 features are cherry picked in, but SVG 2 is not a superset of SVG tiny 1.2 in general.

SVG 2 reached the Candidate Recommendation stage on 15 September 2016, and revised versions were published on 7 August 2018 and 4 October 2018. The latest draft was released on 08 March 2023.

== Features ==
SVG supports interactivity, animation, and rich graphical capabilities, making it suitable for both web and print applications. SVG images can be compressed with the gzip algorithm, resulting in SVGZ files that are typically 20–50% smaller than the original. SVG also supports metadata, enabling better indexing, searching, and retrieval of SVG content.

SVG allows three types of graphic objects: vector graphic shapes (such as paths consisting of straight lines and curves), bitmap images, and text. Graphical objects can be grouped, styled, transformed and composited into previously rendered objects. The feature set includes nested transformations, clipping paths, alpha masks, filter effects and template objects. SVG drawings can be interactive and can include animation, defined in the SVG XML elements or via scripting that accesses the SVG Document Object Model (DOM).

SVG uses CSS for styling and JavaScript for scripting. Text, including internationalization and localization, appearing in plain text within the SVG DOM, enhances the accessibility of SVG graphics.

=== Printing ===

Though the SVG Specification primarily focuses on vector graphics markup language, its design includes the basic capabilities of a page description language like Adobe&#x27;s PDF. It contains provisions for rich graphics, and is compatible with CSS for styling purposes. SVG has the information needed to place each glyph and image in a chosen location on a printed page.

=== Scripting and animation ===
SVG drawings can be dynamic and interactive. Time-based modifications to the elements can be described in SMIL, or can be programmed in a scripting language (e.g. JavaScript). The W3C explicitly recommends SMIL as the standard for animation in SVG.

A rich set of event handlers such as &quot;onmouseover&quot; and &quot;onclick&quot; can be assigned to any SVG graphical object to apply actions and events.

=== Mobile profiles ===

Because of industry demand, two mobile profiles were introduced with SVG 1.1: &quot;SVG Tiny&quot; (SVGT) and &quot;SVG Basic&quot; (SVGB).

These are subsets of the full SVG standard, mainly intended for user agents with limited capabilities. In particular, SVG Tiny was defined for highly restricted mobile devices such as cellphones; it does not support styling or scripting. SVG Basic was defined for higher-level mobile devices, such as smartphones.

In 2003, the 3GPP, an international telecommunications standards group, adopted SVG Tiny as the mandatory vector graphics media format for next-generation phones. SVGT is the required vector graphics format and support of SVGB is optional for Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) and Packet-switched Streaming Service. It was later added as required format for vector graphics in 3GPP IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS).

Neither mobile profile includes support for the full Document Object Model (DOM), while only SVG Basic has optional support for scripting, but because they are fully compatible subsets of the full standard, most SVG graphics can still be rendered by devices which only support the mobile profiles.

SVGT 1.2 adds a microDOM (μDOM), styling and scripting. SVGT 1.2 also includes some features not found in SVG 1.1, including non-scaling strokes, which are supported by some SVG 1.1 implementations, such as Opera, Firefox, and WebKit. As shared code bases between desktop and mobile browsers increased, the use of SVG 1.1 over SVGT 1.2 also increased.

=== Compression ===

SVG images, being XML, contain many repeated fragments of text, so they are well suited for lossless data compression algorithms. When an SVG image has been compressed with the gzip algorithm, it is referred to as an &quot;SVGZ&quot; image and uses the corresponding codice_6 filename extension. Conforming SVG 1.1 viewers will display compressed images. An SVGZ file is typically 20 to 50 percent of the original size. W3C provides SVGZ files to test for conformance.

== Design ==

The SVG 1.1 specification defines 14 functional areas or feature sets:

;Paths
:Simple or compound shape outlines are drawn with curved or straight lines that can be filled in, outlined, or used as a clipping path. Paths have a compact coding.
:For example, &lt;dfn&gt;codice_7&lt;/dfn&gt; (for &quot;move to&quot;) precedes initial numeric x and y coordinates, and &lt;dfn&gt;codice_8&lt;/dfn&gt; (for &quot;line to&quot;) precedes a point to which a line should be drawn. Further command letters (codice_9, codice_10, codice_11, codice_12, and codice_13) precede data that is used to draw various Bézier and elliptical curves. codice_14 is used to close a path.
:In all cases, absolute coordinates follow capital letter commands and relative coordinates are used after the equivalent lower-case letters.
;Basic shapes
:Straight-line paths and paths made up of a series of connected straight-line segments (polylines), as well as closed polygons, circles, and ellipses can be drawn. Rectangles and round-cornered rectangles are also standard elements.
;Text
:Unicode character text included in an SVG file is expressed as XML character data. Many visual effects are possible, and the SVG specification automatically handles bidirectional text (for composing a combination of English and Arabic text, for example), vertical text (as Chinese or Japanese may be written) and characters along a curved path (such as the text around the edge of the Great Seal of the United States).
;Painting
:SVG shapes can be filled and outlined (painted with a color, a gradient, or a pattern). Fills may be opaque, or have any degree of transparency.
:&quot;Markers&quot; are line-end features, such as arrowheads, or symbols that can appear at the vertices of a polygon.
;Color
:Colors can be applied to all visible SVG elements, either directly or via codice_15, codice_16, and other properties. Colors are specified in the same way as in CSS2, i.e. using names like codice_17 or codice_18, in hexadecimal such as codice_19 or codice_20, in decimal like codice_21, or as percentages of the form codice_22.
;Gradients and patterns
:SVG shapes can be filled or outlined with solid colors as above, or with color gradients or with repeating patterns. Color gradients can be linear or radial (circular), and can involve any number of colors as well as repeats. Opacity gradients can also be specified. Patterns are based on predefined raster or vector graphic objects, which can be repeated in codice_23 and codice_24 directions. Gradients and patterns can be animated and scripted.
:Since 2008, there has been discussion among professional users of SVG that either gradient meshes or preferably diffusion curves could usefully be added to the SVG specification. It is said that a &quot;simple representation [using diffusion curves] is capable of representing even very subtle shading effects&quot; and that &quot;Diffusion curve images are comparable both in quality and coding efficiency with gradient meshes, but are simpler to create (according to several artists who have used both tools), and can be captured from bitmaps fully automatically.&quot; The current draft of SVG 2 includes gradient meshes.
;Clipping, masking and compositing
:Graphic elements, including text, paths, basic shapes and combinations of these, can be used as outlines to define both &quot;inside&quot; and &quot;outside&quot; regions that can be painted (with colors, gradients and patterns) independently. Fully opaque &quot;clipping paths&quot; and semi-transparent &quot;masks&quot; are &quot;composited&quot; together to calculate the color and opacity of every pixel of the final image, using alpha blending.
;Filter effects
:A filter effect consists of a series of graphics operations that are applied to a given source vector graphic to produce a modified bitmapped result.
;Interactivity
:SVG images can interact with users in many ways. In addition to hyperlinks as mentioned below, any part of an SVG image can be made receptive to user interface events such as changes in focus, mouse clicks, scrolling or zooming the image and other pointer, keyboard and document events. Event handlers may start, stop or alter animations as well as trigger scripts in response to such events.
;Linking
:SVG images can contain hyperlinks to other documents, using XLink. Through the use of the codice_25 element or a fragment identifier, URLs can link to SVG files that change the visible area of the document. This allows for creating specific view states that are used to zoom in/out of a specific area or to limit the view to a specific element. This is helpful when creating sprites. XLink support in combination with the codice_26 element also allow linking to and re-using internal and external elements. This allows coders to do more with less markup and makes for cleaner code.
;Scripting
:All aspects of an SVG document can be accessed and manipulated using scripts in a similar way to HTML. The default scripting language is JavaScript and there are defined Document Object Model (DOM) objects for every SVG element and attribute. Scripts are enclosed in codice_27 elements. They can run in response to pointer events, keyboard events and document events as required.
;Animation
: SVG content can be animated using the built-in animation elements such as codice_28, codice_29 and codice_30. Content can be animated by manipulating the DOM using ECMAScript and the scripting language&#x27;s built-in timers. SVG animation has been designed to be compatible with current and future versions of Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language (SMIL). Animations can be continuous, they can loop and repeat, and they can respond to user events, as mentioned above.
;Fonts
:As with HTML and CSS, text in SVG may reference external font files, such as system fonts. If the required font files do not exist on the machine where the SVG file is rendered, the text may not appear as intended. To overcome this limitation, text can be displayed in an &quot;SVG font&quot;, where the required glyphs are defined in SVG as a font that is then referenced from the codice_31 element.
;Metadata
:In accord with the W3C&#x27;s Semantic Web initiative, SVG allows authors to provide metadata about SVG content. The main facility is the codice_32 element, where the document can be described using Dublin Core metadata properties (e.g. title, creator/author, subject, description, etc.). Other metadata schemas may also be used. In addition, SVG defines codice_33 and codice_34 elements where authors may also provide plain-text descriptive material within an SVG image to help indexing, searching and retrieval by a number of means.

An SVG document can define components including shapes, gradients etc., and use them repeatedly. SVG images can also contain raster graphics, such as PNG and JPEG images, and further SVG images.


This code will produce the colored shapes shown in the image, excluding the grid and labels:
&lt;?xml version=&quot;1.0&quot; encoding=&quot;UTF-8&quot; standalone=&quot;no&quot;?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE svg PUBLIC &quot;-//W3C//DTD SVG 1.1//EN&quot; &quot;http://www.w3.org/Graphics/SVG/1.1/DTD/svg11.dtd&quot;&gt;
&lt;svg width=&quot;391&quot; height=&quot;391&quot; viewBox=&quot;-70.5 -70.5 391 391&quot; xmlns=&quot;http://www.w3.org/2000/svg&quot; xmlns:xlink=&quot;http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink&quot;&gt;
&lt;rect fill=&quot;#fff&quot; stroke=&quot;#000&quot; x=&quot;-70&quot; y=&quot;-70&quot; width=&quot;390&quot; height=&quot;390&quot;/&gt;
&lt;g opacity=&quot;0.8&quot;&gt;
 &lt;rect x=&quot;25&quot; y=&quot;25&quot; width=&quot;200&quot; height=&quot;200&quot; fill=&quot;lime&quot; stroke-width=&quot;4&quot; stroke=&quot;pink&quot; /&gt;
 &lt;circle cx=&quot;125&quot; cy=&quot;125&quot; r=&quot;75&quot; fill=&quot;orange&quot; /&gt;
 &lt;polyline points=&quot;50,150 50,200 200,200 200,100&quot; stroke=&quot;red&quot; stroke-width=&quot;4&quot; fill=&quot;none&quot; /&gt;
 &lt;line x1=&quot;50&quot; y1=&quot;50&quot; x2=&quot;200&quot; y2=&quot;200&quot; stroke=&quot;blue&quot; stroke-width=&quot;4&quot; /&gt;
&lt;/g&gt;
&lt;/svg&gt;

== Implementation ==

The use of SVG on the web was limited by the lack of support in older versions of Internet Explorer (IE). Many websites that serve SVG images also provide the images in a raster format, either automatically by HTTP content negotiation or by allowing the user directly to choose the file.

=== Web browsers ===

Konqueror was the first browser to support SVG in release version 3.2 in February 2004. As of 2011, all major desktop browsers, and many minor ones, have some level of SVG support. Other browsers&#x27; implementations are not yet complete; see comparison of layout engines for further details.

Some earlier versions of Firefox (e.g. versions between 1.5 and 3.6), as well as a few other, now outdated, web browsers capable of displaying SVG graphics, needed them embedded in codice_35 or codice_36 elements to display them integrated as parts of an HTML webpage instead of using the standard way of integrating images with codice_37. However, SVG images may be included in XHTML pages using XML namespaces.

Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the World Wide Web, was critical of early versions of Internet Explorer for its failure to support SVG.
* Opera (since 8.0) has support for the SVG 1.1 Tiny specification, while Opera 9 includes SVG 1.1 Basic support and some of SVG 1.1 Full. Opera 9.5 has partial SVG Tiny 1.2 support. It also supports SVGZ (compressed SVG).
* Browsers based on the Gecko layout engine (such as Firefox, Flock, Camino, and SeaMonkey) all have had incomplete support for the SVG 1.1 Full specification since 2005. The Mozilla site has an overview of the modules which are supported in Firefox and of the modules which are in development. Gecko 1.9, included in Firefox 3.0, adds support for more of the SVG specification (including filters).
* Pale Moon, which uses the Goanna layout engine (a fork of the Gecko engine), supports SVG.
* Browsers based on WebKit (such as Apple&#x27;s Safari, Google Chrome, and The Omni Group&#x27;s OmniWeb) have had incomplete support for the SVG 1.1 Full specification since 2006.
* Amaya has partial SVG support.
* Internet Explorer 8 and older versions do not support SVG. IE9 (released 14 March 2011) supports the basic SVG feature set. IE10 extended SVG support by adding SVG 1.1 filters.
* Microsoft Edge Legacy supports SVG 1.1.
* The Maxthon Cloud Browser also supports SVG.

There are several advantages to native and full support: plugins are not needed, SVG can be freely mixed with other content in a single document, and rendering and scripting become considerably more reliable.

=== Mobile devices ===

Support for SVG may be limited to SVGT on older or more limited smart phones or may be primarily limited by their respective operating system. Adobe Flash Lite has optionally supported SVG Tiny since version 1.1. At the SVG Open 2005 conference, Sun demonstrated a mobile implementation of SVG Tiny 1.1 for the Connected Limited Device Configuration (CLDC) platform.

Mobiles that use Opera Mobile, as well as the iPhone&#x27;s built in browser, also include SVG support. However, even though it used the WebKit engine, the Android built-in browser did not support SVG prior to v3.0 (Honeycomb). Prior to v3.0, Firefox Mobile 4.0b2 (beta) for Android was the first browser running under Android to support SVG by default.

The level of SVG Tiny support available varies from mobile to mobile, depending on the SVG engine installed. Many newer mobile products support additional features beyond SVG Tiny 1.1, like gradient and opacity; this is sometimes referred to as &quot;SVGT 1.1+&quot;, though there is no such standard.

RIM&#x27;s BlackBerry has built-in support for SVG Tiny 1.1 since version 5.0. Support continues for WebKit-based BlackBerry Torch browser in OS 6 and 7.

Nokia&#x27;s S60 platform has built-in support for SVG. For example, icons are generally rendered using the platform&#x27;s SVG engine. Nokia has also led the JSR 226: Scalable 2D Vector Graphics API expert group that defines Java ME API for SVG presentation and manipulation. This API has been implemented in S60 Platform 3rd Edition Feature Pack 1 and onward. Some Series 40 phones also support SVG (such as Nokia 6280).

Most Sony Ericsson phones beginning with K700 (by release date) support SVG Tiny 1.1. Phones beginning with K750 also support such features as opacity and gradients. Phones with Sony Ericsson Java Platform-8 have support for JSR 226.

Windows Phone has supported SVG since version 7.5.

SVG is also supported on various mobile devices from Motorola, Samsung, LG, and Siemens mobile/BenQ-Siemens. eSVG, an SVG rendering library mainly written for embedded devices, is available on some mobile platforms.

=== Authoring ===

SVG images can be hand coded or produced by the use of a vector graphics editor, such as Inkscape, Adobe Illustrator, Adobe Flash Professional, or CorelDRAW, and rendered to common raster image formats such as PNG using the same software. Additionally, editors like Inkscape and Boxy SVG provide tools to trace raster images to Bézier curves typically using image tracing back-ends like potrace, autotrace, and imagetracerjs.

Software can be programmed to render SVG images by using a library such as librsvg used by GNOME since 2000, Batik and ThorVG (Thor Vector Graphics) since 2020 for lightweight systems. SVG images can also be rendered to any desired popular image format by using ImageMagick, a free command-line utility (which also uses librsvg under the hood).

For web-based applications, the mode of usage termed Inline SVG allows SVG content to be embedded within an HTML document using an codice_38 tag. Its graphical capabilities can then be employed to create sophisticated user interfaces as the SVG and HTML share context, event handling, and CSS.

Other uses for SVG include embedding for use in word processing (e.g. with LibreOffice) and desktop publishing (e.g. Scribus), plotting graphs (e.g. gnuplot), and importing paths (e.g. for use in GIMP or Blender). The application services Microsoft 365 and Microsoft Office 2019 offer support for exporting, importing and editing SVG images. The Uniform Type Identifier for SVG used by Apple is codice_39 and conforms to codice_40 and codice_41.

== Security ==

As a document format, similar to HTML documents, SVG can host scripts or CSS. This is an issue when an attacker can upload a SVG file to a website, such as a profile picture, and the file is treated as a normal picture but contains malicious content. For instance, if an SVG file is deployed as a CSS background image, or a logo on some website, or in some image gallery, then when the image is loaded in a browser it activates a script or other content. This could lock up the browser (the Billion laughs attack), but could also lead to HTML injection and cross-site scripting attacks. The W3C therefore stipulate certain requirements when SVG is simply used for images: SVG Security.

The W3C says that Inline SVG (an SVG file loaded natively on a website) is considered less of a security risk because the content is part of a greater document, and so scripting and CSS would not be unexpected.

== Related work ==

The MPEG-4 Part 20 standard - &quot;Lightweight Application Scene Representation (LASeR) and Simple Aggregation Format (SAF)&quot; is based on SVG Tiny. It was developed by MPEG (ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC29/WG11) and published as ISO/IEC 14496-20:2006. SVG capabilities are enhanced in MPEG-4 Part 20 with key features for mobile services, such as dynamic updates, binary encoding, state-of-art font representation. SVG was also accommodated in MPEG-4 Part 11, in the Extensible MPEG-4 Textual (XMT) format - a textual representation of the MPEG-4 multimedia content using XML.

== See also ==
* Canvas element
* Comparison of graphics file formats
* Comparison of raster-to-vector conversion software
* Comparison of vector graphics editors
* Computer graphics
* Computer Graphics Metafile
* Image file format
* Resolution independence

== References ==

== External links ==
* specifications, list of implementations
* W3C SVG primer W3C Primer (draft) under auspices of SVG Interest Group
* MDN - SVG: Scalable Vector Graphics </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2078" start="0" end="24" title="SVG" label="Scalable Vector Graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078" start="26" end="29" title="SVG" label="SVG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="37" end="40" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="47" end="66" title="Vector graphics" label="vector image format"/>
<link wikidata="Q222032" start="80" end="95" title="Plane (mathematics)" label="two-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q681263" start="182" end="195" title="open standard" label="open standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="213" end="238" title="World Wide Web Consortium" label="World Wide Web Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858537" start="356" end="362" title="Scale (ratio)" label="scaled"/>
<link wikidata="Q755673" start="417" end="425" title="search algorithm" label="searched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167863" start="427" end="434" title="subject indexing" label="indexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="436" end="444" title="scripting language" label="scripted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="450" end="460" title="data compression" label="compressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="512" end="523" title="text editor" label="text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155404" start="528" end="550" title="vector graphics editor" label="vector graphics editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="578" end="589" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="783" end="808" title="World Wide Web Consortium" label="World Wide Web Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="1055" end="1070" title="markup language" label="markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208242" start="1159" end="1176" title="SVG Working Group" label="SVG Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176332" start="1291" end="1296" title="Council for the Central Laboratory of the Research Councils" label="CCLRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537885" start="1299" end="1303" title="PGML" label="PGML"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="1310" end="1323" title="Adobe Systems" label="Adobe Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="1325" end="1328" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q210057" start="1330" end="1338" title="Netscape" label="Netscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="1343" end="1359" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888930" start="1362" end="1365" title="Vector Markup Language" label="VML"/>
<link wikidata="Q628051" start="1370" end="1378" title="Autodesk" label="Autodesk"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="1380" end="1395" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q234946" start="1397" end="1407" title="Macromedia" label="Macromedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1409" end="1418" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1424" end="1430" title="Vision Corporation" label="Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859717" start="1476" end="1485" title="Orange UK" label="Orange UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711558" start="1490" end="1493" title="University of Plymouth" label="PRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122267" start="1496" end="1502" title="Computer Graphics Metafile" label="WebCGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="1509" end="1515" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760641" start="1517" end="1520" title="PTC (software company)" label="PTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435872" start="1549" end="1565" title="Stellent" label="Inso Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176332" start="1567" end="1572" title="Council for the Central Laboratory of the Research Councils" label="CCLRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q152433" start="1578" end="1583" title="Xerox" label="Xerox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107245" start="1656" end="1668" title="Chris Lilley (W3C)" label="Chris Lilley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2404" end="2432" title="World Wide Web Consortium#Specification maturation" label="W3C Candidate Recommendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="2586" end="2604" title="W3C Recommendation" label="W3C Recommendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078" start="2859" end="2867" title="SVG Tiny" label="SVG Tiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078" start="2872" end="2881" title="SVG Basic" label="SVG Basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q86702027" start="3637" end="3641" title="Brand Indicators for Message Identification" label="BIMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053" start="3766" end="3771" title="HTML5" label="HTML5"/>
<link wikidata="Q918221" start="3776" end="3796" title="Web Open Font Format" label="Web Open Font Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q283647" start="4627" end="4631" title="gzip" label="gzip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="4938" end="4944" title="bitmap" label="bitmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q176953" start="5048" end="5056" title="rendering (computer graphics)" label="rendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196371" start="5098" end="5113" title="transformation (geometry)" label="transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134395" start="5115" end="5128" title="clipping path" label="clipping path"/>
<link wikidata="Q693457" start="5131" end="5142" title="alpha compositing" label="alpha masks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518348" start="5144" end="5158" title="SVG filter effect" label="filter effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q839721" start="5201" end="5212" title="Interactivity" label="interactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="5229" end="5238" title="animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="5279" end="5288" title="Scripting language" label="scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093" start="5311" end="5332" title="Document Object Model" label="Document Object Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="5350" end="5353" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="5370" end="5380" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q41271" start="5412" end="5449" title="internationalization and localization" label="internationalization and localization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5508" end="5521" title="Accessibility#Web accessibility" label="accessibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572121" start="5608" end="5639" title="vector graphics markup language" label="vector graphics markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197154" start="5689" end="5714" title="page description language" label="page description language"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="5733" end="5736" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="5803" end="5806" title="Cascading Style Sheets" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072180" start="6069" end="6073" title="Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language" label="SMIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="6101" end="6119" title="scripting language" label="scripting language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="6126" end="6136" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291944" start="6227" end="6240" title="event handler" label="event handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q763744" start="6602" end="6612" title="user agent" label="user agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="6722" end="6731" title="cellphone" label="cellphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="6839" end="6849" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q229804" start="6866" end="6870" title="3GPP" label="3GPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q189443" start="7096" end="7124" title="Multimedia Messaging Service" label="Multimedia Messaging Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140664" start="7236" end="7259" title="IP Multimedia Subsystem" label="IP Multimedia Subsystem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8033" end="8058" title="Data compression#Lossless" label="lossless data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q283647" start="8118" end="8122" title="gzip" label="gzip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134395" start="8625" end="8638" title="clipping path" label="clipping path"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="8774" end="8785" title="Cartesian coordinate system" label="coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q214728" start="9024" end="9030" title="Bézier curve" label="Bézier"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="9035" end="9045" title="Ellipse" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="9548" end="9551" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q171663" start="9870" end="9901" title="Great Seal of the United States" label="Great Seal of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="10350" end="10354" title="Cascading Style Sheets" label="CSS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="10405" end="10416" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17039097" start="11073" end="11081" title="Image gradient" label="gradient"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11082" end="11088" title="Color gradient#gradient mesh" label="meshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275438" start="11103" end="11118" title="diffusion curve" label="diffusion curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q693457" start="12087" end="12092" title="alpha compositing" label="alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="12252" end="12261" title="bitmapped" label="bitmapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291944" start="12446" end="12452" title="event (computing)" label="events"/>
<link wikidata="Q422972" start="12472" end="12477" title="focus (computing)" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063060" start="12749" end="12754" title="XLink" label="XLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440450" start="12802" end="12821" title="fragment identifier" label="fragment identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="12823" end="12826" title="URL" label="URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="13064" end="13071" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063060" start="13073" end="13078" title="XLink" label="XLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="13420" end="13430" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093" start="13453" end="13474" title="Document Object Model" label="Document Object Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072180" start="13987" end="14031" title="Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language" label="Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="14474" end="14479" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="14592" end="14595" title="W3C" label="W3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q54837" start="14603" end="14615" title="Semantic Web" label="Semantic Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="14658" end="14666" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q624610" start="14772" end="14783" title="Dublin Core" label="Dublin Core"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="15234" end="15249" title="raster graphics" label="raster graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q178051" start="15259" end="15262" title="PNG" label="PNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="15267" end="15271" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575" start="16661" end="16678" title="Internet Explorer" label="Internet Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="16750" end="16763" title="Raster graphics" label="raster format"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="16789" end="16793" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128629" start="16794" end="16813" title="content negotiation" label="content negotiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178565" start="16890" end="16899" title="Konqueror" label="Konqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q179551" start="17389" end="17397" title="HTML element" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295992" start="17582" end="17595" title="XML namespace" label="XML namespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="17599" end="17614" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="17636" end="17650" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q41242" start="17738" end="17743" title="Opera (web browser)" label="Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q487834" start="17983" end="17988" title="Gecko (software)" label="Gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q373442" start="17989" end="18002" title="Browser engine" label="layout engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="18012" end="18019" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q488886" start="18021" end="18026" title="Flock (web browser)" label="Flock"/>
<link wikidata="Q727089" start="18028" end="18034" title="Camino (web browser)" label="Camino"/>
<link wikidata="Q156197" start="18040" end="18049" title="SeaMonkey" label="SeaMonkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092491" start="18277" end="18288" title="Mozilla Firefox 3" label="Firefox 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046338" start="18360" end="18369" title="Pale Moon (web browser)" label="Pale Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20869918" start="18386" end="18392" title="Goanna (software)" label="Goanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q487834" start="18422" end="18427" title="Gecko (software)" label="Gecko"/>
<link wikidata="Q654034" start="18471" end="18477" title="WebKit" label="WebKit"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="18487" end="18492" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q35773" start="18500" end="18506" title="Safari (web browser)" label="Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q777" start="18508" end="18521" title="Google Chrome" label="Google Chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q980440" start="18527" end="18541" title="The Omni Group" label="The Omni Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061519" start="18549" end="18556" title="OmniWeb" label="OmniWeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q455973" start="18635" end="18640" title="Amaya (web browser)" label="Amaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q841259" start="18668" end="18687" title="Internet Explorer 8" label="Internet Explorer 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598139" start="18847" end="18868" title="Microsoft Edge Legacy" label="Microsoft Edge Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q491674" start="18893" end="18914" title="Maxthon" label="Maxthon Cloud Browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="18992" end="18999" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="plugins"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="19233" end="19245" title="Smart Phone" label="smart phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q384622" start="19312" end="19328" title="Adobe Flash Lite" label="Adobe Flash Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="19415" end="19418" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023837" start="19480" end="19518" title="Connected Limited Device Configuration" label="Connected Limited Device Configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q868865" start="19554" end="19566" title="Opera Mobile" label="Opera Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="19583" end="19589" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q654034" start="19674" end="19680" title="WebKit" label="WebKit"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="19693" end="19700" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q502121" start="20195" end="20198" title="Research In Motion" label="RIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q171819" start="20206" end="20216" title="BlackBerry" label="BlackBerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="20350" end="20355" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q941283" start="20363" end="20375" title="S60 platform" label="S60 platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="20546" end="20549" title="Application programming interface" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q193828" start="20576" end="20583" title="Java Platform, Micro Edition" label="Java ME"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995656" start="20717" end="20733" title="Series 40 (software platform)" label="Series 40 phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q131829880" start="20760" end="20770" title="Nokia 6280" label="Nokia 6280"/>
<link wikidata="Q376692" start="20779" end="20792" title="Sony Ericsson" label="Sony Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q944912" start="20815" end="20819" title="Sony Ericsson K700" label="K700"/>
<link wikidata="Q606942" start="20882" end="20886" title="K750" label="K750"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562469" start="20952" end="20981" title="Sony Ericsson Java Platform" label="Sony Ericsson Java Platform-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885200" start="21009" end="21022" title="Windows Phone" label="Windows Phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="21114" end="21122" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="21124" end="21131" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="Q136778" start="21133" end="21135" title="LG" label="LG"/>
<link wikidata="Q639440" start="21141" end="21155" title="Siemens mobile" label="Siemens mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q662623" start="21156" end="21168" title="BenQ-Siemens" label="BenQ-Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="21220" end="21228" title="Embedded system" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041" start="21386" end="21394" title="Inkscape" label="Inkscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q215016" start="21396" end="21413" title="Adobe Illustrator" label="Adobe Illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291129" start="21415" end="21439" title="Adobe Flash Professional" label="Adobe Flash Professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q142371" start="21444" end="21453" title="CorelDRAW" label="CorelDRAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="21478" end="21484" title="Raster graphics" label="raster"/>
<link wikidata="Q178051" start="21507" end="21510" title="PNG" label="PNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041" start="21563" end="21571" title="Inkscape" label="Inkscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q104853896" start="21576" end="21584" title="Boxy SVG" label="Boxy SVG"/>
<link wikidata="Q214728" start="21625" end="21637" title="Bézier curve" label="Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q265186" start="21655" end="21668" title="image tracing" label="image tracing"/>
<link wikidata="Q500753" start="21684" end="21691" title="potrace" label="potrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="21783" end="21790" title="library (computing)" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q286024" start="21799" end="21806" title="librsvg" label="librsvg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44316" start="21815" end="21820" title="GNOME" label="GNOME"/>
<link wikidata="Q810829" start="21833" end="21838" title="Batik (software)" label="Batik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047199" start="21986" end="21997" title="ImageMagick" label="ImageMagick"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="22413" end="22428" title="word processing" label="word processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10135" start="22440" end="22451" title="LibreOffice" label="LibreOffice"/>
<link wikidata="Q188610" start="22457" end="22475" title="desktop publishing" label="desktop publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8295" start="22482" end="22489" title="Scribus" label="Scribus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474611" start="22492" end="22507" title="Plot (graphics)" label="plotting graphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q306559" start="22514" end="22521" title="gnuplot" label="gnuplot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038" start="22561" end="22565" title="GIMP" label="GIMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q173136" start="22569" end="22576" title="Blender (software)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q775811" start="22604" end="22617" title="Microsoft 365" label="Microsoft 365"/>
<link wikidata="Q41093270" start="22622" end="22643" title="Microsoft Office 2019" label="Microsoft Office 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257511" start="22711" end="22734" title="Uniform Type Identifier" label="Uniform Type Identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570419" start="23319" end="23340" title="Billion laughs attack" label="Billion laughs attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920753" start="23366" end="23380" title="Code injection" label="HTML injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q371199" start="23385" end="23405" title="cross-site scripting" label="cross-site scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717250" start="23751" end="23765" title="MPEG-4 Part 20" label="MPEG-4 Part 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q11273" start="23920" end="23924" title="MPEG" label="MPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q911765" start="23926" end="23939" title="ISO/IEC JTC 1" label="ISO/IEC JTC 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q441715" start="24183" end="24197" title="MPEG-4 Part 11" label="MPEG-4 Part 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421923" start="24206" end="24244" title="Extensible MPEG-4 Textual Format" label="Extensible MPEG-4 Textual (XMT) format"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="24311" end="24314" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q657954" start="24334" end="24348" title="Canvas element" label="Canvas element"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000450" start="24351" end="24386" title="Comparison of graphics file formats" label="Comparison of graphics file formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368828" start="24389" end="24439" title="Comparison of raster-to-vector conversion software" label="Comparison of raster-to-vector conversion software"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438315" start="24442" end="24479" title="Comparison of vector graphics editors" label="Comparison of vector graphics editors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="24482" end="24499" title="Computer graphics" label="Computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122267" start="24502" end="24528" title="Computer Graphics Metafile" label="Computer Graphics Metafile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572121" start="24531" end="24548" title="Image file format" label="Image file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315695" start="24551" end="24574" title="Resolution independence" label="Resolution independence"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27752" wikidata="Q483666" url="?curid=27752" title="Spectroscopy">
<text>Spectroscopy is the field of study that measures and interprets electromagnetic spectra. In narrower contexts, spectroscopy is the precise study of color as generalized from visible light to all bands of the electromagnetic spectrum.

Spectroscopy, primarily in the electromagnetic spectrum, is a fundamental exploratory tool in the fields of astronomy, chemistry, materials science, and physics, allowing the composition, physical structure and electronic structure of matter to be investigated at the atomic, molecular and macro scale, and over astronomical distances.

Historically, spectroscopy originated as the study of the wavelength dependence of the absorption by gas phase matter of visible light dispersed by a prism. Current applications of spectroscopy include biomedical spectroscopy in the areas of tissue analysis and medical imaging. Matter waves and acoustic waves can also be considered forms of radiative energy, and recently gravitational waves have been associated with a spectral signature in the context of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO).

== Introduction ==
Spectroscopy is a branch of science concerned with the spectra of electromagnetic radiation as a function of its wavelength or frequency measured by spectrographic equipment, and other techniques, in order to obtain information concerning the structure and properties of matter. Spectral measurement devices are referred to as spectrometers, spectrophotometers, spectrographs or spectral analyzers. Most spectroscopic analysis in the laboratory starts with a sample to be analyzed, then a light source is chosen from any desired range of the light spectrum, then the light goes through the sample to a dispersion array (diffraction grating instrument) and captured by a photodiode. For astronomical purposes, the telescope must be equipped with the light dispersion device. There are various versions of this basic setup that may be employed.

Spectroscopy began with Isaac Newton splitting light with a prism; a key moment in the development of modern optics. Therefore, it was originally the study of visible light that we call color that later under the studies of James Clerk Maxwell came to include the entire electromagnetic spectrum. Although color is involved in spectroscopy, it is not equated with the color of elements or objects that involve the absorption and reflection of certain electromagnetic waves to give objects a sense of color to our eyes. Rather spectroscopy involves the splitting of light by a prism, diffraction grating, or similar instrument, to give off a particular discrete line pattern called a &quot;spectrum&quot; unique to each different type of element. Most elements are first put into a gaseous phase to allow the spectra to be examined although today other methods can be used on different phases. Each element that is diffracted by a prism-like instrument displays either an absorption spectrum or an emission spectrum depending upon whether the element is being cooled or heated.

Until recently all spectroscopy involved the study of line spectra and most spectroscopy still does. Vibrational spectroscopy is the branch of spectroscopy that studies the spectra. However, the latest developments in spectroscopy can sometimes dispense with the dispersion technique. In biochemical spectroscopy, information can be gathered about biological tissue by absorption and light scattering techniques. Light scattering spectroscopy is a type of reflectance spectroscopy that determines tissue structures by examining elastic scattering. In such a case, it is the tissue that acts as a diffraction or dispersion mechanism.

Spectroscopic studies were central to the development of quantum mechanics, because the first useful atomic models described the spectra of hydrogen, which include the Bohr model, the Schrödinger equation, and Matrix mechanics, all of which can produce the spectral lines of hydrogen, therefore providing the basis for discrete quantum jumps to match the discrete hydrogen spectrum. Also, Max Planck&#x27;s explanation of blackbody radiation involved spectroscopy because he was comparing the wavelength of light using a photometer to the temperature of a Black Body. Spectroscopy is used in physical and analytical chemistry because atoms and molecules have unique spectra. As a result, these spectra can be used to detect, identify and quantify information about the atoms and molecules. Spectroscopy is also used in astronomy and remote sensing on Earth. Most research telescopes have spectrographs. The measured spectra are used to determine the chemical composition and physical properties of astronomical objects (such as their temperature, density of elements in a star, velocity, black holes and more). An important use for spectroscopy is in biochemistry. Molecular samples may be analyzed for species identification and energy content.

== Theory ==
The underlying premise of spectroscopy is that light is made of different wavelengths and that each wavelength corresponds to a different frequency. The importance of spectroscopy is centered around the fact that every element in the periodic table has a unique light spectrum described by the frequencies of light it emits or absorbs consistently appearing in the same part of the electromagnetic spectrum when that light is diffracted. This opened up an entire field of study with anything that contains atoms. Spectroscopy is the key to understanding the atomic properties of all matter. As such spectroscopy opened up many new sub-fields of science yet undiscovered. The idea that each atomic element has its unique spectral signature enabled spectroscopy to be used in a broad number of fields each with a specific goal achieved by different spectroscopic procedures. The National Institute of Standards and Technology maintains a public Atomic Spectra Database that is continually updated with precise measurements.

The broadening of the field of spectroscopy is due to the fact that any part of the electromagnetic spectrum may be used to analyze a sample from the infrared to the ultraviolet telling scientists different properties about the very same sample. For instance in chemical analysis, the most common types of spectroscopy include atomic spectroscopy, infrared spectroscopy, ultraviolet and visible spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy and nuclear magnetic resonance. In nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), the theory behind it is that frequency is analogous to resonance and its corresponding resonant frequency. Resonances by the frequency were first characterized in mechanical systems such as pendulums, which have a frequency of motion noted famously by Galileo.

== Classification of methods ==

Spectroscopy is a sufficiently broad field that many sub-disciplines exist, each with numerous implementations of specific spectroscopic techniques. The various implementations and techniques can be classified in several ways.

=== Type of radiative energy ===
The types of spectroscopy are distinguished by the type of radiative energy involved in the interaction. In many applications, the spectrum is determined by measuring changes in the intensity or frequency of this energy. The types of radiative energy studied include:
* Electromagnetic radiation was the first source of energy used for spectroscopic studies. Techniques that employ electromagnetic radiation are typically classified by the wavelength region of the spectrum and include microwave, terahertz, infrared, near-infrared, ultraviolet-visible, x-ray, and gamma spectroscopy.
* Particles, because of their de Broglie waves, can also be a source of radiative energy. Both electron and neutron spectroscopy are commonly used. For a particle, its kinetic energy determines its wavelength.
* Acoustic spectroscopy involves radiated pressure waves.
* Dynamic mechanical analysis can be employed to impart radiating energy, similar to acoustic waves, to solid materials.

=== Nature of the interaction ===
The types of spectroscopy also can be distinguished by the nature of the interaction between the energy and the material. These interactions include:
* Absorption spectroscopy: Absorption occurs when energy from the radiative source is absorbed by the material. Absorption is often determined by measuring the fraction of energy transmitted through the material, with absorption decreasing the transmitted portion.
* Emission spectroscopy: Emission indicates that radiative energy is released by the material. A material&#x27;s blackbody spectrum is a spontaneous emission spectrum determined by its temperature. This feature can be measured in the infrared by instruments such as the atmospheric emitted radiance interferometer. Emission can also be induced by other sources of energy such as flames, sparks, electric arcs or electromagnetic radiation in the case of fluorescence.
* Elastic scattering and reflection spectroscopy determine how incident radiation is reflected or scattered by a material. Crystallography employs the scattering of high energy radiation, such as x-rays and electrons, to examine the arrangement of atoms in proteins and solid crystals.
* Impedance spectroscopy: Impedance is the ability of a medium to impede or slow the transmittance of energy. For optical applications, this is characterized by the index of refraction.
* Inelastic scattering phenomena involve an exchange of energy between the radiation and the matter that shifts the wavelength of the scattered radiation. These include Raman and Compton scattering.
* Coherent or resonance spectroscopy are techniques where the radiative energy couples two quantum states of the material in a coherent interaction that is sustained by the radiating field. The coherence can be disrupted by other interactions, such as particle collisions and energy transfer, and so often require high intensity radiation to be sustained. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is a widely used resonance method, and ultrafast laser spectroscopy is also possible in the infrared and visible spectral regions.
* Nuclear spectroscopy are methods that use the properties of specific nuclei to probe the local structure in matter, mainly condensed matter, molecules in liquids or frozen liquids and bio-molecules.
* Quantum logic spectroscopy is a general technique used in ion traps that enables precision spectroscopy of ions with internal structures that preclude laser cooling, state manipulation, and detection. Quantum logic operations enable a controllable ion to exchange information with a co-trapped ion that has a complex or unknown electronic structure.

=== Type of material ===
Spectroscopic studies are designed so that the radiant energy interacts with specific types of matter.

==== Atoms ====

Atomic spectroscopy was the first application of spectroscopy. Atomic absorption spectroscopy and atomic emission spectroscopy involve visible and ultraviolet light. These absorptions and emissions, often referred to as atomic spectral lines, are due to electronic transitions of outer shell electrons as they rise and fall from one electron orbit to another. Atoms also have distinct x-ray spectra that are attributable to the excitation of inner shell electrons to excited states.

Atoms of different elements have distinct spectra and therefore atomic spectroscopy allows for the identification and quantitation of a sample&#x27;s elemental composition. After inventing the spectroscope, Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff discovered new elements by observing their emission spectra. Atomic absorption lines are observed in the solar spectrum and referred to as Fraunhofer lines after their discoverer. A comprehensive explanation of the hydrogen spectrum was an early success of quantum mechanics and explained the Lamb shift observed in the hydrogen spectrum, which further led to the development of quantum electrodynamics.

Modern implementations of atomic spectroscopy for studying visible and ultraviolet transitions include flame emission spectroscopy, inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy, glow discharge spectroscopy, microwave induced plasma spectroscopy, and spark or arc emission spectroscopy. Techniques for studying x-ray spectra include X-ray spectroscopy and X-ray fluorescence.

==== Molecules ====
The combination of atoms into molecules leads to the creation of unique types of energetic states and therefore unique spectra of the transitions between these states. Molecular spectra can be obtained due to electron spin states (electron paramagnetic resonance), molecular rotations, molecular vibration, and electronic states. Rotations are collective motions of the atomic nuclei and typically lead to spectra in the microwave and millimetre-wave spectral regions. Rotational spectroscopy and microwave spectroscopy are synonymous. Vibrations are relative motions of the atomic nuclei and are studied by both infrared and Raman spectroscopy. Electronic excitations are studied using visible and ultraviolet spectroscopy as well as fluorescence spectroscopy.

Studies in molecular spectroscopy led to the development of the first maser and contributed to the subsequent development of the laser.

==== Crystals and extended materials ====
The combination of atoms or molecules into crystals or other extended forms leads to the creation of additional energetic states. These states are numerous and therefore have a high density of states. This high density often makes the spectra weaker and less distinct, i.e., broader. For instance, blackbody radiation is due to the thermal motions of atoms and molecules within a material. Acoustic and mechanical responses are due to collective motions as well.
Pure crystals, though, can have distinct spectral transitions, and the crystal arrangement also has an effect on the observed molecular spectra. The regular lattice structure of crystals also scatters x-rays, electrons or neutrons allowing for crystallographic studies.

==== Nuclei ====
Nuclei also have distinct energy states that are widely separated and lead to gamma ray spectra. Distinct nuclear spin states can have their energy separated by a magnetic field, and this allows for nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.

== Other types ==

Other types of spectroscopy are distinguished by specific applications or implementations:
* Acoustic resonance spectroscopy is based on sound waves primarily in the audible and ultrasonic regions.
* Auger electron spectroscopy is a method used to study surfaces of materials on a micro-scale. It is often used in connection with electron microscopy.
* Cavity ring-down spectroscopy
* Circular dichroism spectroscopy
* Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy is a recent technique that has high sensitivity and powerful applications for &quot;in vivo&quot; spectroscopy and imaging.
* Cold vapour atomic fluorescence spectroscopy
* Correlation spectroscopy encompasses several types of two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy.
* Deep-level transient spectroscopy measures concentration and analyzes parameters of electrically active defects in semiconducting materials.
* Dielectric spectroscopy
* Dual-polarization interferometry measures the real and imaginary components of the complex refractive index.
* Electron energy loss spectroscopy in transmission electron microscopy.
* Electron phenomenological spectroscopy measures the physicochemical properties and characteristics of the electronic structure of multicomponent and complex molecular systems.
* Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy
* Force spectroscopy
* Fourier-transform spectroscopy is an efficient method for processing spectra data obtained using interferometers. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy is a common implementation of infrared spectroscopy. NMR also employs Fourier transforms.
* Gamma spectroscopy
* Hadron spectroscopy studies the energy/mass spectrum of hadrons according to spin, parity, and other particle properties. Baryon spectroscopy and meson spectroscopy are types of hadron spectroscopy.
* Multispectral imaging and hyperspectral imaging is a method to create a complete picture of the environment or various objects, each pixel containing a full visible, visible near infrared, near infrared, or infrared spectrum.
* Inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy uses the changes in current due to inelastic electron-vibration interaction at specific energies that can also measure optically forbidden transitions.
* Inelastic neutron scattering is similar to Raman spectroscopy, but uses neutrons instead of photons.
* Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy, also called laser-induced plasma spectrometry
* Laser spectroscopy uses tunable lasers and other types of coherent emission sources, such as optical parametric oscillators, for selective excitation of atomic or molecular species.
* Light scattering spectroscopy (LSS) is a spectroscopic technique typically used to evaluate morphological changes in epithelial cells in order to study mucosal tissue and detect early cancer and precancer.
* Mass spectroscopy is a historical term used to refer to mass spectrometry. The current recommendation is to use the latter term. The term &quot;mass spectroscopy&quot; originated in the use of phosphor screens to detect ions.
* Mössbauer spectroscopy probes the properties of specific isotopic nuclei in different atomic environments by analyzing the resonant absorption of gamma rays. See also Mössbauer effect.
* Multivariate optical computing is an all optical compressed sensing technique, generally used in harsh environments, that directly calculates chemical information from a spectrum as analogue output. 
* Neutron spin echo spectroscopy measures internal dynamics in proteins and other soft matter systems.
* Nuclear quadrupole resonance is a chemical spectroscopy method mediated by NMR of the electric field gradient (EFG) in the absence of magnetic field
* Perturbed angular correlation (PAC) uses radioactive nuclei as probe to study electric and magnetic fields (hyperfine interactions) in crystals (condensed matter) and bio-molecules.
* Photoacoustic spectroscopy measures the sound waves produced upon the absorption of radiation.
* Photoemission spectroscopy
* Photothermal spectroscopy measures heat evolved upon absorption of radiation.
* Pump-probe spectroscopy can use ultrafast laser pulses to measure reaction intermediates in the femtosecond timescale.
* Raman optical activity spectroscopy exploits Raman scattering and optical activity effects to reveal detailed information on chiral centers in molecules.
* Raman spectroscopy
* Saturated spectroscopy
* Scanning tunneling spectroscopy
* Spectrophotometry
* Spin noise spectroscopy traces spontaneous fluctuations of electronic and nuclear spins.
* Time-resolved spectroscopy measures the decay rates of excited states using various spectroscopic methods.
* Time-stretch spectroscopy
* Thermal infrared spectroscopy measures thermal radiation emitted from materials and surfaces and is used to determine the type of bonds present in a sample as well as their lattice environment. The techniques are widely used by organic chemists, mineralogists, and planetary scientists.
* Transient grating spectroscopy measures quasiparticle propagation. It can track changes in metallic materials as they are irradiated.
* Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy
* Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy
* Vibrational circular dichroism spectroscopy
* Video spectroscopy
* X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

== Applications ==
There are several applications of spectroscopy in the fields of medicine, physics, chemistry, and astronomy. Taking advantage of the properties of absorbance and with astronomy emission, spectroscopy can be used to identify certain states of nature. The uses of spectroscopy in so many different fields and for so many different applications has caused specialty scientific subfields. Such examples include:
* Determining the atomic structure of a sample
* Studying spectral emission lines of the sun and distant galaxies
* Space exploration
* Cure monitoring of composites using optical fibers.
* Estimating weathered wood exposure times using near infrared spectroscopy.
* Measurement of different compounds in food samples by absorption spectroscopy both in visible and infrared spectrum.
* Measurement of toxic compounds in blood samples
* Non-destructive elemental analysis by X-ray fluorescence.
* Electronic structure research with various spectroscopes.
* Redshift to determine the speed and velocity of a distant object
* Determining the metabolic structure of a muscle
* Monitoring dissolved oxygen content in freshwater and marine ecosystems
* Altering the structure of drugs to improve effectiveness
* Characterization of proteins
* Respiratory gas analysis in hospitals
* Finding the physical properties of a distant star or nearby exoplanet using the Relativistic Doppler effect.
* In-ovo sexing: spectroscopy allows to determine the sex of the egg while it is hatching. Developed by French and German companies, both countries decided to ban chick culling, mostly done through a macerator, in 2022.
* Process monitoring in Industrial process control

== History ==
The history of spectroscopy began with Isaac Newton&#x27;s optics experiments (1666–1672). According to Andrew Fraknoi and David Morrison, &quot;In 1672, in the first paper that he submitted to the Royal Society, Isaac Newton described an experiment in which he permitted sunlight to pass through a small hole and then through a prism. Newton found that sunlight, which looks white to us, is actually made up of a mixture of all the colors of the rainbow.&quot; Newton applied the word &quot;spectrum&quot; to describe the rainbow of colors that combine to form white light and that are revealed when the white light is passed through a prism.

Fraknoi and Morrison state that &quot;In 1802, William Hyde Wollaston built an improved spectrometer that included a lens to focus the Sun&#x27;s spectrum on a screen. Upon use, Wollaston realized that the colors were not spread uniformly, but instead had missing patches of colors, which appeared as dark bands in the spectrum.&quot; During the early 1800s, Joseph von Fraunhofer made experimental advances with dispersive spectrometers that enabled spectroscopy to become a more precise and quantitative scientific technique. Since then, spectroscopy has played and continues to play a significant role in chemistry, physics, and astronomy. Per Fraknoi and Morrison, &quot;Later, in 1815, German physicist Joseph Fraunhofer also examined the solar spectrum, and found about 600 such dark lines (missing colors), are now known as Fraunhofer lines, or Absorption lines.&quot;

In quantum mechanical systems, the analogous resonance is a coupling of two quantum mechanical stationary states of one system, such as an atom, via an oscillatory source of energy such as a photon. The coupling of the two states is strongest when the energy of the source matches the energy difference between the two states. The energy of a photon is related to its frequency by where is the Planck constant, and so a spectrum of the system response vs. photon frequency will peak at the resonant frequency or energy. Particles such as electrons and neutrons have a comparable relationship, the de Broglie relations, between their kinetic energy and their wavelength and frequency and therefore can also excite resonant interactions.

Spectra of atoms and molecules often consist of a series of spectral lines, each one representing a resonance between two different quantum states. The explanation of these series, and the spectral patterns associated with them, were one of the experimental enigmas that drove the development and acceptance of quantum mechanics. The hydrogen spectral series in particular was first successfully explained by the Rutherford–Bohr quantum model of the hydrogen atom. In some cases spectral lines are well separated and distinguishable, but spectral lines can also overlap and appear to be a single transition if the density of energy states is high enough. Named series of lines include the principal, sharp, diffuse and fundamental series.

== See also ==
== Notes ==
== References ==
* 

== External links ==


* NIST Atomic Spectroscopy Databases
* MIT Spectroscopy Lab&#x27;s History of Spectroscopy
* Timeline of Spectroscopy
* Spectroscopy: Reading the Rainbow</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="0" end="12" title="Spectroscopy" label="Spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="64" end="87" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="148" end="153" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="174" end="187" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="343" end="352" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="354" end="363" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="365" end="382" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="388" end="395" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="511" end="520" title="molecule" label="molecular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344778" start="547" end="569" title="Distance measures (cosmology)" label="astronomical distances"/>
<link wikidata="Q165896" start="722" end="727" title="Prism (optics)" label="prism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975831" start="774" end="797" title="biomedical spectroscopy" label="biomedical spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="814" end="820" title="tissue (biology)" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="834" end="849" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q193907" start="851" end="862" title="Matter wave" label="Matter wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882459" start="868" end="881" title="acoustic wave" label="acoustic wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="946" end="964" title="gravitational wave" label="gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="1035" end="1086" title="LIGO" label="Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="1170" end="1177" title="spectrum" label="spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="1181" end="1206" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="1264" end="1276" title="spectrograph" label="spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="1442" end="1455" title="spectrometers" label="spectrometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q332084" start="1457" end="1475" title="spectrophotometers" label="spectrophotometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="1477" end="1489" title="spectrograph" label="spectrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055222" start="1494" end="1511" title="spectral analyzer" label="spectral analyzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q175943" start="1785" end="1795" title="photodiode" label="photodiode"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="1983" end="1995" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="2068" end="2074" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="2145" end="2150" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="2183" end="2202" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="2230" end="2254" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="3728" end="3745" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q172948" start="3839" end="3849" title="Bohr model" label="Bohr model"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="3855" end="3875" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q603198" start="3881" end="3897" title="Matrix mechanics" label="Matrix mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="3946" end="3954" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="4060" end="4070" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="4093" end="4112" title="blackbody radiation" label="blackbody radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="4227" end="4237" title="Black Body" label="Black Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="4263" end="4271" title="physical chemistry" label="physical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="4276" end="4296" title="analytical chemistry" label="analytical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="4305" end="4310" title="atoms" label="atoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="4315" end="4324" title="molecules" label="molecules"/>
<link wikidata="Q752171" start="4490" end="4499" title="astronomical spectroscopy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="4504" end="4518" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="4543" end="4553" title="telescopes" label="telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373292" start="4646" end="4665" title="physical property" label="physical properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="4669" end="4689" title="astronomical objects" label="astronomical objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="4705" end="4716" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="4749" end="4757" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="4759" end="4770" title="black holes" label="black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="5165" end="5179" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="5808" end="5854" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="6363" end="6381" title="Raman spectroscopy" label="Raman spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="6386" end="6412" title="nuclear magnetic resonance" label="nuclear magnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q172858" start="6506" end="6515" title="resonance" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20702" start="6641" end="6650" title="pendulums" label="pendulums"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="6703" end="6710" title="Galileo" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="7277" end="7302" title="Electromagnetic radiation" label="Electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48967832" start="7493" end="7502" title="microwave spectroscopy" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157147" start="7504" end="7513" title="terahertz spectroscopy and technology" label="terahertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q70906" start="7515" end="7523" title="infrared spectroscopy" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q30920485" start="7525" end="7538" title="near-infrared spectroscopy" label="near-infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q898426" start="7540" end="7559" title="Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy" label="ultraviolet-visible"/>
<link wikidata="Q901775" start="7561" end="7566" title="x-ray spectroscopy" label="x-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q906816" start="7572" end="7577" title="gamma spectroscopy" label="gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193907" start="7622" end="7638" title="Matter wave" label="de Broglie waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q905243" start="7687" end="7695" title="electron spectroscopy" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003117" start="7700" end="7720" title="neutron spectroscopy" label="neutron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="7760" end="7774" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q578970" start="7804" end="7825" title="Spectrogram" label="Acoustic spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q900639" start="7862" end="7889" title="Dynamic mechanical analysis" label="Dynamic mechanical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553575" start="8168" end="8191" title="Absorption spectroscopy" label="Absorption spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="8433" end="8454" title="Emission spectroscopy" label="Emission spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="8544" end="8562" title="blackbody spectrum" label="blackbody spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q186548" start="8810" end="8816" title="flame spectroscopy" label="flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q911679" start="8818" end="8824" title="Spark (fire)" label="sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="8826" end="8838" title="electric arc" label="electric arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768467" start="8884" end="8896" title="fluorescence spectroscopy" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042929" start="8900" end="8918" title="Elastic scattering" label="Elastic scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q663650" start="8923" end="8933" title="reflectivity" label="reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q160398" start="9021" end="9036" title="Crystallography" label="Crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q899580" start="9186" end="9208" title="Impedance spectroscopy" label="Impedance spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="9298" end="9305" title="optics" label="optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="9349" end="9368" title="index of refraction" label="index of refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027672" start="9372" end="9392" title="Inelastic scattering" label="Inelastic scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q466824" start="9539" end="9544" title="Raman scattering" label="Raman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424022" start="9549" end="9567" title="Compton scattering" label="Compton scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="9571" end="9579" title="Coherent spectroscopy" label="Coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="9696" end="9704" title="coherence (physics)" label="coherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359898" start="9925" end="9970" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy" label="Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186105" start="10010" end="10038" title="ultrafast laser spectroscopy" label="ultrafast laser spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85789979" start="10104" end="10124" title="Nuclear spectroscopy" label="Nuclear spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="10173" end="10179" title="Atomic nucleus" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q77870413" start="10193" end="10208" title="local structure" label="local structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="10227" end="10243" title="condensed matter" label="condensed matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="10245" end="10253" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q120497921" start="10305" end="10331" title="Quantum logic spectroscopy" label="Quantum logic spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202012" start="10363" end="10372" title="ion traps" label="ion traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q163117" start="10456" end="10469" title="laser cooling" label="laser cooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206311" start="10506" end="10519" title="Quantum logic" label="Quantum logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259526" start="10728" end="10742" title="radiant energy" label="radiant energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14068679" start="10802" end="10821" title="Atomic spectroscopy" label="Atomic spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q655346" start="10865" end="10895" title="Atomic absorption spectroscopy" label="Atomic absorption spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186548" start="10900" end="10928" title="atomic emission spectroscopy" label="atomic emission spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11056" end="11078" title="Atomic structure#Energy levels" label="electronic transitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="11493" end="11506" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Robert Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="11511" end="11527" title="Gustav Kirchhoff" label="Gustav Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q311552" start="11667" end="11683" title="Fraunhofer lines" label="Fraunhofer lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613048" start="11743" end="11760" title="Hydrogen spectral series" label="hydrogen spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q631614" start="11821" end="11831" title="Lamb shift" label="Lamb shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="11907" end="11930" title="quantum electrodynamics" label="quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186548" start="12036" end="12063" title="flame emission spectroscopy" label="flame emission spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q261552" start="12065" end="12120" title="inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy" label="inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12122" end="12149" title="Glow discharge#Use in analytical chemistry" label="glow discharge spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q905291" start="12151" end="12175" title="microwave induced plasma" label="microwave induced plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q901775" start="12276" end="12294" title="X-ray spectroscopy" label="X-ray spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q898974" start="12299" end="12317" title="X-ray fluorescence" label="X-ray fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q260463" start="12571" end="12602" title="electron paramagnetic resonance" label="electron paramagnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q904380" start="12605" end="12624" title="rotational spectroscopy" label="molecular rotations"/>
<link wikidata="Q900121" start="12626" end="12645" title="molecular vibration" label="molecular vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="12966" end="12984" title="Raman spectroscopy" label="Raman spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768467" start="13075" end="13100" title="fluorescence spectroscopy" label="fluorescence spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q487875" start="13173" end="13178" title="maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="13232" end="13237" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="13902" end="13919" title="lattice structure" label="lattice structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="14111" end="14120" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359898" start="14232" end="14271" title="nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy" label="nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674709" start="14386" end="14417" title="Acoustic resonance spectroscopy" label="Acoustic resonance spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="14459" end="14466" title="Sound" label="audible"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="14471" end="14481" title="Ultrasound" label="ultrasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28087" start="14493" end="14520" title="Auger electron spectroscopy" label="Auger electron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051896" start="14646" end="14675" title="Cavity ring-down spectroscopy" label="Cavity ring-down spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q899102" start="14678" end="14696" title="Circular dichroism" label="Circular dichroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q903528" start="14712" end="14751" title="Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy" label="Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142484" start="14878" end="14922" title="Cold vapour atomic fluorescence spectroscopy" label="Cold vapour atomic fluorescence spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14925" end="14949" title="Two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy#Correlation spectroscopy (COSY)" label="Correlation spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176282" start="15015" end="15048" title="Deep-level transient spectroscopy" label="Deep-level transient spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="15130" end="15144" title="semiconductor" label="semiconducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q899580" start="15158" end="15181" title="Dielectric spectroscopy" label="Dielectric spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799470" start="15184" end="15216" title="Dual-polarization interferometry" label="Dual-polarization interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q902328" start="15295" end="15328" title="Electron energy loss spectroscopy" label="Electron energy loss spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353146" start="15368" end="15406" title="Electron phenomenological spectroscopy" label="Electron phenomenological spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q260463" start="15546" end="15577" title="Electron paramagnetic resonance" label="Electron paramagnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49298" start="15593" end="15611" title="Force spectroscopy" label="Force spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047974" start="15614" end="15644" title="Fourier-transform spectroscopy" label="Fourier-transform spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q901559" start="15728" end="15767" title="Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy" label="Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520159" start="15838" end="15855" title="Fourier transform" label="Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q906816" start="15860" end="15878" title="Gamma spectroscopy" label="Gamma spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638082" start="15881" end="15900" title="Hadron spectroscopy" label="Hadron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="15958" end="15962" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q141160" start="15964" end="15970" title="parity (physics)" label="parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q132360609" start="16082" end="16103" title="Multispectral imaging" label="Multispectral imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q959005" start="16108" end="16129" title="hyperspectral imaging" label="hyperspectral imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028389" start="16310" end="16351" title="Inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy" label="Inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451740" start="16506" end="16534" title="Inelastic neutron scattering" label="Inelastic neutron scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654990" start="16609" end="16645" title="Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy" label="Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753940" start="16719" end="16732" title="tunable laser" label="tunable laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905515" start="16879" end="16908" title="Light Scattering Spectroscopy" label="Light scattering spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="16996" end="17012" title="Epithelium" label="epithelial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219805" start="17031" end="17045" title="Mucous membrane" label="mucosal tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="17063" end="17069" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088163" start="17074" end="17083" title="Precancerous condition" label="precancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="17143" end="17160" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="17280" end="17288" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q899927" start="17315" end="17337" title="Mössbauer spectroscopy" label="Mössbauer spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="17372" end="17380" title="isotope" label="isotopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="17381" end="17387" title="Atomic nucleus" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="17461" end="17470" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q918552" start="17482" end="17498" title="Mössbauer effect" label="Mössbauer effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642505" start="17502" end="17532" title="Multivariate optical computing" label="Multivariate optical computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665459" start="17551" end="17569" title="compressed sensing" label="compressed sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492917" start="17704" end="17721" title="Neutron spin echo" label="Neutron spin echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q902144" start="17784" end="17795" title="soft matter" label="soft matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q638540" start="17807" end="17835" title="Nuclear quadrupole resonance" label="Nuclear quadrupole resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357592" start="17893" end="17916" title="electric field gradient" label="electric field gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q76416136" start="17958" end="17987" title="Perturbed angular correlation" label="Perturbed angular correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413102" start="18066" end="18088" title="hyperfine structure" label="hyperfine interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="18103" end="18119" title="condensed matter" label="condensed matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q900415" start="18142" end="18168" title="Photoacoustic spectroscopy" label="Photoacoustic spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139350" start="18239" end="18265" title="Photoemission spectroscopy" label="Photoemission spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187925" start="18268" end="18293" title="Photothermal spectroscopy" label="Photothermal spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18348" end="18371" title="Femtochemistry#Pump-probe spectroscopy" label="Pump-probe spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458208" start="18414" end="18435" title="reaction intermediate" label="reaction intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288896" start="18469" end="18491" title="Raman optical activity" label="Raman optical activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="18625" end="18643" title="Raman spectroscopy" label="Raman spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822050" start="18646" end="18668" title="Saturated spectroscopy" label="Saturated spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651687" start="18671" end="18702" title="Scanning tunneling spectroscopy" label="Scanning tunneling spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332084" start="18705" end="18722" title="Spectrophotometry" label="Spectrophotometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804835" start="18816" end="18842" title="Time-resolved spectroscopy" label="Time-resolved spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805437" start="18925" end="18937" title="Time stretch analog-to-digital converter" label="Time-stretch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783055" start="18953" end="18982" title="Thermal infrared spectroscopy" label="Thermal infrared spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="19199" end="19212" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogists"/>
<link wikidata="Q104499" start="19218" end="19238" title="planetary science" label="planetary scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406979" start="19242" end="19272" title="Transient grating spectroscopy" label="Transient grating spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q602144" start="19378" end="19416" title="Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy" label="Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q898426" start="19419" end="19451" title="Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy" label="Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924663" start="19454" end="19484" title="Vibrational circular dichroism" label="Vibrational circular dichroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126755" start="19500" end="19518" title="Video spectroscopy" label="Video spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q899559" start="19521" end="19553" title="X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy" label="X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q907315" start="19721" end="19731" title="absorbance" label="absorbance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19741" end="19759" title="astronomy emission" label="astronomy emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991861" start="20118" end="20133" title="Cure monitoring" label="Cure monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="20137" end="20147" title="Composite material" label="composites"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="20154" end="20168" title="optical fibers" label="optical fibers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536001" start="20287" end="20299" title="food sampling" label="food samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q898974" start="20456" end="20474" title="X-ray fluorescence" label="X-ray fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="20538" end="20546" title="Redshift" label="Redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711325" start="20564" end="20569" title="speed" label="speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="20574" end="20582" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q579900" start="20939" end="20966" title="Relativistic Doppler effect" label="Relativistic Doppler effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q88055136" start="20970" end="20983" title="In-ovo sexing" label="In-ovo sexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309446" start="21131" end="21144" title="chick culling" label="chick culling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649571" start="21212" end="21238" title="Industrial process control" label="Industrial process control"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="21293" end="21305" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757000" start="21358" end="21372" title="Andrew Fraknoi" label="Andrew Fraknoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237750" start="21377" end="21391" title="David Morrison (astrophysicist)" label="David Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="21452" end="21465" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q312975" start="21946" end="21968" title="William Hyde Wollaston" label="William Hyde Wollaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q43948" start="22258" end="22279" title="Joseph von Fraunhofer" label="Joseph von Fraunhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q911951" start="22871" end="22887" title="stationary state" label="stationary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="22915" end="22919" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="22967" end="22973" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="23170" end="23185" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="23314" end="23322" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="23328" end="23335" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q193907" start="23373" end="23393" title="de Broglie relations" label="de Broglie relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613048" start="23847" end="23871" title="hydrogen spectral series" label="hydrogen spectral series"/>
<link wikidata="Q172948" start="23926" end="23955" title="Bohr model" label="Rutherford–Bohr quantum model"/>
<link wikidata="Q230895" start="24127" end="24151" title="density of states" label="density of energy states"/>
<link wikidata="Q108559113" start="24202" end="24211" title="principal series (spectroscopy)" label="principal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080434" start="24213" end="24218" title="sharp series" label="sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q22074515" start="24220" end="24227" title="diffuse series" label="diffuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q22074521" start="24232" end="24250" title="fundamental series" label="fundamental series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27753" wikidata="Q906553" url="?curid=27753" title="List of science fiction themes">
<text>The following is a list of articles about recurring themes in science fiction.

==Overarching themes==

*First contact with aliens
*Artificial intelligence
**Machine rule/Cybernetic revolt/AI takeover
*Extraterrestrials in fiction
*End of humanity: Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction
*The future
**Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction: Apocalypses or worldwide disasters and new societies that develop after the event
*History
**Alternate history
**Scientific prediction of the future (e.g. psychohistory)
*Human fears: List of science fiction horror films
*Language
**Alien languages (e.g. Klingon, Huttese)
**The Sapir–Whorf Hypothesis (e.g. &quot;Babel 17&quot;, &quot;The Languages of Pao&quot;)
**Universal translators (e.g. Babel fish)
*Military/conflicts
**Interstellar war
**Weapons in science fiction
*Parallel worlds or multiverse
*Philosophies and philosophical ideas
*Sex and sexuality
**LGBT themes
**Gender
**Reproduction and pregnancy
*Simulated reality and consciousness
*Social science fiction
*Technological singularity
*Themes of fantasy fiction

==Beings and entities==
*Artificial intelligences
**Androids and Gynoid
**Artificial life
**Biological robot
**Cyborgs
**Robots and humanoid robots
**Replicants
**Simulated consciousness
*Characters
**The Absent-minded professor 
**The Golem
**The Mad Scientist
**Redshirt
**Space Pirate
**Super Soldier
*Clones
*Dinosaurs
*Extraterrestrial life
**Hypothetical types of biochemistry
**Alien invasion
**Astrobiology
**God-like aliens
***Principles of non-interference (e.g. Prime Directive)
***Message from space
*Living planets (both sentient and non-sentient)
*Hive minds
*Infomorphs—memories, characters, and consciences of persons being uploaded to a computer or storage media
*Mutants
*Shapeshifters
*Superhumans
*Superorganisms
*Symbionts
*UFOs
*Uplifting—using technology to &quot;raise&quot; non-human animals to human evolutionary levels
**Ancient astronauts
**Progressor

==Body and mind alterations==
*Biohacking/Amateur biotechnicians
*Artificial organs
*Additional or improved senses
**X-ray vision
*Cloning
*Exocortex
*Genetic engineering
**Super race
*Intelligence amplification
*Invisibility
*Life extension, Biological immortality, Universal immortalism and immortality
**Cryonics
**Digital immortality
**Mind uploading
**Organ transplantation
**Organlegging
*Prosthetics
*Memory
**Memory erasure/editing
**Memory sharing
***Group mind
**Mind control
**Mind swap
**Mind uploading
**Neural implants to directly interface with machinery
*Psi powers and psychic phenomena
**Clairvoyance
**Precognition
**Pyrokinesis
**Retrocognition
**Telepathy
**Telekinesis
*Parasitism
*Psychedelia
*Resizing (size-changing, miniaturization, magnification, shrinking, and enlargement)
*Shapeshifting
*Superhuman strength
*Teleportation
*Transhumanism and Posthumanism

==Habitats==
*Artificial worlds
*Alien Zoo—a zoo where humans are kept as exhibits
*Arcologies—enormous habitats (hyperstructures) of extremely high human population density
*Cyberspace—the new, virtual territory of societal interaction
*Domed city
*Floating city
*Future of the Earth
**Climate change—science fiction dealing with effects of anthropogenic climate change and global warming at the end of the Holocene era
*Megacity
*Pastoral science fiction—science fiction set in rural, bucolic, or agrarian worlds, either on Earth or on Earth-like planets, in which advanced technologies are downplayed.
*Seasteading and ocean colonization
**Pirate utopia
*Reality Television
*Space colonization
**Colonization of the Moon
**Ecumenopolis
**Pantropy
**Other planets
***Desert planet
****Mars
**Terraformed planets
*Space stations and habitats
*Underground city

==Political themes==
*Adhocracy
*Anarcho-capitalism
*Capitalism
**Evil corporation
**Megacorporation
**Neo-feudalism
*Cognitive liberty
*Dystopias and utopias
**Environmental pollution
**Overpopulation
**Technological utopianism
**Totalitarianism
*Galactic empires
*Government by algorithm
*Legal personality
*Libertarianism
*Mass surveillance
*Mind reading and mind control
*National security state
*Post-scarcity economy
*Socialism
**Nanosocialism
*Technoethics
**Bioethics
*Technophobia
*Techno-progressivism
*Terrorism
**Bio-terrorism
**Eco-terrorism
*Totalitarianism vs. Libertarianism

==Technologies==

*Artificial gravity
*Artificial intelligence
*Asteroid mining
*Astronomical engineering
*Brain–computer interface
*Cloaking device
*Emerging technologies
*Robots
*Self-replicating machines
*Simulated reality
*Star lifting and stellar engineering
*Stasis device
*Total conversion as energy source
*Mecha
*Megascale engineering and planetary engineering
**Megastructures
**Dyson sphere
*Molecular manufacturing and Nanotechnology
**Molecular assembler
*Alien technology
*Virtual reality, mixed reality, augmented reality
**Infosphere
**Metaverse
*Weapons in science fiction

==Travel==
*Accidental travel
*Colonization of other planets, moons, asteroids, etc.
**Embryo space colonization
**Generation ship
**Interstellar ark
**Uploaded astronaut
**Terraforming
*Space exploration
**Interstellar travel/Starships
***Faster-than-light travel and communications
****Hyperspace
****Slipstream
****Warp drives
****Wormholes
****Ansibles
***Close to light speed
****Bussard ramjets
****Ursula K. Le Guin&#x27;s NAFAL ships, and the Twin paradox
***Much slower than light
****Generation ship
****Sleeper ship
**Space stations
*Teleportation
**Teletransporter
*Time travel
**Alternate history: time travel can be used as a plot device to explore parallel universes. While alternate history has its own category (see above), it often occurs in time travel stories as well.
**Alternate future
**Time loop
*Travel to the Earth&#x27;s center
**Hollow Earth

==See also==

* Biology in fiction
* Fantasy tropes
* Outline of science fiction
* Protoscience

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1053916" start="52" end="58" title="theme (narrative)" label="themes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="62" end="77" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q14841174" start="105" end="118" title="First contact (science fiction)" label="First contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q25933185" start="132" end="155" title="Artificial intelligence in fiction" label="Artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254427" start="158" end="170" title="Machine rule" label="Machine rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254427" start="171" end="188" title="Cybernetic revolt" label="Cybernetic revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254427" start="189" end="200" title="AI takeover" label="AI takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307329" start="202" end="230" title="Extraterrestrials in fiction" label="Extraterrestrials in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="249" end="289" title="Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q344" start="295" end="301" title="future" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="304" end="344" title="Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction" label="Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="385" end="427" title="Post-apocalypse" label="new societies that develop after the event"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="429" end="436" title="History" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="439" end="456" title="Alternate history (fiction)" label="Alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q748250" start="470" end="480" title="prediction" label="prediction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551232" start="501" end="514" title="Psychohistory (fictional)" label="psychohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745426" start="530" end="566" title="List of science fiction horror films" label="List of science fiction horror films"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="568" end="576" title="Language" label="Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421041" start="579" end="593" title="Alien language" label="Alien language"/>
<link wikidata="Q10134" start="601" end="608" title="Klingon language" label="Klingon"/>
<link wikidata="Q340152" start="610" end="614" title="Hutt (Star Wars)" label="Hutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179677" start="625" end="647" title="Sapir–Whorf Hypothesis" label="Sapir–Whorf Hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722309" start="660" end="668" title="Babel 17" label="Babel 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809069" start="682" end="702" title="The Languages of Pao" label="The Languages of Pao"/>
<link wikidata="Q622217" start="712" end="732" title="Universal translator" label="Universal translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q904447" start="753" end="771" title="Military science fiction" label="Military/conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661982" start="774" end="790" title="Interstellar war" label="Interstellar war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129041" start="793" end="819" title="Weapons in science fiction" label="Weapons in science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="821" end="835" title="Parallel universe (fiction)" label="Parallel world"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327819" start="840" end="850" title="multiverse" label="multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737414" start="852" end="888" title="Philosophical fiction" label="Philosophies and philosophical ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458476" start="890" end="907" title="Sex and sexuality in speculative fiction" label="Sex and sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110674" start="910" end="921" title="LGBT themes in speculative fiction" label="LGBT themes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530981" start="924" end="930" title="Gender in speculative fiction" label="Gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314294" start="933" end="959" title="Reproduction and pregnancy in speculative fiction" label="Reproduction and pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="961" end="978" title="Simulated reality" label="Simulated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521292" start="983" end="996" title="Simulated consciousness (science fiction)" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q944250" start="998" end="1020" title="Social science fiction" label="Social science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q237525" start="1022" end="1047" title="Technological singularity" label="Technological singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080374" start="1049" end="1074" title="Science fantasy" label="Themes of fantasy fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="1101" end="1124" title="Artificial intelligence" label="Artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q181787" start="1128" end="1135" title="Android (robot)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q730863" start="1141" end="1147" title="Gynoid" label="Gynoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q263847" start="1150" end="1165" title="Artificial life" label="Artificial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657270" start="1168" end="1184" title="Biological robot" label="Biological robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="1187" end="1193" title="Cyborg" label="Cyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353475" start="1197" end="1223" title="Robots in fiction" label="Robots and humanoid robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174429" start="1226" end="1235" title="Replicant" label="Replicant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521292" start="1239" end="1262" title="Simulated consciousness (science fiction)" label="Simulated consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q897028" start="1281" end="1304" title="Absent-minded professor" label="Absent-minded professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215085" start="1312" end="1317" title="Golem" label="Golem"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="1324" end="1337" title="Mad Scientist" label="Mad Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580954" start="1340" end="1348" title="Redshirt (character)" label="Redshirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q898031" start="1351" end="1363" title="Space pirate" label="Space Pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975749" start="1366" end="1379" title="Super Soldier" label="Super Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q120877" start="1381" end="1386" title="Cloning" label="Clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q590756" start="1389" end="1398" title="Dinosaurs in science fiction" label="Dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307329" start="1400" end="1421" title="Extraterrestrial life in culture" label="Extraterrestrial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q218004" start="1424" end="1458" title="Hypothetical types of biochemistry" label="Hypothetical types of biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447078" start="1461" end="1475" title="Alien invasion" label="Alien invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q411" start="1478" end="1490" title="Astrobiology" label="Astrobiology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1493" end="1507" title="God-like alien" label="God-like alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q891149" start="1549" end="1564" title="Prime Directive" label="Prime Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6821776" start="1569" end="1587" title="Message from space (science fiction)" label="Message from space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611246" start="1638" end="1648" title="Group mind (science fiction)" label="Hive minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030491" start="1650" end="1659" title="Infomorph" label="Infomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248485" start="1757" end="1764" title="Mutants in fiction" label="Mutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="1766" end="1779" title="Shapeshifting" label="Shapeshifters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643449" start="1781" end="1791" title="Superhuman" label="Superhuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q916139" start="1794" end="1807" title="Superorganism" label="Superorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="1810" end="1818" title="Symbiont" label="Symbiont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864590" start="1821" end="1825" title="UFOs in fiction" label="UFOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980086" start="1827" end="1836" title="Uplift (science fiction)" label="Uplifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q646988" start="1924" end="1942" title="Ancient astronauts" label="Ancient astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338723" start="1945" end="1955" title="Progressor" label="Progressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086942" start="1988" end="1998" title="Grinder (biohacking community)" label="Biohacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077883" start="1999" end="2021" title="Biopunk" label="Amateur biotechnicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353169" start="2023" end="2039" title="Artificial organ" label="Artificial organ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2042" end="2071" title="Sense#Not human analogues" label="Additional or improved senses"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041586" start="2074" end="2086" title="X-ray vision" label="X-ray vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q120877" start="2088" end="2095" title="Cloning" label="Cloning"/>
<link wikidata="Q897410" start="2097" end="2106" title="Exocortex" label="Exocortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="2108" end="2127" title="Genetic engineering" label="Genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643449" start="2130" end="2140" title="Super race" label="Super race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362688" start="2142" end="2168" title="Intelligence amplification" label="Intelligence amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q762018" start="2170" end="2182" title="Invisibility" label="Invisibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q574567" start="2184" end="2198" title="Life extension" label="Life extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660153" start="2200" end="2222" title="Biological immortality" label="Biological immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="2250" end="2261" title="immortality" label="immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q633581" start="2264" end="2272" title="Cryonics" label="Cryonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505966" start="2275" end="2294" title="Digital immortality" label="Digital immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863587" start="2297" end="2311" title="Mind uploading in fiction" label="Mind uploading"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311074" start="2314" end="2335" title="Organ transplantation in fiction" label="Organ transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101783" start="2338" end="2350" title="Organlegging" label="Organlegging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250990" start="2352" end="2363" title="Prosthetics in fiction" label="Prosthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="2365" end="2371" title="Human memory" label="Memory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2374" end="2388" title="Memory erasure#In fiction" label="Memory erasure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2399" end="2413" title="Memory sharing" label="Memory sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611246" start="2417" end="2427" title="Group mind (science fiction)" label="Group mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863554" start="2430" end="2442" title="Mind control in popular culture" label="Mind control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936971" start="2445" end="2454" title="Mind swap" label="Mind swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863587" start="2457" end="2471" title="Mind uploading in fiction" label="Mind uploading"/>
<link wikidata="Q897410" start="2474" end="2526" title="Brain–computer interface" label="Neural implants to directly interface with machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="2528" end="2560" title="Parapsychology" label="Psi powers and psychic phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975244" start="2563" end="2575" title="Clairvoyance" label="Clairvoyance"/>
<link wikidata="Q520667" start="2578" end="2590" title="Precognition" label="Precognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069787" start="2593" end="2604" title="Pyrokinesis" label="Pyrokinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146358" start="2607" end="2621" title="Retrocognition" label="Retrocognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="2624" end="2633" title="Telepathy" label="Telepathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="2636" end="2647" title="Telekinesis" label="Telekinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55628604" start="2649" end="2659" title="Parasites in fiction" label="Parasitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q666011" start="2661" end="2672" title="Psychedelia" label="Psychedelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11308039" start="2674" end="2682" title="Resizing (fiction)" label="Resizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="2760" end="2773" title="Shapeshifting" label="Shapeshifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386945" start="2775" end="2794" title="Superhuman strength" label="Superhuman strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q204043" start="2796" end="2809" title="Teleportation" label="Teleportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194100" start="2811" end="2824" title="Transhumanism" label="Transhumanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119946" start="2829" end="2841" title="Posthumanism" label="Posthumanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124029838" start="2857" end="2873" title="Artificial planet" label="Artificial world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157015" start="2876" end="2885" title="Zoo hypothesis" label="Alien Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q673699" start="2927" end="2937" title="Arcology" label="Arcologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q204606" start="3018" end="3028" title="Cyberspace" label="Cyberspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360507" start="3081" end="3091" title="Domed city" label="Domed city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459907" start="3093" end="3106" title="Floating city (science fiction)" label="Floating city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003654" start="3108" end="3127" title="Future of the Earth" label="Future of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15635954" start="3130" end="3144" title="Climate fiction" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="3199" end="3213" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="3218" end="3232" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="3251" end="3259" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q174844" start="3265" end="3273" title="Megacity" label="Megacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347710" start="3275" end="3299" title="Pastoral science fiction" label="Pastoral science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q910203" start="3449" end="3460" title="Seasteading" label="Seasteading"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076132" start="3465" end="3483" title="ocean colonization" label="ocean colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197847" start="3486" end="3499" title="Pirate utopia" label="Pirate utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182415" start="3501" end="3519" title="Reality Television" label="Reality Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q686876" start="3521" end="3539" title="Space colonization" label="Space colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q367737" start="3542" end="3566" title="Colonization of the Moon" label="Colonization of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035733" start="3569" end="3581" title="Ecumenopolis" label="Ecumenopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362485" start="3584" end="3592" title="Pantropy" label="Pantropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972970" start="3595" end="3608" title="Planets in science fiction" label="Other planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037127" start="3612" end="3625" title="Desert planet" label="Desert planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661218" start="3630" end="3634" title="Mars in fiction" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q204520" start="3637" end="3656" title="Terraforming" label="Terraformed planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572627" start="3658" end="3685" title="Space stations and habitats in fiction" label="Space stations and habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348073" start="3687" end="3703" title="Underground city" label="Underground city"/>
<link wikidata="Q356648" start="3727" end="3736" title="Adhocracy" label="Adhocracy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3738" end="3756" title="Anarcho-capitalist literature#Fiction" label="Anarcho-capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="3758" end="3768" title="Capitalism" label="Capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418464" start="3771" end="3787" title="Evil corporation" label="Evil corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852060" start="3790" end="3805" title="Megacorporation" label="Megacorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912273" start="3808" end="3821" title="Neo-feudalism" label="Neo-feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226078" start="3823" end="3840" title="Cognitive liberty" label="Cognitive liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="3842" end="3850" title="Dystopia" label="Dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="3856" end="3862" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="3866" end="3889" title="Environmental pollution" label="Environmental pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113866" start="3892" end="3906" title="Overpopulation" label="Overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892659" start="3909" end="3933" title="Technological utopianism" label="Technological utopianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="3936" end="3951" title="Totalitarianism" label="Totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q653007" start="3953" end="3968" title="Galactic empire" label="Galactic empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379788" start="3971" end="3994" title="Government by algorithm" label="Government by algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q889137" start="3996" end="4013" title="Legal personality" label="Legal personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271584" start="4015" end="4029" title="Libertarian science fiction" label="Libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="4031" end="4048" title="Mass surveillance" label="Mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="4050" end="4062" title="Telepathy" label="Mind reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="4067" end="4079" title="Brainwashing" label="mind control"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="4081" end="4104" title="National security state" label="National security state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975790" start="4106" end="4127" title="Post-scarcity economy" label="Post-scarcity economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="4129" end="4138" title="Socialism" label="Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762321" start="4141" end="4154" title="Nanosocialism" label="Nanosocialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403493" start="4156" end="4168" title="Technoethics" label="Technoethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194294" start="4171" end="4180" title="Bioethics" label="Bioethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042900" start="4182" end="4194" title="Technophobia" label="Technophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516910" start="4196" end="4216" title="Techno-progressivism" label="Techno-progressivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="4218" end="4227" title="Terrorism" label="Terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q854975" start="4230" end="4243" title="Bio-terrorism" label="Bio-terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333099" start="4246" end="4259" title="Eco-terrorism in fiction" label="Eco-terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271584" start="4261" end="4295" title="Libertarian science fiction" label="Totalitarianism vs. Libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332690" start="4316" end="4334" title="Artificial gravity" label="Artificial gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="4336" end="4359" title="Artificial intelligence" label="Artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q748764" start="4361" end="4376" title="Asteroid mining" label="Asteroid mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q28792482" start="4378" end="4402" title="Astronomical engineering" label="Astronomical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q897410" start="4404" end="4428" title="Brain–computer interface" label="Brain–computer interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300708" start="4430" end="4445" title="Cloaking device" label="Cloaking device"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667876" start="4447" end="4468" title="List of emerging technologies" label="Emerging technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353475" start="4470" end="4476" title="Robots in fiction" label="Robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q691243" start="4478" end="4502" title="Self-replicating machine" label="Self-replicating machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="4505" end="4522" title="Simulated reality" label="Simulated reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601227" start="4524" end="4536" title="Star lifting" label="Star lifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303593" start="4541" end="4560" title="stellar engineering" label="stellar engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967741" start="4562" end="4575" title="Stasis (fiction)" label="Stasis device"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353595" start="4577" end="4610" title="Total conversion (energy source)" label="Total conversion as energy source"/>
<link wikidata="Q858784" start="4612" end="4617" title="Mecha" label="Mecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808853" start="4619" end="4640" title="Megascale engineering" label="Megascale engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719358" start="4645" end="4666" title="planetary engineering" label="planetary engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q957798" start="4669" end="4682" title="Megastructure" label="Megastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q469" start="4686" end="4698" title="Dyson sphere" label="Dyson sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q740612" start="4700" end="4723" title="Molecular manufacturing" label="Molecular manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="4728" end="4742" title="Nanotechnology" label="Nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q740612" start="4745" end="4764" title="Molecular assembler" label="Molecular assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="4784" end="4799" title="Virtual reality" label="Virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758389" start="4801" end="4814" title="mixed reality" label="mixed reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="4816" end="4833" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662644" start="4836" end="4846" title="Infosphere" label="Infosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632041" start="4849" end="4858" title="Metaverse" label="Metaverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129041" start="4860" end="4886" title="Weapons in science fiction" label="Weapons in science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072719" start="4900" end="4917" title="Accidental travel" label="Accidental travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q686876" start="4919" end="4931" title="Space colonization" label="Colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="4957" end="4965" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179500" start="4975" end="5000" title="Embryo space colonization" label="Embryo space colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q964131" start="5003" end="5018" title="Generation ship" label="Generation ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355598" start="5021" end="5037" title="Interstellar ark" label="Interstellar ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267982" start="5040" end="5058" title="Uploaded astronaut" label="Uploaded astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q204520" start="5061" end="5073" title="Terraforming" label="Terraforming"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="5075" end="5092" title="Space exploration" label="Space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q834826" start="5095" end="5114" title="Interstellar travel" label="Interstellar travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003852" start="5115" end="5123" title="Starship" label="Starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q44207" start="5128" end="5171" title="Faster-than-light" label="Faster-than-light travel and communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024959" start="5176" end="5186" title="Hyperspace" label="Hyperspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825576" start="5191" end="5201" title="Slipstream (science fiction)" label="Slipstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q169890" start="5206" end="5216" title="Alcubierre drive" label="Warp drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544" start="5222" end="5230" title="Wormhole" label="Wormhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333833" start="5236" end="5243" title="Ansible" label="Ansible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760905" start="5273" end="5287" title="Bussard ramjet" label="Bussard ramjet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="5293" end="5310" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33539" start="5339" end="5351" title="Twin paradox" label="Twin paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q964131" start="5382" end="5397" title="Generation ship" label="Generation ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q684995" start="5402" end="5414" title="Sleeper ship" label="Sleeper ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="5417" end="5431" title="Space stations" label="Space stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q204043" start="5433" end="5446" title="Teleportation" label="Teleportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q204043" start="5449" end="5464" title="Teletransporter" label="Teletransporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="5466" end="5477" title="Time travel" label="Time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="5480" end="5497" title="Alternate history" label="Alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="5551" end="5569" title="Parallel universe (fiction)" label="parallel universes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5679" end="5695" title="Time travel in fiction#Alternate future" label="Alternate future"/>
<link wikidata="Q186610" start="5698" end="5707" title="Time loop" label="Time loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835966" start="5709" end="5742" title="Travel to the Earth&amp;#x27;s center" label="Travel to the Earth&amp;#x27;s center"/>
<link wikidata="Q649143" start="5745" end="5757" title="Hollow Earth" label="Hollow Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274774" start="5775" end="5793" title="Biology in fiction" label="Biology in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023989" start="5796" end="5810" title="Fantasy tropes" label="Fantasy tropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905894" start="5813" end="5839" title="Outline of science fiction" label="Outline of science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q375843" start="5842" end="5854" title="Protoscience" label="Protoscience"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27754" wikidata="Q6981696" url="?curid=27754" title="Samaritanism">
<text>Samaritanism (; ) is an Abrahamic monotheistic ethnic religion. It comprises the collective spiritual, cultural, and legal traditions of the Samaritan people, who originate from the Hebrews and Israelites and began to emerge as a relatively distinct group after the Kingdom of Israel was conquered by the Neo-Assyrian Empire during the Iron Age. Central to the faith is the Samaritan Pentateuch, which Samaritans believe is the original and unchanged version of the Torah.

Although it developed alongside and is closely related to Judaism, Samaritanism asserts itself as the truly preserved form of the monotheistic faith that the Israelites adopted under Moses. Samaritan belief also holds that the Israelites&#x27; original holy site was Mount Gerizim, near Nablus, and that Jerusalem only attained importance under Israelite dissenters who had followed Eli to the city of Shiloh; the Israelites who remained at Mount Gerizim would become the Samaritans in the Kingdom of Israel, whereas the Israelites who left would become the Jews in the Kingdom of Judah. Mount Gerizim is likewise revered by Samaritans as the location where the Binding of Isaac took place, in contrast to the Jewish belief that it occurred at Jerusalem&#x27;s Temple Mount.

Today there are only about 800 to 900 followers, which makes Samaritanism one of the smallest religions globally. According to one source, there were millions of followers in ancient times.

==History==

=== Traditional accounts ===
Samaritanism holds that the summit of Mount Gerizim is the true location of God&#x27;s Holy Place. Samaritans trace their history as a separate entity to a period soon after the Israelites&#x27; entry into the Promised Land. Samaritan historiography traces the schism to High Priest Eli leaving Mount Gerizim, where stood the first Israelite altar in Canaan, and building a competing altar in nearby Shiloh. The dissenting group of Israelites who had followed Eli to Shiloh would be the ones who in later years would head south to settle Jerusalem (the Jews), whereas the Israelites who stayed on Mount Gerizim, in Samaria, would become known as the Samaritans.

Abu l-Fath, who in the 14th century wrote a major work of Samaritan history, comments on Samaritan origins as follows:

A terrible civil war broke out between Eli son of Yafni, of the line of Ithamar, and the sons of Pincus (Phinehas), because Eli son of Yafni resolved to usurp the High Priesthood from the descendants of Pincus. He used to offer sacrifices on an altar of stones. He was 50 years old, endowed with wealth and in charge of the treasury of the Children of Israel. ...

He offered a sacrifice on the altar, but without salt, as if he were inattentive. When the Great High Priest Ozzi learned of this, and found the sacrifice was not accepted, he thoroughly disowned him; and it is (even) said that he rebuked him.

Thereupon he and the group that sympathized with him, rose in revolt and at once he and his followers and his beasts set off for Shiloh. Thus Israel split in factions. He sent to their leaders saying to them, &quot;Anyone who would like to see wonderful things, let him come to me.&quot; Then he assembled a large group around him in Shiloh, and built a Temple for himself there; he constructed a place like the Temple [on Mount Gerizim]. He built an altar, omitting no detail—it all corresponded to the original, piece by piece.

At this time the Children of Israel split into three factions. A loyal faction on Mount Gerizim; a heretical faction that followed false gods; and the faction that followed Eli son of Yafni in Shiloh.

Further, the &quot;Samaritan New Chronicle&quot; or &quot;Adler&quot;, named after its editor Elkan Nathan Adler (1861-1946), which is believed to have been composed in the 18th century using earlier chronicles as sources, states:

=== Scholarly perspective ===
Modern genetic studies (2004) suggest that Samaritans&#x27; lineages trace back to a common ancestor with Jews in the paternally-inherited Jewish high priesthood (Cohanim) temporally proximate to the period of the Assyrian conquest of the kingdom of Israel, and are probably descendants of the historical Israelite population. The religion of the proto-Samaritans at this time was probably no different than that of their southern counterparts in Judea. This likely remained the case for several centuries after the destruction of the Kingdom of Israel, as Judean cultic reforms instituted by the kings Hezekiah and Josiah experience little opposition extending to the Samaritan people in the north, according to the biblical text.

Though Samaritans certainly were culturally unique, they were closely intertwined with the Jews to the south. As such, Samaritanism likely did not emerge as a distinct tradition until the Hasmonean and Roman era, by which point Yahwism had coalesced into Second Temple Judaism. The temple on Mount Gerizim, the central place of worship in Samaritanism, was built in the 5th century BCE, as one of many Yahwistic temples in Samaria. However, the temple precinct experienced a centuries-long period of large-scale construction beginning around the 4th century BCE, which indicates that its status as the pre-eminent place of worship among Samaritans had only just been established. Likewise, theological debates between Jews and Samaritans are attested as early as the 2nd century BCE, indicating that the Samaritan Pentateuch had already taken shape, in some form.

The Hasmonean king John Hyrcanus destroyed the Mount Gerizim temple and brought Samaria under his control around 120 BCE, which led to a longlasting sense of mutual hostility between the Jews and Samaritans. From this point, the Samaritans likely sought to consciously distance themselves from their Judean brethren, and both peoples came to see the Samaritan faith as a religion distinct from Judaism.

The relationship between Jews and Samaritans only further deteriorated with time. By the time of Jesus, Samaritans and Jews deeply disparaged one another, as evinced by Jesus&#x27; Parable of the Good Samaritan.

==Beliefs==
The principal beliefs of Samaritanism are as follows:

* There is one God, Yahweh, the same God recognized by the Jewish prophets. Faith is in the unity of the Creator which is absolute unity. It is the cause of the causes, and it fills the entire world. His nature can not be understood by human beings, but according to his actions and according to his revelation to his people and the kindness he showed them.
* The Torah is the only true holy book and was given by God to Moses. The Torah was created before the creation of the world and whoever believes in it is assured a part in the world to come. The status of the Torah in Samaritanism as the only holy book causes Samaritans to reject the Oral Torah, Talmud, and all prophets and scriptures except for the Book of Joshua, whose book in the Samaritan community is significantly different from the Book of Joshua in the Jewish Bible. Essentially, the authority of all post-Torah sections of the Jewish Bible and classical Jewish Rabbinical works (the Talmud, comprising the Mishnah and the Gemara) is rejected. Moses is considered to be the last of the line of prophets.
* Mount Gerizim, not Jerusalem, is the one true sanctuary chosen by God. The Samaritans do not recognize the sanctity of Jerusalem and do not recognize the Temple Mount, claiming instead that Mount Gerizim was the place where the binding of Isaac took place.
* The apocalypse, called &quot;the day of vengeance&quot;, will be the end of days, when a figure called the Taheb (essentially the Samaritan equivalent of the Jewish Messiah) from the tribe of Joseph will come, be a prophet like Moses for 40 years and bring about the return of all the Israelites, following which the dead will be resurrected. The Taheb will then discover the tent of Moses&#x27; Tabernacle on Mount Gerizim, and will be buried next to Joseph when he dies.

==Festivals and observances==
The Samaritans preserve a form of the proto-Hebraic script, conserve the institution of a high priesthood, and the practice of slaughtering and eating lambs on Passover eve. They celebrate Pesach, Shavuot, and Sukkot, but use a different mode from that employed in Judaism in order to determine the dates annually. Yom Teru&#x27;ah (the Biblical name for &quot;Rosh Hashanah&quot;), at the beginning of Tishrei, is not considered a New Year as it is in Rabbinic Judaism.

The sabbath is observed weekly by the Samaritan community every Friday to Saturday beginning and ending at sundown. For 24 hours, the families gather together to celebrate the rest day: all electricity with the exception of minimal lighting (kept on the entire day) in the house is disconnected, no work is done, and neither cooking nor driving is allowed. The time is devoted to worship which consists of seven prayer services (divided into two for sabbath eve, two in the morning, two in afternoon and one at eve of conclusion), reading the weekly Torah portion (according to the Samaritan yearly Torah cycle), spending quality time with family, taking meals, rest and sleep, and visiting other members of the community.

Passover is particularly important in the Samaritan community, climaxing with the sacrifice of up to 40 sheep. The Counting of the Omer remains largely unchanged; however, the week before Shavuot is a unique festival celebrating the continued commitment Samaritanism has maintained since the time of Moses. Shavuot is characterized by nearly day-long services of continuous prayer, especially over the stones on Gerizim traditionally attributed to Joshua. 

During Sukkot, the sukkah is built inside houses, as opposed to outdoor settings that are traditional among Jews. Samaritan historian Benyamim Tsedaka traces the indoor-sukkah tradition to persecution of Samaritans during the Byzantine Empire. The roof of the Samaritan sukkah is decorated with citrus fruits and the branches of palm, myrtle, and willow trees, according to the Samaritan interpretation of the four species designated in the Torah for the holiday.

==Religious texts==
Samaritan law differs from Halakha (Rabbinic Jewish law) and other Jewish movements. The Samaritans have several groups of religious texts, which correspond to Jewish Halakha. A few examples of such texts are:
* Samaritan Pentateuch: There are some 6,000 differences between the Samaritan Pentateuch and the Masoretic Jewish Pentateuch text; and, according to one estimate, 1,900 points of agreement between it and the Greek LXX version. Several passages in the New Testament would also appear to echo a Torah textual tradition not dissimilar to that conserved in the Samaritan text. There are several theories regarding the similarities. The variations, some corroborated by readings in the Old Latin, Syriac and Ethiopian translations, attest to the antiquity of the Samaritan text, although the exact date of composition is still largely unclear. Granted special attention is the so-called &quot;Abisha Scroll&quot;, a manuscript of the Pentateuch tradition attributed to Abishua, grandson of Aaron, traditionally compiled during the Bronze Age.
* Historical writings
** &quot;Samaritan Chronicle, The Tolidah&quot; (Creation to the time of Abishah)
** &quot;Samaritan Chronicle&quot;, The Chronicle of Joshua (Israel during the time of divine favor) (4th century, in Arabic and Aramaic)
** &quot;Samaritan Chronicle, Adler&quot; (Israel from the time of divine disfavor until the exile)
** &quot;Samaritan Chronicle,&quot; The Kitab al-Tarikh of Abu ’l-Fath (Historical chronology from Adam to Mohammad)
* Halakhic texts
** &quot;Samaritan Halakhic Text&quot;, The Hillukh (Code of Halakha, marriage, circumcision, etc.)
** &quot;Samaritan Halakhic Text&quot;, the Kitab at-Tabbah (Halakha and interpretation of some verses and chapters from the Torah, written by Abu Al Hassan 12th century CE)
** &quot;Samaritan Halakhic Text&quot;, the Kitab al-Kafi (Book of Halakha, written by Yosef Al Ascar 14th century CE)
* Haggadic Midrash texts
** &quot;Al-Asatir&quot;—legendary Aramaic texts from the 11th and 12th centuries, containing:
*** &quot;Haggadic Midrash&quot;, Abu&#x27;l Hasan al-Suri
*** &quot;Haggadic Midrash&quot;, Memar Markah—3rd or 4th century theological treatises attributed to &quot;Hakkam&quot; Markha
*** &quot;Haggadic Midrash&quot;, Pinkhas on the Taheb
*** &quot;Haggadic Midrash&quot;, Molad Maseh (On the birth of Moses)
* Liturgical texts
** &quot;Defter&quot;, prayer book of psalms and hymns.
** &quot;Samaritan Haggadah&quot;

==See also==
* Amram ibn Salameh

==Notes==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* Anderson, Robert T., Giles, Terry (2005). &quot;Tradition kept: the literature of the Samaritans&quot;, Hendrickson Publishers.
* 
* 
* Heinsdorff, Cornel (2003). &quot;Christus, Nikodemus und die Samaritanerin bei Juvencus. Mit einem Anhang zur lateinischen Evangelienvorlage&quot; (= Untersuchungen zur antiken Literatur und Geschichte, Bd. 67), Berlin/New York. 
* 
* 
* * 
* Zertal, Adam (1989). &quot;The Wedge-Shaped Decorated Bowl and the Origin of the Samaritans&quot;. &quot;Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research&quot;, No. 276. (November 1989), pp. 77–84.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6981696" start="0" end="12" title="Samaritanism" label="Samaritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="24" end="33" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="34" end="46" title="monotheism" label="monotheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189816" start="47" end="62" title="ethnic religion" label="ethnic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="141" end="157" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q570868" start="182" end="189" title="Hebrews" label="Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="194" end="204" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="266" end="283" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="305" end="324" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="336" end="344" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q149441" start="374" end="394" title="Samaritan Pentateuch" label="Samaritan Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="466" end="471" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="532" end="539" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="657" end="662" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288751" start="741" end="754" title="Mount Gerizim" label="Mount Gerizim"/>
<link wikidata="Q214178" start="761" end="767" title="Nablus" label="Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="778" end="787" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q362021" start="857" end="860" title="Eli (biblical figure)" label="Eli"/>
<link wikidata="Q985542" start="876" end="882" title="Shiloh (biblical city)" label="Shiloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1032" end="1036" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="1044" end="1060" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Kingdom of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007906" start="1136" end="1152" title="Binding of Isaac" label="Binding of Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698514" start="1165" end="1176" title="Temple denial" label="in contrast"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="1235" end="1247" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288751" start="1521" end="1534" title="Mount Gerizim" label="Mount Gerizim"/>
<link wikidata="Q44536" start="1693" end="1706" title="Promised Land" label="Promised Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q51677" start="1754" end="1765" title="High Priest of Israel" label="High Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q362021" start="1766" end="1769" title="Eli (biblical figure)" label="Eli"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="1834" end="1840" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q985542" start="1883" end="1889" title="Shiloh (biblical city)" label="Shiloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="2021" end="2030" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603860" start="2146" end="2156" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fath" label="Abu l-Fath"/>
<link wikidata="Q128063" start="2371" end="2379" title="Phinehas" label="Phinehas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288751" start="3299" end="3312" title="Mount Gerizim" label="Mount Gerizim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170731" start="3703" end="3721" title="Elkan Nathan Adler" label="Elkan Nathan Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q728973" start="4034" end="4041" title="Kohen" label="Cohanim"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="4318" end="4323" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q244912" start="4474" end="4482" title="Hezekiah" label="Hezekiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q313228" start="4487" end="4493" title="Josiah" label="Josiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q496922" start="4792" end="4801" title="Hasmonean dynasty" label="Hasmonean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571322" start="4832" end="4839" title="Yahwism" label="Yahwism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205363" start="4859" end="4880" title="Second Temple Judaism" label="Second Temple Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q149441" start="5408" end="5428" title="Samaritan Pentateuch" label="Samaritan Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q496922" start="5473" end="5482" title="Hasmonean dynasty" label="Hasmonean"/>
<link wikidata="Q319043" start="5488" end="5501" title="John Hyrcanus" label="John Hyrcanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="5970" end="5975" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q261103" start="6054" end="6083" title="Parable of the Good Samaritan" label="Parable of the Good Samaritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="6168" end="6171" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="6173" end="6179" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6212" end="6227" title="prophet#The Hebrew and Jewish concepts of prophet" label="Jewish prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="6517" end="6522" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="6574" end="6579" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621334" start="6797" end="6807" title="Oral Torah" label="Oral Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="6809" end="6815" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943041" start="6864" end="6878" title="Book of Joshua (Samaritan)" label="Book of Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q47680" start="6954" end="6968" title="Book of Joshua" label="Book of Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="6976" end="6988" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Jewish Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="7085" end="7101" title="Rabbinic literature" label="Rabbinical works"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="7130" end="7137" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q930585" start="7146" end="7152" title="Gemara" label="Gemara"/>
<link wikidata="Q193163" start="7383" end="7395" title="Temple Mount" label="Temple Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007906" start="7457" end="7473" title="binding of Isaac" label="binding of Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="7646" end="7660" title="Messiah in Judaism" label="Jewish Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="7818" end="7829" title="resurrection" label="resurrected"/>
<link wikidata="Q255481" start="7884" end="7894" title="Tabernacle" label="Tabernacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="7996" end="8005" title="Samaritan" label="Samaritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550930" start="8007" end="8015" title="Samaritan alphabet" label="preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q440608" start="8030" end="8050" title="Paleo-Hebrew alphabet" label="proto-Hebraic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q51677" start="8082" end="8097" title="High Priest of Israel" label="high priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="8143" end="8148" title="Lamb and mutton" label="lambs"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="8152" end="8160" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="8181" end="8187" title="Pesach" label="Pesach"/>
<link wikidata="Q201196" start="8189" end="8196" title="Shavuot" label="Shavuot"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="8202" end="8208" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="8353" end="8366" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q217782" start="8395" end="8402" title="Tishrei" label="Tishrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q34812" start="8424" end="8432" title="New Year" label="New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="8445" end="8461" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="8876" end="8891" title="Liturgy" label="prayer services"/>
<link wikidata="Q749173" start="9303" end="9323" title="Counting of the Omer" label="Counting of the Omer"/>
<link wikidata="Q496417" start="9665" end="9671" title="sukkah" label="sukkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9872" end="9888" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="9941" end="9947" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="9975" end="9979" title="Arecaceae" label="palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q165152" start="9981" end="9987" title="Myrtus" label="myrtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="9993" end="9999" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915727" start="10056" end="10068" title="four species" label="four species"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="10158" end="10165" title="Halakha" label="Halakha"/>
<link wikidata="Q149441" start="10343" end="10363" title="Samaritan Pentateuch" label="Samaritan Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="10550" end="10567" title="Septuagint" label="Greek LXX version"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="10593" end="10606" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q149441" start="11030" end="11043" title="Abisha Scroll" label="Abisha Scroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338482" start="11106" end="11113" title="Abishua" label="Abishua"/>
<link wikidata="Q51676" start="11127" end="11132" title="Aaron" label="Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q30692521" start="11211" end="11243" title="Samaritan Chronicle, The Tolidah" label="Samaritan Chronicle, The Tolidah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943041" start="11287" end="11343" title="Book of Joshua (Samaritan)" label="&amp;quot;Samaritan Chronicle&amp;quot;, The Chronicle of Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170731" start="11452" end="11457" title="Elkan Nathan Adler" label="Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603860" start="11558" end="11592" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Fath" label="The Kitab al-Tarikh of Abu ’l-Fath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748616" start="12606" end="12623" title="Amram ibn Salameh" label="Amram ibn Salameh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27760" wikidata="Q615405" url="?curid=27760" title="Statute of Anne">
<text>The Statute of Anne, also known as the Copyright Act 1709 or the Copyright Act 1710 (cited either as 8 Ann. c. 21 or as 8 Ann. c. 19), was an act of the Parliament of Great Britain passed in 1710, which was the first statute to provide for copyright regulated by the government and courts, rather than by private parties.

Prior to the statute&#x27;s enactment in 1710, copying restrictions were authorized by the Licensing of the Press Act 1662. These restrictions were enforced by the Stationers&#x27; Company, a guild of printers given the exclusive power to print—and the responsibility to censor—literary works. The censorship administered under the Licensing Act led to public protest; as the act had to be renewed at two-year intervals, authors and others sought to prevent its reauthorisation. In 1694, Parliament refused to renew the Licensing Act, ending the Stationers&#x27; monopoly and press restrictions.

Over the next 10 years the Stationers repeatedly advocated bills to re-authorize the old licensing system, but Parliament declined to enact them. Faced with this failure, the Stationers decided to emphasise the benefits of licensing to authors rather than publishers, and the Stationers succeeded in getting Parliament to consider a new Bill. This Bill, which after substantial amendments was granted royal assent on 5 April 1710, became known as the Statute of Anne owing to its passage during the reign of Queen Anne. The new law prescribed a copyright term of 14 years, with a provision for renewal for a similar term, during which only the author and the printers to whom they chose to license their works could publish the author&#x27;s creations. Following this, the work&#x27;s copyright would expire, with the material falling into the public domain. Despite a period of instability known as the Battle of the Booksellers when the initial copyright terms under the statute began to expire, the Statute of Anne remained in force until the Copyright Act 1842 replaced it.

The statute is considered a &quot;watershed event in Anglo-American copyright history ... transforming what had been the publishers&#x27; private law copyright into a public law grant&quot;. Under the statute, copyright was for the first time vested in authors rather than publishers; it also included provisions for the public interest, such as a legal deposit scheme. The statute was an influence on copyright law in several other nations, including the United States, and even in the 21st century is &quot;frequently invoked by modern judges and academics as embodying the utilitarian underpinnings of copyright law&quot;.

==Background==
With the introduction of the printing press to England by William Caxton in 1476, printed works became both more common and more economically important. As early as 1483, Richard III recognised the value of literary works by specifically exempting them from the government&#x27;s protectionist legislation. Over the next fifty years, the government moved further towards economic regulation, abolishing the provision with the Printers and Binders Act 1533 (25 Hen. 8. c. 15), which also banned the import of foreign works and empowered the Lord Chancellor to set maximum pricing for English books. This was followed by increasing degrees of censorship. A further proclamation of 1538, aiming to stop the spread of Lutheran doctrine, saw Henry VIII note that &quot;sondry contentious and sinyster opiniones, have by wrong teachynge and naughtye bokes increaced and growen within this his realme of England&quot;, and declare that all authors and printers must allow the Privy Council or their agents to read and censor books before publication.

===Stationers&#x27; Company===

This censorship peaked on 4 May 1557, when Mary I issued a royal warrant formally incorporating the Stationers&#x27; Company. The old method of censorship had been limited by the Second Statute of Repeal, and with Mary&#x27;s increasing unpopularity the existing system was unable to cope with the number of critical works being printed. Instead, the royal warrant devolved this power to the company. This was done by decreeing that only the company&#x27;s publishers could print and distribute books. Their Wardens were given the power to enter any printing premises, destroy illegal works and imprison anyone found manufacturing them. In this way the government &quot;harnessed the self interest of the publishers to the yoke of royal incentive&quot;, guaranteeing that the company would follow the rules due to the economic monopoly it gave their members. With the abolition of the Star Chamber and Court of High Commission by the Long Parliament, the legal basis for this warrant was removed, but the Long Parliament chose to replace it with the Licensing Act 1662. This provided that the company would retain their original powers, and imposed additional restrictions on printing; King&#x27;s Messengers were permitted to enter any home or business in search of illegal presses. The legislation required renewal every two years, and was regularly reapproved.

This was not &quot;copyright&quot; as is normally understood; although there was a monopoly on the right to copy, this was available to publishers, not authors, and did not exist by default; it only applied to books which had been accepted and published by the company. A member of the company would register the book, and would then have a perpetual copyright over its printing, copying and publication, which could be leased, transferred to others or given to heirs upon the member&#x27;s death. The only exception to this was that, if a person tried to make a copy of a copyrighted material and warned the owner of the copyright (i.e. the printer), and the owner did not reprint it within six months, then this person could continue with the printing (provided that the author of the material did not object), giving a &quot;&quot; part of the profits to the owner of the copyright. This did not mean, though, a loss of copyright ownership, but a provision to allow other presses the right to reprint books that were unavailable. Authors themselves were not particularly respected until the 18th century, and were not permitted to be members of the company, playing no role in the development or use of its licences despite the company&#x27;s sovereign authority to decide what was published. There is evidence that some authors were recognised by the Company itself to have the right to copy and the right to alter their works; these authors were uniformly the writers of uneconomical books who were underwriting their publication.

The company&#x27;s monopoly, censorship and failure to protect authors made the system highly unpopular; John Milton wrote &quot;Areopagitica&quot; as a result of his experiences with the company, accusing Parliament of being deceived by &quot;the fraud of some old patentees and monopolisers in the trade of bookselling&quot;. He was not the first writer to criticise the system, with John Locke writing a formal memorandum to the MP Edward Clarke in 1693 while the Licensing Act was being renewed, complaining that the existing system restricted the free exchange of ideas and education while providing an unfair monopoly for Company members. Academic Mark Rose attributes the efforts of Milton to promote the &quot;bourgeois public sphere&quot;, along with the Glorious Revolution&#x27;s alterations to the political system and the rise of public coffee houses, as the source of growing public unhappiness with the system. At the same time, this was a period in which clearly defined political parties were taking shape, and with the promise of regular elections, an environment where the public were of increasing importance to the political process. The result was a &quot;developing public sphere [which] provided the context that enabled the collapse of traditional press controls&quot;.

===Lapse of the Licensing Act===

The result of this environment was the lapse of the Licensing Act 1662. In November 1694, a committee was appointed by the Commons to see what laws were &quot;lately expired and expiring [and] fit to be revived and continued&quot;. The Committee reported in January 1695, and suggested the renewal of the Licensing Act; this was included in the &quot;Continuation Bill&quot;, but rejected by the House of Commons on 11 February. When it reached the House of Lords, the Lords re-included the Licensing Act, and returned the bill to the Commons. In response, a second committee was appointed – this one to produce a report indicating why the Commons disagreed with the inclusion of the Licensing Act, and chaired by Edward Clarke. This committee soon reported to the Commons, and Clarke was ordered to carry a message to the Lords requesting a conference over the Act. On 18 April 1695, Clarke met with representatives of the Lords, and they agreed to allow the Continuation Bill to pass without the renewal of the Licensing Act. With this, &quot;the Lords&#x27; decision heralded an end to a relationship that had developed throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries between the State and the Company of Stationers&quot;, ending both nascent publishers&#x27; copyright and the existing system of censorship.

John Locke&#x27;s close relationship with Clarke, along with the respect he commanded, is seen by academics as what led to this decision. Locke had spent the early 1690s campaigning against the statute, considering it &quot;ridiculous&quot; that the works of dead authors were held perpetually in copyright. In letters to Clarke he wrote of the absurdity of the existing system, complaining primarily about the unfairness of it to authors, and &quot;[t]he parallels between Locke&#x27;s commentary and those reasons presented by the Commons to the Lords for refusing to renew the 1662 Act are striking&quot;. He was assisted by a number of independent printers and booksellers, who opposed the monopolistic aspects of the Act, and introduced a petition in February 1693 that the Act prevented them from conducting their business. The &quot;developing public sphere&quot;, along with the harm the existing system had caused to both major political parties, is also seen as a factor.

The failure to renew the Licensing Act led to confusion and both positive and negative outcomes; while the government no longer played a part in censoring publications, and the monopoly of the Company over printing was broken, there was uncertainty as to whether or not copyright was a binding legal concept without the legislation. Economic chaos also resulted; with the company now unable to enforce any monopoly, provincial towns began establishing printing presses, producing cheaper books than the London booksellers. The absence of the censorship provisions also opened Britain up as a market for internationally printed books, which were similarly cheaper than those British printers could produce.

===Attempts at replacement===
The rejection of the existing system was not done with universal approval, and there were ultimately twelve unsuccessful attempts to replace it. The first was introduced to the House of Commons on 11 February 1695. A committee, again led by Clarke, was to write a &quot;Bill for the Better Regulating of Printing and the Printing Presses&quot;. This bill was essentially a copy of the Licensing Act, but with a narrower jurisdiction; only books covering religion, history, the affairs of the state or the law would require official authorisation. Four days after its introduction, the Stationers&#x27; held an emergency meeting to agree to petition the Commons – this was because the bill did not contain any reference to books as property, eliminating their monopoly on copying. Clarke also had issues with the provisions, and the debate went on until the end of the Parliamentary session, with the bill failing to pass.

With the end of the Parliamentary session came the first general election under the Triennial Act 1694, which required the Monarch to dissolve Parliament every 3 years, causing a general election. This led to the &quot;golden age&quot; of the English electorate, and allowed for the forming of two major political parties – the Whigs and Tories. At the same time, with the failure to renew the Licensing Act, a political press developed. While the Act had been in force only one official newspaper existed; the &quot;London Gazette&quot;, published by the government. After its demise, a string of newspapers sprang into being, including the &quot;Flying Post&quot;, the &quot;Evening Post&quot; and the &quot;Daily Courant&quot;. Newspapers had a strong bias towards particular parties, with the &quot;Courant&quot; and the &quot;Flying Post&quot; supporting the Whigs and the &quot;Evening Post&quot; in favour of the Tories, leading to politicians from both parties realising the importance of an efficient propaganda machine in influencing the electorate. This added a new dimension to the Commons&#x27; decision to reject two new renewals of the Licensing Act in the new Parliamentary session.

Authors, as well as Stationers, then joined the demand for a new system of licensing. Jonathan Swift was a strong advocate for licensing, and Daniel Defoe wrote on 8 November 1705 that with the absence of licensing, &quot;One Man Studies Seven Year, to bring a finish&#x27;d Peice into the World, and a Pyrate Printer, Reprints his Copy immediately, and Sells it for a quarter of the Price ... these things call for an Act of Parliament&quot;. Seeing this, the Company took the opportunity to experiment with a change to their approach and argument. Instead of lobbying because of the effect the absence of legislation was having on their trade, they lobbied on behalf of the authors, but seeking the same things. The first indication of this change in approach comes from the 1706 pamphlet by John How, a stationer, titled &quot;Reasons humbly Offer&#x27;d for a Bill for the Encouragement of Learning and the Improvement of Printing&quot;. This argued for a return to licensing, not with reference to the printers, but because without something to protect authors and guarantee them an income, &quot;Learned men will be wholly discouraged from Propagating the most useful Parts of Knowledge and Literature&quot;. Using these new tactics and the support of authors, the Company petitioned Parliament again in both 1707 and 1709 to introduce a bill providing for copyright.

==Act==

===Passage===
Although both bills failed, they led to media pressure that was exacerbated by both Defoe and How. Defoe&#x27;s &quot;A Review&quot;, published on 3 December 1709 and demanding &quot;a Law in the present Parliament ... for the Encouragement of Learning, Arts, and Industry, by securing the Property of Books to the Authors or Editors of them&quot;, was followed by How&#x27;s &quot;Some Thoughts on the Present State of Printing and Bookselling&quot;, which hoped that Parliament &quot;might think fit to secure Property in Books by a Law&quot;. This was followed by another review by Defoe on 6 December, in which he even went so far as to provide a draft text for the bill. On 12 December, the Stationers submitted yet another petition asking for legislation on the issue, and the House of Commons gave three MPs – Spencer Compton, Craven Peyton and Edward Wortley – permission to form a drafting committee. On 11 January 1710, Wortley introduced this bill, titling it &quot;A Bill for the Encouragement of Learning and for Securing the Property of Copies of Books to the rightful Owners thereof&quot;.

The bill imposed fines on anyone who imported or traded in unlicensed or foreign books, required every book for which copyright protection was sought to be entered into the Stationers&#x27; Register, provided a legal deposit system centred around the King&#x27;s Library, the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge, but said nothing about limiting the term of copyright. It also specified that books were property; an emphasis on the idea that authors deserved copyright simply due to their efforts. The Stationers were enthusiastic, urging Parliament to pass the bill, and it received its second reading on 9 February. A Committee of the Whole met to amend it on 21 February, with further alterations made when it was passed back to the House of Commons on 25 February. Alterations during this period included minor changes, such as extending the legal deposit system to cover Sion College and the Faculty of Advocates, but also major ones, including the introduction of a limit on the length of time for which copyright would be granted.

Linguistic amendments were also included; the line in the preamble emphasising that authors possessed books as they would any other piece of property was dropped, and the bill moved from something designed &quot;for Securing the Property of Copies of Books to the rightful Owners thereof&quot; to a bill &quot;for the Encouragement of Learning, by Vesting the Copies of Printed Books in the Authors or Purchasers of such Copies&quot;. Another amendment allowed anyone to own and trade in copies of books, undermining the Stationers. Other changes were made when the bill went to the House of Lords, and it was finally returned to the Commons on 5 April. The aims of the resulting statute are debated; Ronan Deazley suggests that the intent was to balance the rights of the author, publisher and public in such a way as to ensure the maximum dissemination of works, while other academics argue that the bill was intended to protect the company&#x27;s monopoly or, conversely, to weaken it. Oren Bracha, writing in the &quot;Berkeley Technology Law Journal&quot;, says that when considering which of these options are correct, &quot;the most probable answer [is] all of them&quot;. Whatever the motivations, the bill was passed on 5 April 1710, and is commonly known simply as the Statute of Anne due its passage during the reign of Queen Anne.

===Text===

Consisting of 11 sections, the Statute of Anne is formally titled &quot;An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, by Vesting the Copies of Printed Books in the Authors or Purchasers of Copies, during the Times therein mentioned&quot;. The preamble for the statute indicates the purpose of the legislation – to bring order to the book trade – saying: 
The statute then continued by stating the nature of copyright. The right granted was the right to copy; to have sole control over the printing and reprinting of books, with no provision to benefit the owner of this right after the sale. This right, previously held by the Stationers&#x27; Company&#x27;s members, would automatically be given to the author as soon as it was published, although they had the ability to license these rights to another person. The copyright could be gained through two stages; first, the registration of the book&#x27;s publication with the company, to prevent unintentional infringement, and second, the deposit of copies of the book at the Stationers&#x27; Company, the royal library and various universities. One restriction on copyright was a &quot;cumbersome system&quot; designed to prohibit unreasonably high prices for books, which limited how much authors could charge for copies. There was also a prohibition on importing foreign works, with exceptions made for Latin and Greek classics.

Once registration had been completed and the deposits were made, the author was granted an exclusive right to control the copying of the book. Penalties for infringing this right were severe, with all infringing copies to be destroyed and large fines to be paid to both the copyright holder and the government; there was only a three-month statute of limitations on bringing a case, however. This exclusive right&#x27;s length was dependent on when the book had been published. If it was published after 10 April 1710, the length of copyright was 14 years; if published before that date, 21 years. An author who survived until the copyright expired would be granted an additional 14-year term, and when that ran out, the works would enter the public domain. Copyright under the statute applied to Scotland and England, as well as Ireland when that country joined the union in 1800.

==Aftermath==

===Impact===
The statute was initially welcomed, ushering in &quot;stability to an insecure book trade&quot; while providing for a &quot;pragmatic bargain&quot; between the rights of the author, publisher and public intended to boost public learning and the availability of knowledge. The clause requiring book deposits, however, was not seen as a success. If the books were not deposited, the penalties would be severe, with a fine of £5. The number of deposits required, however, meant that it was a substantial burden; a print run might only be of 250 copies, and if they were particularly expensive to print, it could be cheaper to ignore the law. Some booksellers argued that the deposit provision only applied to registered books, and so deliberately avoided registration just to be able to minimise their liability. This was further undermined by the ruling in &quot;Beckford v Hood&quot;, where the Court of King&#x27;s Bench confirmed that, even without registration, copyright could be enforced against infringers.

Another failure, identified by Bracha, is not found in what the statute covered, but in what it did not. The statute did not provide any means for identifying authors, did not identify what constituted authored works, and covered only &quot;books&quot;, even while discussing &quot;property&quot; as a whole. Moreover, the right provided was merely that of &quot;making and selling ... exact reprints. To a large extent, the new regime was the old stationer&#x27;s privilege, except it was universalised, capped in time, and formally conferred upon authors rather than publishers&quot;. The effect of the statute on authors was also minimal. Previously, publishers would have bought the original manuscript from writers for a lump sum; with the passage of the statute, they simply did the same thing, but with the manuscript&#x27;s copyright as well. The remaining economic power of the company also allowed them to pressure booksellers and distributors into continuing their past arrangements, meaning that even theoretically &quot;public domain&quot; works were, in practise, still treated as copyrighted.

===Battle of the Booksellers===

When the copyrights granted to works published before the statute began to expire in 1731, the Stationers&#x27; Company and their publishers again began to fight to preserve the status quo. Their first port of call was Parliament, where they lobbied for new legislation to extend the length of copyright, and when this failed, they turned to the courts. Their principal argument was that copyright had not been created by the Statute of Anne; it existed beforehand, in the common law, and was perpetual. As such, even though the statute provided for a limited term, all works remained in copyright under the common law regardless of when statutory copyright expired. Starting in 1743, this began a thirty-year campaign known as the &quot;Battle of the Booksellers&quot;. They first tried going to the Court of Chancery and applying for injunctions prohibiting other publishers from printing their works, and this was initially successful. A series of legal setbacks over the next few years, however, left the law ambiguous.

The first major action taken to clarify the situation was &quot;Millar v Taylor&quot;. Andrew Millar, a British publisher, purchased the rights to James Thomson&#x27;s &quot;The Seasons&quot; in 1729, and when the copyright term expired, a competing publisher named Robert Taylor began issuing his own reprints of the work. Millar sued, and went to the Court of King&#x27;s Bench to obtain an injunction and advocate perpetual copyright at common law. The jury found that the facts submitted by Millar were accurate, and asked the judges to clarify whether common law copyright existed. The first arguments were delivered on 30 June 1767, with John Dunning representing Millar and Edward Thurlow representing Taylor. A second set of arguments were submitted for Millar by William Blackstone on 7 June, and judgment was given on 20 April 1769. The final decision, written by Lord Mansfield and endorsed by Aston and Willes JJ, confirmed that there existed copyright at common law that turned &quot;upon Principles before and independent&quot; of the Statute of Anne, something justified because it was right &quot;that an Author should reap the pecuniary Profits of his own Ingenuity and Labour&quot;. In other words, regardless of the statute, there existed a perpetual copyright under the common law. Yates J dissented, on the grounds that the focus on the author obscured the effect this decision would have on &quot;the rest of mankind&quot;, which he felt would be to create a virtual monopoly, something that would harm the public and should certainly not be considered &quot;an encouragement of the propagation of learning&quot;.

Although this decision was a boon to the Stationers, it was short-lived. Following &quot;Millar&quot;, the right to print &quot;The Seasons&quot; was sold to a coalition of publishers including Thomas Becket. Two Scottish printers, Alexander and John Donaldson, began publishing an unlicensed edition, and Becket successfully obtained an injunction to stop them. This decision was appealed in &quot;Donaldson v Beckett&quot;, and eventually went to the House of Lords. After consulting with the judges of the King&#x27;s Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequer of Pleas, the Lords concluded that copyright was not perpetual, and that the term permitted by the Statute of Anne was the maximum length of legal protection for publishers and authors alike.

===Expansion and repeal===
Until its repeal, most extensions to copyright law were based around provisions found in the Statute of Anne. The one successful bill from the lobbying in the 1730s, which came into force on 29 September 1739, extended the provision prohibiting the import of foreign books to also prohibit the import of books that, while originally published in Britain, were being reprinted in foreign nations and then shipped to England and Wales. This was intended to stop the influx of cheap books from Ireland, and also repealed the price restrictions in the Statute of Anne. Another alteration was over the legal deposit provisions of the statute, which many booksellers found unfair. Despite an initial period of compliance, the principle of donating copies of books to certain libraries lapsed, partly due to the unwieldiness of the statute&#x27;s provisions and partly because of a lack of cooperation by the publishers. In 1775 Lord North, who was Chancellor of the University of Oxford, succeeded in passing a bill that reiterated the legal deposit provisions and granted the universities perpetual copyright on their works.

Another range of extensions came in relation to what could be copyrighted. The statute only referred to books, and being an Act of Parliament, it was necessary to pass further legislation to include various other types of intellectual property. The Engraving Copyright Act 1734 extended copyright to cover engravings, statutes in 1789 and 1792 involved cloth, sculptures were copyrighted in 1814 and the performance of plays and music were covered by copyright in 1833 and 1842 respectively. The length of copyright was also altered; the Copyright Act 1814 set a copyright term of either 28 years, or the natural life of the author if this was longer. Despite these expansions, some still felt copyright was not a strong enough regime. In 1837, Thomas Noon Talfourd introduced a bill into Parliament to expand the scope of copyright. A friend of many men of letters, Talfourd aimed to provide adequate rewards for authors and artists. He campaigned for copyright to exist for the life of the author, with an additional 60 years after that. He also proposed that existing statutes be codified under the bill, so that the case law that had arisen around the Statute of Anne was clarified.

Talfourd&#x27;s proposals led to opposition, and he reintroduced modified versions of them year on year. Printers, publishers and booksellers were concerned about the cost implications for original works, and for reprinting works that had fallen out of copyright. Many within Parliament argued that the bill failed to take into account the public interest, including Lord Macaulay, who succeeded in defeating one of Talfourd&#x27;s bills in 1841. The Copyright Act 1842 passed, but &quot;fell far short of Talfourd&#x27;s dream of a uniform, consistent, codified law of copyright&quot;. It extended copyright to life plus seven years, and, as part of the codification clauses, repealed the Statute of Anne.

===Significance===
The Statute of Anne is traditionally seen as &quot;a historic moment in the development of copyright&quot;, and the first statute in the world to provide for copyright. Craig Joyce and Lyman Ray Patterson, writing in the &quot;Emory Law Journal&quot;, call this a &quot;too simple understanding [that] ignores the statute&#x27;s source&quot;, arguing that it is at best a derivative of the Licensing Act. Even considering this, however, the Statute of Anne was &quot;the watershed event in Anglo-American copyright history ... transforming what had been the publishers&#x27; private law copyright into a public law grant&quot;. Patterson, writing separately, does note the differences between the Licensing Act and the Statute of Anne; the question of censorship was, by 1710, out of the question, and in that regard the statute is distinct, not providing for censorship.

It also marked the first time that copyright had been vested primarily in the author, rather than the publisher, and also the first time that the injurious treatment of authors by publishers was recognised; regardless of what authors signed away, the second 14-year term of copyright would automatically return to them. Even in the 21st century, the Statute of Anne is &quot;frequently invoked by modern judges and academics as embodying the utilitarian underpinnings of copyright law&quot;. In &quot;IceTV v Nine Network&quot;, for example, the High Court of Australia noted that the title of the statute &quot;echoed explicitly the emphasis on the practical or utilitarian importance that certain seventeenth-century philosophers attached to knowledge and its encouragement in the scheme of human progress&quot;. Despite &quot;widely recognised flaws&quot;, the Act became a model copyright statute, both within the United Kingdom and internationally. Christophe Geiger notes that it is &quot;a difficult, almost impossible task&quot; to analyse the relationship between the Statute of Anne and early French copyright law, both because it is difficult to make a direct connection, and because the ongoing debate over both has led to radically different interpretations of each nation&#x27;s law.

Similarly, Belgium took no direct influence from the statute or English copyright theory, but Joris Deene of the University of Ghent identifies an indirect influence &quot;at two levels&quot;; the criteria for what constitutes copyrightable material, which comes from the work of English theorists such as Locke and Edward Young, and the underlying justification of copyright law. In Belgium, this justification is both that copyright serves the public interest, and that copyright is a &quot;private right&quot; that serves the interests of individual authors. Both theories were taken into account in &quot;Donaldson v Beckett&quot;, as well as in the drafting of the Statute of Anne, and Deene infers that they subsequently affected the Belgian debates over their first copyright statute. In the United States, the Copyright Clause of the United States Constitution and the first Federal copyright statute, the Copyright Act of 1790, both draw on the Statute of Anne. The 1790 Act contains provisions for a 14-year term of copyright and sections that provide for authors who published their works before 1790, both of which mirror the protection offered by the statute 80 years previously.

==See also==
* Licensing of the Press Act 1662
* Copyright Act 1911
* Copyright Act 1956
* Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988
* Copyright law of the United Kingdom
* Common law copyright

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==
*Images and transcription of the Statute of Anne, as published 1710
*The Statute of Anne on The History of Information.
*The Statute of Anne in William F. Patry&#x27;s &quot;Copyright Law and Practice&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q615405" start="4" end="19" title="Statute of Anne" label="Statute of Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q615405" start="39" end="57" title="Statute of Anne" label="Copyright Act 1709"/>
<link wikidata="Q615405" start="65" end="83" title="Statute of Anne" label="Copyright Act 1710"/>
<link wikidata="Q118945345" start="101" end="107" title="8 Ann." label="8 Ann."/>
<link wikidata="Q4677783" start="142" end="145" title="Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom" label="act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="153" end="180" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="240" end="249" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238075" start="414" end="445" title="Licensing of the Press Act 1662" label="Licensing of the Press Act 1662"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013382" start="487" end="511" title="Stationers&amp;#x27; Company" label="Stationers&amp;#x27; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="1321" end="1333" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="1428" end="1438" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169286" start="1514" end="1521" title="Copyright renewal" label="renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="1764" end="1777" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169214" start="1966" end="1984" title="Copyright Act 1842" label="Copyright Act 1842"/>
<link wikidata="Q384840" start="2347" end="2360" title="legal deposit" label="legal deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2455" end="2468" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="2575" end="2586" title="Utilitarianism" label="utilitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="2670" end="2684" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2688" end="2695" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q94608" start="2699" end="2713" title="William Caxton" label="William Caxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="2812" end="2823" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="2921" end="2934" title="Protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3067" end="3096" title="Printers and Binders Act 1533" label="Printers and Binders Act 1533"/>
<link wikidata="Q127433509" start="3098" end="3107" title="25 Hen. 8" label="25 Hen. 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="3181" end="3196" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="3355" end="3363" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="3378" end="3388" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246345" start="3610" end="3623" title="Privy Council of England" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q82674" start="3761" end="3767" title="Mary I of England" label="Mary I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="3777" end="3790" title="royal charter" label="royal warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013382" start="3818" end="3842" title="Stationers&amp;#x27; Company" label="Stationers&amp;#x27; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443564" start="3897" end="3921" title="Second Statute of Repeal" label="Second Statute of Repeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329062" start="4603" end="4615" title="Star Chamber" label="Star Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445297" start="4620" end="4644" title="Court of High Commission" label="Court of High Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q535158" start="4652" end="4667" title="Long Parliament" label="Long Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238075" start="4768" end="4786" title="Licensing Act 1662" label="Licensing Act 1662"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270035" start="4904" end="4926" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Messenger" label="King&amp;#x27;s Messengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="6725" end="6736" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q642635" start="6749" end="6761" title="Areopagitica" label="Areopagitica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="7006" end="7016" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="7384" end="7403" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="7470" end="7483" title="Coffeehouse" label="coffee houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238075" start="8002" end="8020" title="Licensing Act 1662" label="Licensing Act 1662"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8664" end="8677" title="Edward Clarke (1650–1710)" label="Edward Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="9266" end="9276" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807912" start="11993" end="12011" title="Triennial Act 1694" label="Triennial Act 1694"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137581" start="12426" end="12440" title="London Gazette" label="London Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416619" start="12586" end="12598" title="Evening Post (London)" label="Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741094" start="12619" end="12632" title="Daily Courant" label="Daily Courant"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="13195" end="13209" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="13251" end="13263" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q270415" start="15324" end="15339" title="Spencer Compton, 1st Earl of Wilmington" label="Spencer Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q39803018" start="15341" end="15354" title="Craven Peyton" label="Craven Peyton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15359" end="15373" title="Edward Wortley" label="Edward Wortley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133775" start="15786" end="15811" title="Stationers&amp;#x27; Register" label="Stationers&amp;#x27; Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q384840" start="15824" end="15837" title="legal deposit" label="legal deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="15889" end="15909" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="15918" end="15941" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153033" start="16249" end="16271" title="Committee of the Whole" label="Committee of the Whole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525349" start="16505" end="16517" title="Sion College" label="Sion College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428890" start="16526" end="16546" title="Faculty of Advocates" label="Faculty of Advocates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365459" start="17369" end="17382" title="Ronan Deazley" label="Ronan Deazley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892119" start="17691" end="17722" title="Berkeley Technology Law Journal" label="Berkeley Technology Law Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="17999" end="18009" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="20148" end="20161" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21177" end="21192" title="Beckford v Hood" label="Beckford v Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="21210" end="21236" title="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q284804" start="23272" end="23289" title="Court of Chancery" label="Court of Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858492" start="23560" end="23575" title="Millar v Taylor" label="Millar v Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758020" start="23583" end="23596" title="Andrew Millar" label="Andrew Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q555029" start="23643" end="23656" title="James Thomson (poet, born 1700)" label="James Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956983" start="23670" end="23681" title="The Seasons (Thomson poem)" label="The Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153557" start="24053" end="24073" title="common law copyright" label="common law copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="24268" end="24286" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q869340" start="24370" end="24384" title="William Murray, 1st Earl of Mansfield" label="Lord Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q15434836" start="24401" end="24406" title="Richard Aston" label="Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288099" start="24798" end="24803" title="Joseph Yates (judge)" label="Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718741" start="25365" end="25374" title="Alexander Donaldson (bookseller)" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295373" start="25532" end="25551" title="Donaldson v Beckett" label="Donaldson v Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058404" start="25586" end="25600" title="Judicial Committee of the House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178387" start="25642" end="25659" title="Court of King&amp;#x27;s Bench (England)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q206634" start="25661" end="25673" title="Court of Common Pleas (England)" label="Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137765" start="25678" end="25696" title="Exchequer of Pleas" label="Exchequer of Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q312593" start="26830" end="26840" title="Frederick North, Lord North" label="Lord North"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566685" start="26850" end="26888" title="List of Chancellors of the University of Oxford" label="Chancellor of the University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378746" start="27278" end="27306" title="Engraving Copyright Act 1734" label="Engraving Copyright Act 1734"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426332" start="27774" end="27794" title="Thomas Noon Talfourd" label="Thomas Noon Talfourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169214" start="28668" end="28686" title="Copyright Act 1842" label="Copyright Act 1842"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708077" start="29129" end="29148" title="Lyman Ray Patterson" label="Lyman Ray Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30318" end="30338" title="IceTV v Nine Network" label="IceTV v Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="30363" end="30386" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111766" start="30771" end="30788" title="Christophe Geiger" label="Christophe Geiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137665" start="31229" end="31248" title="University of Ghent" label="University of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q507699" start="31432" end="31444" title="Edward Young" label="Edward Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169225" start="31934" end="31950" title="Copyright Clause" label="Copyright Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="31958" end="31984" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169218" start="32030" end="32051" title="Copyright Act of 1790" label="Copyright Act of 1790"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238075" start="32325" end="32356" title="Licensing of the Press Act 1662" label="Licensing of the Press Act 1662"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169215" start="32359" end="32377" title="Copyright Act 1911" label="Copyright Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169216" start="32380" end="32398" title="Copyright Act 1956" label="Copyright Act 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169209" start="32401" end="32440" title="Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988" label="Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169279" start="32443" end="32478" title="Copyright law of the United Kingdom" label="Copyright law of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153557" start="32481" end="32501" title="Common law copyright" label="Common law copyright"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27761" wikidata="Q2248822" url="?curid=27761" title="School choice">
<text>School choice is a term for education options that allow students and families to select alternatives to public schools. It is the subject of debate in various state legislatures across the United States.

The most common type of school choice in the United States, measured both by the number of programs and by the number of participating students, are scholarship tax credit programs. These allow individuals or corporations to receive tax credits toward their state taxes in exchange for donations made to non-profit organizations that grant private school scholarships. A similar subsidy may be provided by a state through a school voucher program.

Other school choice options include open enrollment laws (which allow students to attend public schools other than their neighborhood school), charter schools, magnet schools, virtual schools, homeschooling, education savings accounts (ESAs), and individual education tax credits or deductions.

== History ==

=== In the United States ===

In 1955, economist Milton Friedman proposed using free market principles in assigning students to schools, which he believed would improve the United States public school system. The typical practice at that time was to assign children to the public school nearest their home. Friedman proposed that parents should be able to receive education funds in the form of school vouchers, which would allow them to choose their children&#x27;s schools from among public, private, and religious and non-religious options.

Virginia&#x27;s 1956 Stanley Plan used vouchers to finance white-only private schools known as segregation academies. Other states followed until the practice was disallowed by &quot;Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County&quot; (1964).

Milwaukee mayor John Norquist (D) and Wisconsin governor Tommy Thompson (R) initiated school vouchers in Milwaukee in 1990. Minnesota was the first state to have a charter school law and the nation&#x27;s first charter school was City Academy High School, which opened in St. Paul, Minnesota, in 1992. California created its District of Choice program in 1993. It allows California public school district to enroll students residing outside district lines.

In 1995, Friedman slammed the public school system for its “dismal results: some relatively good government schools in high-income suburbs and communities; very poor government schools in our inner cities.” In 1996, Friedman and his wife, Rose Friedman, founded the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice (later EdChoice).

In &quot;Zelman v. Simmons-Harris&quot; in 2002, the Supreme Court of the United States declared that school vouchers could be used to pay for education in sectarian schools without violating the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment. As a result, states are free to enact voucher programs that provide funding for any school of the parent&#x27;s choosing.

In 2004, Congress enacted the D.C. Opportunity Scholarship Program, which provided scholarships to 2000 low-income students. In 2008, students came from families with an average income of $22,736, approximately 107 percent of the federal poverty level for a family of four.

In Iowa, the Educational Opportunities Act was enacted in 2006, creating tax credits for eligible donors to scholarship-granting organizations (SGO)s. These tax caps were $5 million originally, but in 2007 increased to $7.5 million.

In 2007 Newark launched alternatives to poorly performing local schools. Governor Chris Christie worked with mayor Cory Booker to expand charter schools there.

By 2009 school choice had become a partisan issue. Democratic support waned, while Republican support continued to broaden. The Democratic-led Congress attempted to phase out the DC program, despite a waiting list of 9,000 low income children. The Obama administration provided funding incentives to states and school districts to increase the number of charter schools. In 2011 Republicans became the majority and renewed the program. In the 2009 and 2010 elections, school-choice-supporting Republicans gained seven governors’ seats. 12 states expanded school choice in 2011. Newly Republican states enacted half of that year&#x27;s school-choice legislation.

In 2011 Wisconsin opened the Milwaukee program to all city students and introduced a similar plan in Racine. In 2013 vouchers were made available to qualifying families across Wisconsin, reaching more than 14,500 students in 2022. Also in 2011 Florida grew special-ed vouchers, simplified the rules that allowed students to transfer out of failing schools, and increased the cap on charter schools. Oklahoma created a tax-credit scholarship program for low-income students. Indiana removed the limit on charter schools, allowed universities to authorize charters, and established vouchers for low- and middle-income students. Arizona created ESAs for special-needs students. Ohio doubled the state’s scholarship program and increased scholarship/tutoring funding for low-income students in Cleveland. Louisiana added scholarships for special-needs students. A poll found that 60 percent of American voters felt that tax credits support parents whereas 26 percent felt that tax credits support religion.

The Arizona Individual Private School Tuition Tax Credit Program in 2014 offered $1,053 (individuals), and couples ($2,106). Nearly 24,000 children received scholarships in the 2011–2012 school year. The program started in 1998, reaching over 77,500 taxpayers, providing over $500 million in scholarship money for children at private schools across the state. The Arizona program survived a court challenge, ostensibly because tuition grants could go to religious schools.

Greater Opportunities for Access to Learning is the Georgia program that offers a state income tax credit to donors of scholarships to private schools. Representative David Casas passed school choice legislation in Georgia.

About 1.8 million children were home educated in 2012. In 2014 a lawsuit sought to challenge the legality of the Florida voucher program.

In 2015, 14 cities had 30% or more of their students in charter schools, led by New Orleans, with 93% , 47 California school districts and 10,000 students participated in District of Choice, serving five percent of school districts and 0.2 percent of students.

In the 2020 &quot;Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue case&quot;, the Supreme Court ruled that states could not restrict voucher programs from religious schools simply because the school was run by a religious organization. The Court further ruled in &quot;Carson v. Makin&quot; that states could not restrict the use of vouchers against any secular private school as long as the parents had a choice of school, as this would violate the Free Exercise Clause.

By 2021 school choice students numbered 621,000, up from 200,000 in 2011. The next expansion was driven by pandemic-related dissatisfaction with public school policies and curricula. While many European school systems reopened in spring 2020, American public schools generally remained closed until the fall of 2021. For the 2020–2021 school year, public school enrollment fell by 3 percent. Private and charter schools grew an estimated 7 percent. 18 states either initiated school-choice programs or expanded offerings, making 3.6 million American students eligible for school choice and/or homeschool support programs. Several states expanded eligibility to include middle-class children.

Also in Florida directed ~$200 million to increased low-income scholarships, while raising the income cap to $100,000, to reach an estimated 60,000 more students. In June 2021 New Hampshire established ESAs, with an income cap of $79,500. By November, New Hampshire 1,600 students had applied. In 2018–19 in West Virginia, teachers fought a charter expansion, twice launching strikes. In 2020 Republicans won a state legislative supermajority and offered ESAs to students of all incomes.

In 2022 Alabama increased scholarship funding by 50%, to $30B. South Dakota expanded tax-credit scholarships. As of May 2022, 72% of US school parents favored vouchers, 76% supported ESAs, and 71% favored charter schools in the United States.

==Forms==

=== Scholarship tax credits ===
Scholarship tax credit programs grant individuals and businesses a full or partial credit toward their taxes for donations made to scholarship granting organizations (SGOs; also called school tuition organizations). SGOs use the donations to create scholarships that allow students to attend private schools or out-of-district public schools. These programs currently exist in fourteen states: Alabama, Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Minnesota, New Hampshire, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Virginia.

=== Vouchers ===
Vouchers help pay for private school tuition, whether secular or religious.

=== Charter schools ===
Charter schools are independent public schools that are exempt from many of the regulations governing public schools. These exemptions grant charter schools some autonomy and flexibility with decision-making, such as teacher contracts, hiring, and curriculum. In return, charter schools are subject to stricter accountability on spending and academic performance. Most states and the national capital of Washington, D.C. have charter school laws, though they vary in how charter schools are approved.

=== Magnet schools ===

Magnet schools are public schools that specialize in science, technology, art or other specific areas. Magnet schools are not open to all children; some require a competitive examination. Magnet schools are an example of open enrollment programs, which refer to that allow families to choose public schools other than the ones they are assigned.

=== Homeschooling ===
Home education or homeschooling is education provided at home, provided primarily by a parent or under direct parental control. Informal home education predates public schools, and formal instruction in the home has at times been popular. As public education grew during the 1900s, homeschooling dropped. Since 2000, the number of children educated at home has increased, particularly in the US. Laws relevant to home education differ: in some states, the parent needs to notify the state that the child is to be educated at home, while in others, at least one parent must be a certified teacher and annual progress reports are reviewed by the state.

=== Inter-district enrollment ===

Intra-district open enrollment programs allow school choice within a district, while inter-district open enrollment allows families to choose schools outside the district.

To participate in California&#x27;s District of Choice program, district governing boards declare themselves a District of Choice and set a quota for how many students to accept. School districts cannot discriminate among students, but can limit the number through a lottery system.

=== Education Savings Accounts ===

ESAs allow parents to receive public funds in a government-authorized savings account. These funds are often distributed in the form of a debit card that can be used to pay for various services, such as private school tuition and fees, online programs, private tutoring, community college costs, higher education services, and other approved learning materials and services. ESAs can pay for a combination of public school courses and private services.

=== Tax credit/deduction ===

Some states allow parents to claim a tax credit or deduction to help fund certain educational expenses. These can include private school tuition, textbooks, school supplies and equipment, tutoring, and transportation.

Some other jurisdictions reduce the income tax for parents, so educational expenses can be more economical, which include private school tuition, supplies, computers, books, tutors, and transportation.

=== Online learning ===

Online learning allows students to work with teachers and their courses over the internet.

=== Composites ===

Course choice programs, public school courses, and special education therapies can be integrated into a student&#x27;s curriculum, potentially with hybrid funding.

== Debate ==

=== Support ===

==== Parental influence ====
School choice gives parents more influence over what students learn (e.g., academics vs trades) and the learning environment (e.g., discipline, uniforms, extra-curriculars).

==== Student achievement ====
Caroline Hoxby suggested that competition among schools increases student achievement. Supporters say this would level the playing field by broadening opportunities for low-income students—particularly minorities—to attend high-quality schools that would otherwise be accessible only to higher-income families.

==== Competition ====
Voucher supporters argue that choice creates competition between schools, and that failing schools can lose students and close. Competition encourages schools to create innovative programs, become more responsive to parental demands, and increase student achievement. Competition can help parents influence their child&#x27;s education. Parents can also punish ineffective schools by transferring their children elsewhere. Traditional public schools also have to compete, although even the least effective are rarely closed.

==== Cost effectiveness ====
Studies undertaken by the Cato Institute and other American libertarian and conservative think tanks claim that privately run education costs less and produces superior outcomes.

==== Mental health ====
One study reported that states that adopted charter school laws experienced a decline in adolescent suicides, and that private schooling reduces the likelihood of adults reporting mental health issues. School choice supporters claim that it can reduce bullying since families could choose to send their kids to a different school if they are experiencing bullying.

==== Rights ====
According to The Organisation Internationale pour le Droit à l&#x27;Education et la Liberté d&#x27;Enseignement (OIDEL; ) the right to education is a human right and parents should be able to choose a school for their children without discrimination on the basis of finances. To advance freedom of education, OIDEL promotes a greater parity between public and private schooling systems.

In the United States, support for school choice has been paired with parental rights. For example, Virginia Governor Glenn Youngkin asserted that he won his 2021 race by emphasizing that parents have the right to make decisions about their children’s education and supported school choice.

==== Housing prices ====
One study reported that school choice programs in Seoul, South Korea, reduced housing prices in high-performing districts more than in low-performing districts.

=== Oppose ===

==== Profiteering ====
School choice measures are criticized as encouraging profiteering. Charter authorization organizations have non-profit status; and contract with related for-profit entities. Charters have been accused of creating units that charge them high rent, and that while the facilities are used as schools, they pay no property taxes.

==== Constitutionality ====
Some school choice measures are criticized as violating church-state separation. The constitutionality of state-sponsored school choice laws has been challenged by school board associations, public school districts, teacher unions, associations of school business officials, the American Civil Liberties Union, the Freedom From Religion Foundation, and People for the American Way.

==== Destruction of public system ====
School choice has been criticized for aiming to privatize schooling.

==== Racism ====
School choice policies have been accused of racism, as they came into prominence for encouraging private schooling shortly after the Brown v. Board of Education decision required desegregation only in public schools.

==International overview ==

=== Belgium ===

The Flemish community of Belgium has a high-performing education system as measured by PISA scores. Most private schools are subject to government targets and inspections. Schools are not allowed to select students via admissions tests, performance, religious background, or gender. The Flemish education system allows choice between teaching styles and competition, while suffering from relatively high socio-economic segregation.

=== Sweden ===
Sweden&#x27;s system of school choice is one of the world&#x27;s freest, providing public funds for student choice of publicly or privately run school, including religious and for-profit schools. Fifteen years after the 1993 reform, private school enrollment had increased from 1% to 10% of the student population.

=== Chile ===
In Chile, researchers reported that when controlling for student background (parental income and education), the difference in performance between public and private sectors is not significant. Variation within each sector is greater than that between the two systems.

== See also ==
* School-choice mechanism: an algorithm for matching pupils to schools in a way that respects the pupils&#x27; preferences and the schools&#x27; priorities.
* School voucher
* Tax choice

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2248822" start="0" end="13" title="School choice" label="School choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="105" end="119" title="Public school (government funded)" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149363" start="355" end="377" title="scholarship tax credit" label="scholarship tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="546" end="560" title="private school" label="private school"/>
<link wikidata="Q173810" start="630" end="644" title="school voucher" label="school voucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="744" end="758" title="Public school (government funded)" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241709" start="798" end="812" title="charter school" label="charter school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703577" start="815" end="829" title="magnet schools" label="magnet schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996789" start="831" end="846" title="virtual schools" label="virtual schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q83602" start="848" end="861" title="homeschooling" label="homeschooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179224" start="863" end="889" title="Coverdell education savings account" label="education savings accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="1015" end="1030" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="1046" end="1057" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q861654" start="1139" end="1173" title="Education in the United States" label="United States public school system"/>
<link wikidata="Q173810" start="1361" end="1375" title="school voucher" label="school voucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="1511" end="1519" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600071" start="1532" end="1544" title="Stanley Plan" label="Stanley Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446325" start="1606" end="1627" title="segregation academies" label="segregation academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608836" start="1694" end="1748" title="Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County" label="Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="1764" end="1773" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250640" start="1780" end="1793" title="John Norquist" label="John Norquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q732804" start="1821" end="1835" title="Tommy Thompson" label="Tommy Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692571" start="1994" end="2018" title="City Academy High School" label="City Academy High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q433201" start="2461" end="2474" title="Rose Friedman" label="Rose Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006226" start="2538" end="2546" title="EdChoice" label="EdChoice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068821" start="2559" end="2583" title="Zelman v. Simmons-Harris" label="Zelman v. Simmons-Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2603" end="2637" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203380" start="2944" end="2980" title="D.C. Opportunity Scholarship Program" label="D.C. Opportunity Scholarship Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q25395" start="3431" end="3437" title="Newark, New Jersey" label="Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q63879" start="3505" end="3519" title="Chris Christie" label="Chris Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135767" start="3538" end="3549" title="Cory Booker" label="Cory Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="3832" end="3837" title="Barack Obama" label="Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q40340" start="4348" end="4354" title="Racine, Wisconsin" label="Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010769" start="6169" end="6180" title="Orleans Parish School District" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q97188996" start="6369" end="6410" title="Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue" label="Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="6427" end="6440" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q107555785" start="6614" end="6629" title="Carson v. Makin" label="Carson v. Makin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499816" start="6795" end="6815" title="Free Exercise Clause" label="Free Exercise Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873577" start="6925" end="6933" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United States" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83602" start="7411" end="7421" title="homeschool" label="homeschool"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="9353" end="9369" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="10722" end="10732" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q13499" start="11162" end="11172" title="debit card" label="debit card"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045105" start="12497" end="12511" title="Caroline Hoxby" label="Caroline Hoxby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051256" start="13412" end="13426" title="Cato Institute" label="Cato Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="13446" end="13457" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="13462" end="13474" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q69370" start="14099" end="14117" title="right to education" label="right to education"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="14123" end="14134" title="human right" label="human right"/>
<link wikidata="Q100963892" start="14478" end="14492" title="Glenn Youngkin" label="Glenn Youngkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561101" start="14931" end="14943" title="profiteering (business)" label="profiteering"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="15512" end="15542" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q531069" start="15548" end="15580" title="Freedom From Religion Foundation" label="Freedom From Religion Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165877" start="15586" end="15613" title="People for the American Way" label="People for the American Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="15875" end="15902" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q323481" start="16093" end="16104" title="Programme for International Student Assessment" label="PISA scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q124309330" start="17071" end="17094" title="School-choice mechanism" label="School-choice mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q173810" start="17228" end="17242" title="School voucher" label="School voucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689414" start="17245" end="17255" title="Tax choice" label="Tax choice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27762" wikidata="Q7600723" url="?curid=27762" title="Star Frontiers">
<text>Star Frontiers is a science fiction role-playing game produced by TSR from 1982 to 1985. The game offers a space opera action-adventure setting.

== Description ==
&quot;Star Frontiers&quot; is a space opera role-playing game that is set near the center of a spiral galaxy (the setting does not specify whether the galaxy is our own Milky Way). A previously undiscovered quirk of the laws of physics allows starships to jump to &quot;The Void&quot;, a hyperspatial realm that greatly shortens the travel times between inhabited worlds, once they reach 1% of the speed of light. Four races — Dralasite, Humans, Vrusk, and Yazirian — have independently discovered this way of travelling vast distances, and in &quot;The Frontier Sector&quot;, they form the United Planetary Federation (UPF). A large number of the star systems shown on the map of the Frontier sector in the basic rulebook are unexplored and undetailed, allowing the gamemaster to put whatever they wish there.

Players can take on any number of possible roles in the setting but usually act as hired agents of the Pan Galactic corporation in exploring the Frontier and fighting the aggressive incursions of the alien and mysterious worm-like race known as the Sathar. Most published modules for the game follow these themes.

The game is a percentile-based system and uses only 10-sided dice. Characters have eight attributes rated from 1-100, which are paired together: Strength/Stamina, Dexterity/Reaction Speed, Intuition/Logic, and Personality/Leadership.

Characters also each have a Primary Skill Area (PSA), either Military, Technological, or Biosocial. Character generation uses a point-buy system to buy skills; skills falling within a character&#x27;s PSA can be bought at a discount. Unlike TSR&#x27;s better-known fantasy role-playing game &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, there is no character level advancement in &quot;Star Frontiers&quot;, although skills can be improved through experience.

Because of the lack of magical healing found in fantasy RPGs, characters are quite durable in combat. Medical technology is also advanced, so characters can recover quickly from wounds with appropriate medical attention. Additionally, a dead character can be &quot;frozen&quot; and revived later.

The original boxed set includes two ten-sided dice, a large set of cardboard counters, and a folding map with a futuristic city on one side and various wilderness areas on the other. The box also includes the first &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; adventure, SF-0: &quot;Crash on Volturnus&quot;. The characters would remain marooned on Volturnus through the next few modules: SF-1: &quot;Volturnus, Planet of Mystery&quot; (1982) and SF-2: &quot;Starspawn of Volturnus&quot; (1982)

In his 2023 book &quot;Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground&quot;, RPG historian Stu Horvath noted that during this time on Volturnus, &quot;Strangely, &quot;Star Frontiers&quot;, a science fiction game about space exploration, went two years without rules for spaceships.&quot;

(Rules for spaceships and space combat finally appeared in 1983, with the boxed set titled &quot;Knight Hawks&quot;.)

== Publication history ==
Although TSR was a pioneer in developing science fiction role-playing games like the generation ship game &quot;Metamorphosis Alpha&quot; (1976) and the post-apocalyptic &quot;Gamma World&quot; (1978), they didn&#x27;t immediately publish a space opera to rival Game Designer&#x27;s Workshop&#x27;s very popular &quot;Traveller&quot; (1977). Then in the early 1980s, David Cook and Lawrence Schick developed the rules for a TSR game they called &quot;Alien Worlds&quot;. Those rules turned out to be too complex, and Cook and Schick severely edited the game to produce a more streamlined system — a 1984 article in &quot;Dragon&quot; noted that much of the material excised from &quot;Alien Worlds&quot; &quot;was felt to be too complex; playability was emphasized in the final version over complete realism.&quot; The revised game was titled &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; and was published by TSR in 1982.

In 1983, Mike Gray, Allen Hammack, Harold Johnson, David C. Sutherland III, and Steve Winter revised and expanded the game; this was released as &quot;Star Frontiers: Alpha Dawn&quot;. About the same time, TSR released &quot;Knight Hawks&quot; (1983), designed by Douglas Niles, which provided rules for using starships, and for starship combat.

TSR released several more adventures to take advantage of the expanded rules in &quot;Alpha Dawn&quot;, including SF-3: &quot;Sundown on Starmist&quot; (1983), SF-4: &quot;Mission to Alcazzar&quot; (1984), SF-5: &quot;Bugs in the System&quot; (1985) and SF-6: &quot;Dark Side of the Moon&quot; (1985).

Adventures using the &quot;Knight Hawks&quot; spaceship rules included SFKH-1: &quot;Dramune Run&quot; (1984) and a trilogy set &quot;Beyond the Frontier&quot; in which the players learn more about the Sathar and foil their latest plot (SFKH-2: &quot;Mutiny on the Eleanor Moraes&quot; (1984), SFKH-3: &quot;Face of the Enemy&quot; (1985), and SFKH-4: &quot;The War Machine&quot; (1985)).
In addition to adventures, several game aids were released, including the &quot;Star Frontiers Referee&#x27;s Screen and Mini-Module&quot; in 1983, and the &quot;Star Frontiers Character Record Sheets&quot; in 1984, a 32-page book of character sheets with cover art by Larry Elmore.

Two modules published in 1984 also re-created the plot and setting of the movies &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot; and &quot;2010: Odyssey Two&quot;.

In 1985, TSR signalled a new expansion to the game by publishing &quot;Zebulon&#x27;s Guide to Frontier Space&quot; (1985) which introduced several additional races and radical changes to the game&#x27;s mechanics. Although several more volumes were planned, they were never published, as TSR abruptly ended support for the &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; game. Various reasons for this sudden termination have been proposed — RPG historian Stu Horvath presented the possibility that TSR was angling to gain the game license for &quot;Star Wars&quot; and &quot;ditched &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; on the hubristic assumption they could outbid the competition.&quot; Whether or not this was the reason, TSR ultimately lost a bidding war for the &quot;Star Wars&quot; rights to West End Games.

=== &quot;d20 Modern&quot; ===
After TSR&#x27;s takeover by Wizards of the Coast (WotC), the &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; campaign setting was resurrected and updated for WotC&#x27;s &quot;d20 Modern&quot; role-playing game system in the science fiction supplement &quot;d20 Future&quot; (2004); the new revision was titled &quot;Star Law&quot;.

==Reception==
In Issue 37 of &quot;White Dwarf&quot;, Andy Slack stated that &quot;Unfortunately, I can&#x27;t say the system struck me as especially realistic; but if you like action adventure, thinking with your fists, and &quot;Star Wars&quot; (and who doesn&#x27;t from time to time) you can have a lot of fun with this game.&quot; Slack concluded by giving it an overall rating of 7 out of 10.

In the February 1983 issue of &quot;The Space Gamer&quot; , William A. Barton commented, &quot;&quot;Star Frontiers&quot; probably isn&#x27;t going to lose TSR any money. But I wish there were a lot more to commend it than that.&quot;

In the November 1983 issue of &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction&quot;, Dana Lombardy commented, &quot;Warning: these games can be addictive! Successfully completing an adventure (which sometimes means simply surviving!), or having your character obliterated in one of them, will probably make you want to play even more challenging adventures. TSR has a lot to offer the novice and experienced SF gamer in &quot;Star Frontiers&quot;.&quot;

In Issue 30 of the French games magazine &quot;Casus Belli&quot;, Jean Bolczesak liked the game but found its science fiction content a bit simplistic, commenting, &quot;&quot;Star Frontiers&quot; is playable, interesting and ESPECIALLY entertaining. But &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; is a game that presents a rather caricatured vision of science fiction. Since Dick and Herbert, SF is no longer necessarily a literary genre reserved for the simple-minded and the mentally ill. You can be passionate about space opera without being completely stupid.&quot; Bolczesak also pointed out the lack of content about spaceships and planet creation. Despite this, Bolczesak concluded, &quot;&quot;Star Frontiers&quot; is not a bad game, however, far from it. To be honest, it is even excellent for all &#x27;dungeoners&#x27; who dream of exploring the galaxy. Especially if they like action and sci-fi, but not &#x27;hard science.&#x27;

The French games magazine &quot;Jeux et Stratégie&quot; dismissed this game as fantasy masquerading as science fiction, commenting, &quot;The fact remains that it is simply a transfer of &quot;D&amp;D&quot; into a sci-fi world. We find the same type of scenarios, the monsters being replaced by extraterrestrial life forms, and the elves by Yazirians.&quot;

In the inaugural issue of the UK role-playing game magazine &quot;Imagine&quot;, Jim Bambra liked the game, saying, &quot;In summary, the &quot;Starfrontiers&quot; game is an excellent introduction to Sci Fi gaming, a game I heartily recommend to beginners and experienced gamers. A lot of expertise has gone into the designing of this product and the result is a very enjoyable and easy to learn game.&quot;

Also writing for &quot;Imagine&quot;, Stephen Nutt reviewed &quot;Star Frontiers Character Record Sheets&quot;, and stated that &quot;it makes up handsomely for the originals in the boxed set, which are rather pedestrian in comparison.&quot;

In his 1990 book &quot;The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games&quot;, game critic Rick Swan called &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; &quot;a streamlined, easy-to-learn game stressing general concepts while minimizing complicated mechanics.&quot; Swan concluded by giving the game a solid rating of 3 out of 4 and a qualified recommendation, saying, &quot;It&#x27;s an excellent game for beginners, but experienced players may be disappointed that it lacks the scope of more elaborate science-fiction games such as &quot;MegaTraveller&quot;.&quot;

Scott Taylor revisited &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; several times for &quot;Black Gate&quot;
* In 2014, Taylor listed the &quot;Star Frontiers Alpha Dawn&quot; boxed set by Larry Elmore as #9 in The Top 10 TSR Cover Paintings of All Time.
* In a retrospective review of &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; in 2020, Taylor said &quot;&quot;Frontiers&quot;, in my opinion, is a &#x27;clean&#x27; game, which is to say there aren&#x27;t any rough edges, shadowed pasts, massive interstellar threats, plagues, or the like. It&#x27;s like a perfect joining of &quot;Star Trek&quot; and &quot;Star Wars&quot;, where characters find themselves challenged to explore new worlds while still dealing with a handful of alien races as trusted friends.&quot; In another review for &quot;Black Gate&quot;, Patrick Kanouse said &quot;&quot;Star Frontiers&quot; remains a playable and enjoyable game. A group of devoted fans have kept the game alive and expanded on it, so if you&#x27;re looking for an easy-to-learn RPG with a focus on action, give it a go. I think you may like the retrofuture it inhabits.&quot;
* In 2015, Taylor rated the &quot;Volturnus&quot; series as #5 in &quot;The Top 10 Campaign Adventure Module Series of All Time, saying &quot;Acres &amp; Moldvay spin a nice thread that pervades all of the &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; universe with the additions of &quot;SF1 Volturnus, Planet of Mystery&quot; and &quot;SF2 Starspawn of Volturnus&quot;.&quot;

== Subsequent legal dispute over trademark ==

In 2021, a new iteration of TSR Games was launched by a group including Ernie Gygax, son of the deceased Tactical Studies Rules (TSR) co-founder Gary Gygax, and Justin LaNasa. They announced plans to release tabletop games and operate the Dungeon Hobby Shop Museum, which is located in the first office building of the original TSR. In July 2022, &quot;TechRaptor&quot; reported on a leaked &quot;Star Frontiers: New Genesis&quot; (a reboot of &quot;Star Frontiers&quot;) playtest created by LaNasa&#x27;s TSR; the content contains &quot;blatantly racist&quot; descriptions of character races and the race design &quot;plays into Nazi eugenics&quot;. The content also contains &quot;homophobic, transphobic, and anti-semitic content, as well as additional material of a discriminatory nature&quot;. &quot;IGN Southeast Asia&quot; highlighted that in this playtest game a black &quot;race is classified as a &#x27;Subrace&#x27; and having &#x27;average&#x27; intellect with a maximum intelligence rating of 9, whereas the &#x27;norse&#x27; race has a minimum intelligence rating of 13&quot;.

In September 2022, Wizards of the Coast sued TSR Games and the Dungeon Hobby Shop Museum to enjoin these companies from publishing games under the &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; and &quot;TSR&quot; trademarks. In its motion for a preliminary injunction, Wizards of the Coast wrote that TSR&#x27;s &quot;Star Frontiers: New Genesis&quot; game is &quot;despicable&quot; and &quot;blatantly racist and transphobic&quot;, and that the publication of such content would inflict reputational harm on Wizards of the Coast. Charlie Hall, for &quot;Polygon&quot;, commented that &quot;Wizards&#x27; filing also seeks to undermine LaNasa&#x27;s most powerful argument — that Wizards abandoned TSR and other related trademarks, thus opening the door to his usurping of the brand and its games. [...] Here&#x27;s where things get complicated. Wizards admits that it failed to file paperwork for the registration of TSR, Star Frontiers, and other related marks in a timely fashion as required under federal law. But through continued sales of related products and use of the related IP, the company claims ownership via &#x27;common law trademark rights.&#x27; It will be up to a jury to determine if that is, in fact, the case&quot;.

== References ==
==External links==
* StarFrontiers.org - Includes downloadable rule books for Knight Hawks and Alpha Dawn and other material (via the Wayback Machine).
* StarFrontiers.com - Features legal PDF downloads of the game (via the Wayback Machine).
* The Star Frontiers Network - Site designed for hosting online &quot;Star Frontiers&quot; games and software development.
* Star Frontiers Revival Site: Devoted to collaborative community development and discussion of &quot;Star Frontiers&quot;.
* &quot;Frontier Explorer&quot; Magazine - Free fan-created electronic magazine with articles and other content related to &quot;Star Frontiers&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="36" end="53" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543201" start="66" end="69" title="TSR, Inc." label="TSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="107" end="118" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="333" end="342" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="562" end="576" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q930701" start="931" end="941" title="gamemaster" label="gamemaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="1176" end="1181" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="1823" end="1845" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q104881022" start="2716" end="2738" title="Starspawn of Volturnus" label="Starspawn of Volturnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793015" start="3135" end="3147" title="Knight Hawks" label="Knight Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q964131" start="3268" end="3283" title="generation ship" label="generation ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116228" start="3295" end="3314" title="Metamorphosis Alpha" label="Metamorphosis Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q197949" start="3336" end="3352" title="post-apocalyptic" label="post-apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520309" start="3359" end="3370" title="Gamma World" label="Gamma World"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="3424" end="3435" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054486" start="3445" end="3474" title="Game Designer&amp;#x27;s Workshop" label="Game Designer&amp;#x27;s Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164069" start="3501" end="3510" title="Traveller (role-playing game)" label="Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232538" start="3550" end="3560" title="David Cook (game designer)" label="David Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q16875342" start="3565" end="3580" title="Lawrence Schick" label="Lawrence Schick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405201" start="3804" end="3810" title="Dragon (magazine)" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793015" start="4313" end="4325" title="Knight Hawks" label="Knight Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038032" start="4352" end="4365" title="Douglas Niles" label="Douglas Niles"/>
<link wikidata="Q105657191" start="4561" end="4580" title="Sundown on Starmist" label="Sundown on Starmist"/>
<link wikidata="Q107185271" start="4607" end="4626" title="Mission to Alcazzar" label="Mission to Alcazzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q105554912" start="4823" end="4834" title="Dramune Run" label="Dramune Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120727" start="4989" end="5017" title="Mutiny on the Eleanor Moraes" label="Mutiny on the Eleanor Moraes"/>
<link wikidata="Q104881833" start="5207" end="5259" title="Star Frontiers Referee&amp;#x27;s Screen and Mini-Module" label="Star Frontiers Referee&amp;#x27;s Screen and Mini-Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192016" start="5361" end="5376" title="character sheet" label="character sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q932944" start="5396" end="5408" title="Larry Elmore" label="Larry Elmore"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5498" end="5519" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5536" end="5553" title="2010: Odyssey Two" label="2010: Odyssey Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="6092" end="6101" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095106" start="6332" end="6346" title="West End Games" label="West End Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135204" start="6409" end="6429" title="Wizards of the Coast" label="Wizards of the Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418079" start="6469" end="6485" title="campaign setting" label="campaign setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266754" start="6536" end="6546" title="d20 Modern" label="d20 Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204015" start="6618" end="6628" title="d20 Future" label="d20 Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="6729" end="6740" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118748" start="7130" end="7145" title="The Space Gamer" label="The Space Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="7366" end="7395" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519464" start="7403" end="7416" title="Dana Lombardy" label="Dana Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q515818" start="7820" end="7831" title="Casus Belli (magazine)" label="Casus Belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="8133" end="8137" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934" start="8142" end="8149" title="Frank Herbert" label="Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002663" start="9126" end="9133" title="Imagine (AD&amp;amp;D magazine)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378914" start="9141" end="9151" title="Jim Bambra" label="Jim Bambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q122850319" start="9736" end="9776" title="The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games" label="The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154713" start="9796" end="9805" title="Rick Swan" label="Rick Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164069" start="10227" end="10240" title="MegaTraveller" label="MegaTraveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666226" start="10329" end="10339" title="Black Gate (magazine)" label="Black Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q932944" start="10426" end="10438" title="Larry Elmore" label="Larry Elmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543201" start="11855" end="11877" title="Tactical Studies Rules" label="Tactical Studies Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379" start="11895" end="11905" title="Gary Gygax" label="Gary Gygax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203549" start="12222" end="12230" title="playtest" label="playtest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="12298" end="12304" title="Racism" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q701673" start="12380" end="12393" title="Nazi eugenics" label="Nazi eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="12433" end="12443" title="Homophobia" label="homophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q59677" start="12445" end="12456" title="transphobia" label="transphobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="12462" end="12474" title="Antisemitism" label="anti-semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="12555" end="12573" title="IGN Southeast Asia" label="IGN Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135204" start="12861" end="12881" title="Wizards of the Coast" label="Wizards of the Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="13068" end="13090" title="preliminary injunction" label="preliminary injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226423" start="13378" end="13385" title="Polygon (website)" label="Polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668431" start="13951" end="13971" title="common law trademark" label="common law trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q648266" start="14212" end="14227" title="Wayback Machine" label="Wayback Machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27763" wikidata="Q179168" url="?curid=27763" title="Structuralism">
<text>Structuralism is an intellectual current and methodological approach, primarily in the social sciences, that interprets elements of human culture by way of their relationship to a broader system. It works to uncover the structural patterns that underlie all the things that humans do, think, perceive, and feel. 

Alternatively, as summarized by philosopher Simon Blackburn, structuralism is:&quot;The belief that phenomena of human life are not intelligible except through their interrelations. These relations constitute a structure, and behind local variations in the surface phenomena there are constant laws of abstract structure.&quot;Structuralism in Europe developed in the early 20th century, mainly in France and the Russian Empire, in the structural linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure and the subsequent Prague, Moscow, and Copenhagen schools of linguistics. As an intellectual movement, structuralism emerged in opposition to existentialism. After World War II, an array of scholars in the humanities borrowed Saussure&#x27;s concepts for use in their respective fields. French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss was arguably the first such scholar, sparking a widespread interest in structuralism.

The structuralist mode of reasoning has since been applied in a range of fields, including anthropology, sociology, psychology, literary criticism, economics, and architecture. Along with Lévi-Strauss, the most prominent thinkers associated with structuralism include linguist Roman Jakobson and psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan.

By the late 1960s, many of structuralism&#x27;s basic tenets came under attack from a new wave of predominantly French intellectuals/philosophers such as historian Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida, Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser, and literary critic Roland Barthes. Though elements of their work necessarily relate to structuralism and are informed by it, these theorists eventually came to be referred to as post-structuralists. Many proponents of structuralism, such as Lacan, continue to influence continental philosophy and many of the fundamental assumptions of some of structuralism&#x27;s post-structuralist critics are a continuation of structuralist thinking.

== History and background ==
The term &quot;structuralism&quot; is ambiguous, referring to different schools of thought in different contexts. As such, the movement in humanities and social sciences called structuralism relates to sociology. Emile Durkheim based his sociological concept on &#x27;structure&#x27; and &#x27;function&#x27;, and from his work emerged the sociological approach of structural functionalism.

Apart from Durkheim&#x27;s use of the term &quot;structure&quot;, the semiological concept of Ferdinand de Saussure became fundamental for structuralism. Saussure conceived language and society as a system of relations. His linguistic approach was also a refutation of evolutionary linguistics.

Structuralism in Europe developed in the early 20th century, mainly in France and the Russian Empire, in the structural linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure and the subsequent Prague, Moscow, and Copenhagen schools of linguistics. As an intellectual movement, structuralism became the heir to existentialism. After World War II, an array of scholars in the humanities borrowed Saussure&#x27;s concepts for use in their respective fields. French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss was arguably the first such scholar, sparking a widespread interest in structuralism.

Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, existentialism, such as that propounded by Jean-Paul Sartre, was the dominant European intellectual movement. Structuralism rose to prominence in France in the wake of existentialism, particularly in the 1960s. The initial popularity of structuralism in France led to its spread across the globe. By the early 1960s, structuralism as a movement was coming into its own and some believed that it offered a single unified approach to human life that would embrace all disciplines.

By the late 1960s, many of structuralism&#x27;s basic tenets came under attack from a new wave of predominantly French intellectuals/philosophers such as historian Michel Foucault, Jacques Derrida, Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser, and literary critic Roland Barthes. Though elements of their work necessarily relate to structuralism and are informed by it, these theorists eventually came to be referred to as post-structuralists. Many proponents of structuralism, such as Lacan, continue to influence continental philosophy and many of the fundamental assumptions of some of structuralism&#x27;s post-structuralist critics are a continuation of structuralist thinking.

Russian functional linguist Roman Jakobson was a pivotal figure in the adaptation of structural analysis to disciplines beyond linguistics, including philosophy, anthropology, and literary theory. Jakobson was a decisive influence on anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss, by whose work the term &quot;structuralism&quot; first appeared in reference to social sciences. Lévi-Strauss&#x27; work in turn gave rise to the structuralist movement in France, also called French structuralism, influencing the thinking of other writers, most of whom disavowed themselves as being a part of this movement. This included such writers as Louis Althusser and psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan, as well as the structural Marxism of Nicos Poulantzas. Roland Barthes and Jacques Derrida focused on how structuralism could be applied to literature.

===Ferdinand de Saussure ===
The origins of structuralism are connected with the work of Ferdinand de Saussure on linguistics along with the linguistics of the Prague and Moscow schools. In brief, Saussure&#x27;s structural linguistics propounded three related concepts.
# Saussure argued for a distinction between &quot;langue&quot; (an idealized abstraction of language) and &quot;parole&quot; (language as actually used in daily life). He argued that a &quot;sign&quot; is composed of a &quot;signified&quot; (&quot;signifié&quot;, i.e. an abstract concept or idea) and a &quot;signifier&quot; (&quot;signifiant&quot;, i.e. the perceived sound/visual image).
# Because different languages have different words to refer to the same objects or concepts, there is no intrinsic reason why a specific signifier is used to express a given concept or idea. It is thus &quot;arbitrary.&quot;
# Signs gain their meaning from their relationships and contrasts with other signs. As he wrote, &quot;in language, there are only differences &#x27;without positive terms.

=== Lévi-Strauss ===
Structuralism rejected the concept of human freedom and choice, focusing instead on the way that human experience and behaviour is determined by various structures. The most important initial work on this score was Lévi-Strauss&#x27;s 1949 volume &quot;The Elementary Structures of Kinship&quot;. Lévi-Strauss had known Roman Jakobson during their time together at the New School in New York during WWII and was influenced by both Jakobson&#x27;s structuralism, as well as the American anthropological tradition. 

In &quot;Elementary Structures&quot;, he examined kinship systems from a structural point of view and demonstrated how apparently different social organizations were different permutations of a few basic kinship structures. In the late 1958, he published &quot;Structural Anthropology&quot;, a collection of essays outlining his program for structuralism.

=== Lacan and Piaget ===
Blending Freud and Saussure, French (post)structuralist Jacques Lacan applied structuralism to psychoanalysis. Similarly, Jean Piaget applied structuralism to the study of psychology, though in a different way. Piaget, who would better define himself as constructivist, considered structuralism as &quot;a method and not a doctrine,&quot; because, for him, &quot;there exists no structure without a construction, abstract or genetic.&quot;

=== &#x27;Third order&#x27; ===
Proponents of structuralism argue that a specific domain of culture may be understood by means of a structure that is modelled on language and is distinct both from the organizations of reality and those of ideas, or the imagination—the &quot;third order.&quot; In Lacan&#x27;s psychoanalytic theory, for example, the structural order of &quot;the Symbolic&quot; is distinguished both from &quot;the Real&quot; and &quot;the Imaginary;&quot; similarly, in Althusser&#x27;s Marxist theory, the structural order of the capitalist mode of production is distinct both from the actual, real agents involved in its relations and from the ideological forms in which those relations are understood.

=== Althusser ===
Although French theorist Louis Althusser is often associated with structural social analysis, which helped give rise to &quot;structural Marxism,&quot; such association was contested by Althusser himself in the Italian foreword to the second edition of &quot;Reading Capital&quot;. In this foreword Althusser states the following: 

Despite the precautions we took to distinguish ourselves from the &#x27;structuralist&#x27; ideology…, despite the decisive intervention of categories foreign to &#x27;structuralism&#x27;…, the terminology we employed was too close in many respects to the &#x27;structuralist&#x27; terminology not to give rise to an ambiguity. With a very few exceptions…our interpretation of Marx has generally been recognized and judged, in homage to the current fashion, as &#x27;structuralist&#x27;.… We believe that despite the terminological ambiguity, the profound tendency of our texts was not attached to the &#x27;structuralist&#x27; ideology.
=== Assiter ===
In a later development, feminist theorist Alison Assiter enumerated four ideas common to the various forms of structuralism:

# a structure determines the position of each element of a whole;
# every system has a structure;
# structural laws deal with co-existence rather than change; and 
# structures are the &quot;real things&quot; that lie beneath the surface or the appearance of meaning.

==In linguistics==


In Ferdinand de Saussure&#x27;s &quot;Course in General Linguistics&quot;, the analysis focuses not on the use of language (&quot;parole&quot;, &#x27;speech&#x27;), but rather on the underlying system of language (&quot;langue&quot;). This approach examines how the elements of language relate to each other in the present, synchronically rather than diachronically. Saussure argued that linguistic signs were composed of two parts:

# a &quot;signifiant&quot; (&#x27;signifier&#x27;): the &quot;sound pattern&quot; of a word, either in mental projection—e.g., as when one silently recites lines from signage, a poem to one&#x27;s self—or in actual, any kind of text, physical realization as part of a speech act.
# a &quot;signifié&quot; &#x27;(signified&#x27;): the concept or meaning of the word.

This differed from previous approaches that focused on the relationship between words and the things in the world that they designate.

Although not fully developed by Saussure, other key notions in structural linguistics can be found in structural &quot;idealism.&quot; A structural idealism is a class of linguistic units (lexemes, morphemes, or even constructions) that are possible in a certain position in a given &quot;syntagm&quot;, or linguistic environment (such as a given sentence). The different functional role of each of these members of the paradigm is called &#x27;value&#x27; (French: &quot;&quot;).

=== Prague School ===
In France, Antoine Meillet and Émile Benveniste continued Saussure&#x27;s project, and members of the Prague school of linguistics such as Roman Jakobson and Nikolai Trubetzkoy conducted influential research. The clearest and most important example of Prague school structuralism lies in phonemics. Rather than simply compiling a list of which sounds occur in a language, the Prague school examined how they were related. They determined that the inventory of sounds in a language could be analysed as a series of contrasts. 

Thus, in English, the sounds /p/ and /b/ represent distinct phonemes because there are cases (&quot;minimal pairs&quot;) where the contrast between the two is the only difference between two distinct words (e.g. &#x27;pat&#x27; and &#x27;bat&#x27;). Analyzing sounds in terms of contrastive features also opens up comparative scope—for instance, it makes clear the difficulty Japanese speakers have differentiating /r/ and /l/ in English and other languages is because these sounds are not contrastive in Japanese. Phonology would become the paradigmatic basis for structuralism in a number of different fields.

Based on the Prague school concept, André Martinet in France, J. R. Firth in the UK and Louis Hjelmslev in Denmark developed their own versions of structural and functional linguistics.

==In anthropology==

According to structural theory in anthropology and social anthropology, &quot;meaning&quot; is produced and reproduced within a culture through various practices, phenomena, and activities that serve as systems of signification. 

A structuralist approach may study activities as diverse as food-preparation and serving rituals, religious rites, games, literary and non-literary texts, and other forms of entertainment to discover the deep structures by which meaning is produced and reproduced within the culture. For example, Lévi-Strauss analysed in the 1950s cultural phenomena including mythology, kinship (the alliance theory and the incest taboo), and food preparation. In addition to these studies, he produced more linguistically-focused writings in which he applied Saussure&#x27;s distinction between &quot;langue&quot; and &quot;parole&quot; in his search for the fundamental structures of the human mind, arguing that the structures that form the &quot;deep grammar&quot; of society originate in the mind and operate in people unconsciously. Lévi-Strauss took inspiration from mathematics.

Another concept used in structural anthropology came from the Prague school of linguistics, where Roman Jakobson and others analysed sounds based on the presence or absence of certain features (e.g., voiceless vs. voiced). Lévi-Strauss included this in his conceptualization of the universal structures of the mind, which he held to operate based on pairs of binary oppositions such as hot-cold, male-female, culture-nature, cooked-raw, or marriageable vs. tabooed women.

A third influence came from Marcel Mauss (1872–1950), who had written on gift-exchange systems. Based on Mauss, for instance, Lévi-Strauss argued an &quot;alliance&quot; theory—that kinship systems are based on the exchange of women between groups—as opposed to the &quot;&#x27;descent&#x27;-based&quot; theory described by Edward Evans-Pritchard and Meyer Fortes. While replacing Mauss at his &quot;Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes&quot; chair, the writings of Lévi-Strauss became widely popular in the 1960s and 1970s and gave rise to the term &quot;structuralism&quot; itself.

In Britain, authors such as Rodney Needham and Edmund Leach were highly influenced by structuralism. Authors such as Maurice Godelier and Emmanuel Terray combined Marxism with structural anthropology in France. In the United States, authors such as Marshall Sahlins and James Boon built on structuralism to provide their own analysis of human society. Structural anthropology fell out of favour in the early 1980s for a number of reasons. D&#x27;Andrade suggests that this was because it made unverifiable assumptions about the universal structures of the human mind. Authors such as Eric Wolf argued that political economy and colonialism should be at the forefront of anthropology. More generally, criticisms of structuralism by Pierre Bourdieu led to a concern with how cultural and social structures were changed by human agency and practice, a trend which Sherry Ortner has referred to as &#x27;practice theory&#x27;.

One example is Douglas E. Foley&#x27;s &quot;Learning Capitalist Culture&quot; (2010), in which he applied a mixture of structural and Marxist theories to his ethnographic fieldwork among high school students in Texas. Foley analyzed how they reach a shared goal through the lens of social solidarity when he observed &quot;Mexicanos&quot; and &quot;Anglo-Americans&quot; come together on the same football team to defeat the school&#x27;s rivals. However, he also continually applies a marxist lens and states that he, &quot;wanted to wow peers with a new cultural marxist theory of schooling.&quot;

Some anthropological theorists, however, while finding considerable fault with Lévi-Strauss&#x27;s version of structuralism, did not turn away from a fundamental structural basis for human culture. The Biogenetic Structuralism group for instance argued that some kind of structural foundation for culture must exist because all humans inherit the same system of brain structures. They proposed a kind of neuroanthropology which would lay the foundations for a more complete scientific account of cultural similarity and variation by requiring an integration of cultural anthropology and neuroscience—a program that theorists such as Victor Turner also embraced.

== In literary criticism and theory ==

In literary theory, structuralist criticism relates literary texts to a larger structure, which may be a particular genre, a range of intertextual connections (such as patterns of metaphor),
a model of a universal narrative structure, or a system of recurrent patterns or motifs.

The field of structuralist semiotics argues that there must be a structure in every text, which explains why it is easier for experienced readers than for non-experienced readers to interpret a text. Everything that is written seems to be governed by rules, or &quot;grammar of literature&quot;, that one learns in educational institutions and that are to be unmasked.

A potential problem for a structuralist interpretation is that it can be highly reductive; as scholar Catherine Belsey puts it: &quot;the structuralist danger of collapsing all difference.&quot; An example of such a reading might be if a student concludes the authors of &quot;West Side Story&quot; did not write anything &quot;really&quot; new, because their work has the same structure as Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;. In both texts a girl and a boy fall in love (a &quot;formula&quot; with a symbolic operator between them would be &quot;Boy + Girl&quot;) despite the fact that they belong to two groups that hate each other (&quot;Boy&#x27;s Group - Girl&#x27;s Group&quot; or &quot;Opposing forces&quot;) and conflict is resolved by their deaths. Structuralist readings focus on how the structures of the single text resolve inherent narrative tensions. If a structuralist reading focuses on multiple texts, there must be some way in which those texts unify themselves into a coherent system. The versatility of structuralism is such that a literary critic could make the same claim about a story of two &quot;friendly&quot; families (&quot;Boy&#x27;s Family + Girl&#x27;s Family&quot;) that arrange a marriage between their children despite the fact that the children hate each other (&quot;Boy - Girl&quot;) and then the children commit suicide to escape the arranged marriage; the justification is that the second story&#x27;s structure is an &#x27;inversion&#x27; of the first story&#x27;s structure: the relationship between the values of love and the two pairs of parties involved have been reversed.

Structuralist literary criticism argues that the &quot;literary banter of a text&quot; can lie only in new structure, rather than in the specifics of character development and voice in which that structure is expressed. Literary structuralism often follows the lead of Vladimir Propp, Algirdas Julien Greimas, and Claude Lévi-Strauss in seeking out basic deep elements in stories, myths, and more recently, anecdotes, which are combined in various ways to produce the many versions of the ur-story or ur-myth.

There is considerable similarity between structural literary theory and Northrop Frye&#x27;s archetypal criticism, which is also indebted to the anthropological study of myths. Some critics have also tried to apply the theory to individual works, but the effort to find unique structures in individual literary works runs counter to the structuralist program and has an affinity with New Criticism.

== In economics ==

Yifu Lin criticizes early structural economic systems and theories, discussing the failures of it. He writes:&quot;The structuralism believes that the failure to develop advanced capital-intensive industries spontaneously in a developing country is due to market failures caused by various structural rigidities...&quot; &quot;According to neoliberalism, the main reason for the failure of developing countries to catch up with developed countries was too much state intervention in the market, causing misallocation of resources, rent seeking and so forth.&quot;Rather these failures are more so centered around the unlikelihood of such quick development of these advanced industries within developing countries.

=== New Structural Economics (NSE) ===
New structural economics is an economic development strategy developed by World Bank Chief Economist Justin Yifu Lin. The strategy combines ideas from both neoclassical economics and structural economics.

NSE studies two parts: the base and the superstructure. A base is a combination of forces and relations of production, consisting of, but not limited to, industry and technology, while the superstructure consists of hard infrastructure and institutions. This results in an explanation of how the base impacts the superstructure which then determines transaction costs.

== Interpretations and general criticisms ==
Structuralism is less popular today than other approaches, such as post-structuralism and deconstruction. Structuralism has often been criticized for being ahistorical and for favouring deterministic structural forces over the ability of people to act. As the political turbulence of the 1960s and 1970s (particularly the student uprisings of May 1968) began affecting academia, issues of power and political struggle moved to the center of public attention.

In the 1980s, deconstruction—and its emphasis on the fundamental ambiguity of language rather than its logical structure—became popular. By the end of the century, structuralism was seen as a historically important school of thought, but the movements that it spawned, rather than structuralism itself, commanded attention.

Several social theorists and academics have strongly criticized structuralism or even dismissed it. French hermeneutic philosopher Paul Ricœur (1969) criticized Lévi-Strauss for overstepping the limits of validity of the structuralist approach, ending up in what Ricœur described as &quot;a Kantianism without a transcendental subject.&quot; 

Anthropologist Adam Kuper (1973) argued that:&#x27;Structuralism&#x27; came to have something of the momentum of a millennial movement and some of its adherents felt that they formed a secret society of the seeing in a world of the blind. Conversion was not just a matter of accepting a new paradigm. It was, almost, a question of salvation. Philip Noel Pettit (1975) called for an abandoning of &quot;the positivist dream which Lévi-Strauss dreamed for semiology,&quot; arguing that semiology is not to be placed among the natural sciences. Cornelius Castoriadis (1975) criticized structuralism as failing to explain symbolic mediation in the social world; he viewed structuralism as a variation on the &quot;logicist&quot; theme, arguing that, contrary to what structuralists advocate, language—and symbolic systems in general—cannot be reduced to logical organizations on the basis of the binary logic of oppositions. 

Critical theorist Jürgen Habermas (1985) accused structuralists like Foucault of being positivists; Foucault, while not an ordinary positivist per se, paradoxically uses the tools of science to criticize science, according to Habermas. (See &quot;Performative contradiction&quot; and &quot;Foucault–Habermas debate&quot;.) Sociologist Anthony Giddens (1993) is another notable critic; while Giddens draws on a range of structuralist themes in his theorizing, he dismisses the structuralist view that the reproduction of social systems is merely &quot;a mechanical outcome.&quot;

== See also ==
* Antihumanism
* Engaged theory
* Genetic structuralism
*Holism
* Isomorphism
* Post-structuralism
* Russian formalism
* Structuralist film theory
* Structuration theory
* Émile Durkheim
* Structural functionalism
* Structuralism (philosophy of science)
* Structuralism (philosophy of mathematics)
* Structuralism (psychology)
* Structural change
* Structuralist economics

== References ==
==Further reading==

* Angermuller, Johannes. 2015. &quot;Why There Is No Poststructuralism in France: The Making of an Intellectual Generation.&quot; London: Bloomsbury.
* Roudinesco, Élisabeth. 2008. &quot;Philosophy in Turbulent Times: Canguilhem, Sartre, Foucault, Althusser, Deleuze, Derrida&quot;. New York: Columbia University Press.

===Primary sources===
*Althusser, Louis. &quot;Reading Capital&quot;.
* Barthes, Roland. &quot;S/Z&quot;.
* Deleuze, Gilles. 1973. &quot;À quoi reconnaît-on le structuralisme?&quot; Pp. 299–335 in &quot;Histoire de la philosophie, Idées, Doctrines. Vol. 8: Le XXe siècle&quot;, edited by F. Châtelet. Paris: Hachette
* de Saussure, Ferdinand. 1916. &quot;Course in General Linguistics&quot;.
* Foucault, Michel. &quot;The Order of Things&quot;.
*Jakobson, Roman. &quot;Essais de linguistique générale&quot;.
* Lacan, Jacques. &quot;The Seminars of Jacques Lacan&quot;.
*Lévi-Strauss, Claude. &quot;The Elementary Structures of Kinship&quot;.
* —— 1958. &quot;Structural Anthropology&quot; [&quot;Anthropologie structurale&quot;]
* —— 1964–1971. &quot;Mythologiques&quot;
* Wilcken, Patrick, ed. &quot;Claude Levi-Strauss: The Father of Modern Anthropology&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="0" end="13" title="Structuralism" label="Structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="45" end="59" title="methodology" label="methodological"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="87" end="102" title="Social science" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="132" end="145" title="Culture" label="human culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q211606" start="220" end="239" title="Social structure" label="structural patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769299" start="281" end="283" title="Human behavior" label="do"/>
<link wikidata="Q9420" start="285" end="290" title="think" label="think"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="292" end="300" title="perceive" label="perceive"/>
<link wikidata="Q205555" start="306" end="310" title="feeling" label="feel"/>
<link wikidata="Q287357" start="358" end="373" title="Simon Blackburn" label="Simon Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="712" end="718" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="727" end="741" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466334" start="750" end="772" title="structural linguistics" label="structural linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="776" end="797" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q402282" start="817" end="823" title="Prague Linguistic Circle" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946536" start="825" end="831" title="Moscow linguistic circle" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412134" start="837" end="847" title="The Copenhagen school (linguistics)" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="940" end="954" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="1004" end="1014" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="1107" end="1126" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="1240" end="1249" title="reasoning" label="reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="1305" end="1317" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="1319" end="1328" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="1330" end="1340" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="1342" end="1360" title="literary criticism" label="literary criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909499" start="1362" end="1371" title="structuralist economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667680" start="1377" end="1389" title="structuralism (architecture)" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="1491" end="1505" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Roman Jakobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="1510" end="1523" title="Psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="1524" end="1537" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="1704" end="1719" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="1721" end="1736" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639471" start="1738" end="1757" title="Marxist philosophy" label="Marxist philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q184169" start="1758" end="1773" title="Louis Althusser" label="Louis Althusser"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="1779" end="1794" title="literary critic" label="literary critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="1795" end="1809" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="1954" end="1973" title="Post-structuralism" label="post-structuralists"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="2017" end="2022" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59104" start="2046" end="2068" title="continental philosophy" label="continental philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="2383" end="2393" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="2398" end="2413" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="2446" end="2455" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="2457" end="2471" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Emile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="2609" end="2633" title="structural functionalism" label="structural functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="2706" end="2718" title="Semiotics" label="semiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="2730" end="2751" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313085" start="2905" end="2929" title="evolutionary linguistics" label="evolutionary linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="3003" end="3009" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3018" end="3032" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466334" start="3041" end="3063" title="structural linguistics" label="structural linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="3067" end="3088" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q402282" start="3108" end="3114" title="Prague Linguistic Circle" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946536" start="3116" end="3122" title="Moscow linguistic circle" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412134" start="3128" end="3138" title="The Copenhagen school (linguistics)" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="3225" end="3239" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="3289" end="3299" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="3392" end="3411" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="3531" end="3545" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="3574" end="3590" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195695" start="3618" end="3639" title="Intellectual history" label="intellectual movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="4175" end="4190" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="4192" end="4207" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639471" start="4209" end="4228" title="Marxist philosophy" label="Marxist philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q184169" start="4229" end="4244" title="Louis Althusser" label="Louis Althusser"/>
<link wikidata="Q58854" start="4250" end="4265" title="literary critic" label="literary critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="4266" end="4280" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="4425" end="4444" title="Post-structuralism" label="post-structuralists"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="4488" end="4493" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59104" start="4517" end="4539" title="continental philosophy" label="continental philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="4714" end="4728" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Roman Jakobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="4935" end="4954" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="5036" end="5051" title="Social science" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="5128" end="5134" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q184169" start="5311" end="5326" title="Louis Althusser" label="Louis Althusser"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="5331" end="5344" title="Psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="5345" end="5358" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096707" start="5375" end="5393" title="structural Marxism" label="structural Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q505296" start="5397" end="5413" title="Nicos Poulantzas" label="Nicos Poulantzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="5415" end="5429" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="5434" end="5449" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="5499" end="5509" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="5601" end="5622" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="5626" end="5637" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q402282" start="5672" end="5678" title="Prague Linguistic Circle" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946536" start="5683" end="5689" title="Moscow linguistic circle" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466334" start="5725" end="5747" title="structural linguistics" label="structural linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973772" start="5833" end="5839" title="Langue and parole" label="langue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16136913" start="6031" end="6039" title="signifié" label="signifié"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="6632" end="6645" title="Human Freedom" label="human freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="6847" end="6883" title="The Elementary Structures of Kinship" label="The Elementary Structures of Kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="6914" end="6928" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Roman Jakobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q599316" start="6963" end="6973" title="The New School" label="New School"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="6977" end="6985" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6993" end="6997" title="World War II" label="WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="7080" end="7095" title="anthropology" label="anthropological"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="7159" end="7166" title="kinship" label="kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111399" start="7370" end="7393" title="Structural Anthropology" label="Structural Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="7527" end="7546" title="Post-structuralism" label="(post)structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="7547" end="7560" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="7586" end="7600" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123190" start="7613" end="7624" title="Jean Piaget" label="Jean Piaget"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="7663" end="7673" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179270" start="7745" end="7759" title="Constructivist epistemology" label="constructivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="8242" end="8256" title="Psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q489538" start="8308" end="8320" title="the Symbolic" label="the Symbolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q489544" start="8360" end="8368" title="the Real" label="the Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169049" start="8385" end="8398" title="The Imaginary (psychoanalysis)" label="the Imaginary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096707" start="8437" end="8444" title="Structural Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132726" start="8481" end="8510" title="capitalist mode of production (Marxist theory)" label="capitalist mode of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="8596" end="8607" title="Ideology" label="ideological"/>
<link wikidata="Q184169" start="8699" end="8714" title="Louis Althusser" label="Louis Althusser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990987" start="8751" end="8766" title="Social theory" label="social analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096707" start="8800" end="8818" title="structural Marxism" label="structural Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242338" start="8933" end="8948" title="Reading Capital" label="Reading Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810748" start="9685" end="9702" title="Feminist theory" label="feminist theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429906" start="9703" end="9717" title="Alison Assiter" label="Alison Assiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="10080" end="10101" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13231" start="10115" end="10144" title="Course in General Linguistics" label="Course in General Linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973772" start="10207" end="10213" title="Langue and parole" label="parole"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="10271" end="10277" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973772" start="10297" end="10303" title="Langue and parole" label="langue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208048" start="10401" end="10415" title="synchronic analysis" label="synchronically"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="10428" end="10442" title="Historical linguistics" label="diachronically"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="10465" end="10481" title="Sign (linguistics)" label="linguistic signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16136913" start="10521" end="10531" title="signifiant" label="signifiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25481968" start="10779" end="10789" title="speech act" label="speech act"/>
<link wikidata="Q111352" start="11203" end="11210" title="lexemes" label="lexemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="11212" end="11221" title="morphemes" label="morphemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294584" start="11231" end="11244" title="Pattern language" label="constructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303637" start="11303" end="11310" title="Syntagma (linguistics)" label="syntagm"/>
<link wikidata="Q28643" start="11434" end="11442" title="paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="11472" end="11478" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q347001" start="11529" end="11544" title="Antoine Meillet" label="Antoine Meillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q274931" start="11549" end="11565" title="Émile Benveniste" label="Émile Benveniste"/>
<link wikidata="Q402282" start="11620" end="11633" title="Prague linguistic circle" label="Prague school"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="11657" end="11671" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Roman Jakobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q159491" start="11676" end="11694" title="Nikolai Trubetzkoy" label="Nikolai Trubetzkoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="11806" end="11815" title="phonemics" label="phonemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="12105" end="12113" title="phonemes" label="phonemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="12139" end="12164" title="minimal pair" label="&amp;quot;minimal pairs&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117245" start="12324" end="12344" title="Contrastive distribution" label="contrastive features"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="12421" end="12429" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="12475" end="12482" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="12560" end="12569" title="Phonology" label="Phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236342" start="12720" end="12731" title="John Rupert Firth" label="J. R. Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q313769" start="12746" end="12761" title="Louis Hjelmslev" label="Louis Hjelmslev"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="12900" end="12912" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051" start="12917" end="12936" title="social anthropology" label="social anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509484" start="12938" end="12957" title="Meaning (semiotics)" label="&amp;quot;meaning&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="13394" end="13406" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522375" start="13482" end="13497" title="alliance theory" label="alliance theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576342" start="13506" end="13518" title="incest taboo" label="incest taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973772" start="13678" end="13719" title="langue and parole" label="&amp;quot;langue&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;parole&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="13956" end="13967" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q402282" start="14032" end="14060" title="Prague Linguistic Circle" label="Prague school of linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="14068" end="14082" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Roman Jakobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920592" start="14329" end="14346" title="binary opposition" label="binary opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q295393" start="14471" end="14483" title="Marcel Mauss" label="Marcel Mauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233575" start="14516" end="14529" title="Gift exchange" label="gift-exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522375" start="14592" end="14619" title="Alliance theory" label="&amp;quot;alliance&amp;quot; theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q150379" start="14767" end="14789" title="Edward Evans-Pritchard" label="Edward Evans-Pritchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q346927" start="14794" end="14806" title="Meyer Fortes" label="Meyer Fortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q273631" start="14843" end="14875" title="Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes" label="Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438232" start="15052" end="15066" title="Rodney Needham" label="Rodney Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q550729" start="15071" end="15083" title="Edmund Leach" label="Edmund Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q960473" start="15141" end="15157" title="Maurice Godelier" label="Maurice Godelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="15187" end="15194" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q345300" start="15273" end="15289" title="Marshall Sahlins" label="Marshall Sahlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q65325332" start="15294" end="15304" title="James Boon" label="James Boon"/>
<link wikidata="Q89562" start="15608" end="15617" title="Eric Wolf" label="Eric Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="15630" end="15647" title="political economy" label="political economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="15652" end="15663" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156268" start="15755" end="15770" title="Pierre Bourdieu" label="Pierre Bourdieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278440" start="15885" end="15898" title="Sherry Ortner" label="Sherry Ortner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237364" start="15924" end="15939" title="practice theory" label="practice theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402508" start="16120" end="16129" title="fieldwork" label="fieldwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080100" start="16752" end="16776" title="Biogenetic Structuralism" label="Biogenetic Structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049637" start="16954" end="16971" title="neuroanthropology" label="neuroanthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="17111" end="17132" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="17137" end="17149" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q357480" start="17183" end="17196" title="Victor Turner" label="Victor Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q459381" start="17256" end="17271" title="literary theory" label="literary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="17369" end="17374" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q667404" start="17387" end="17399" title="Intertextuality" label="intertextual"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="17433" end="17441" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q847829" start="17467" end="17486" title="narrative structure" label="narrative structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q17402693" start="18006" end="18022" title="Catherine Belsey" label="Catherine Belsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="18181" end="18196" title="West Side Story (musical)" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="18320" end="18336" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q313455" start="19805" end="19819" title="Vladimir Propp" label="Vladimir Propp"/>
<link wikidata="Q313379" start="19821" end="19844" title="Algirdas Julien Greimas" label="Algirdas Julien Greimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="19850" end="19869" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="19917" end="19922" title="Mythology" label="myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q354256" start="20119" end="20132" title="Northrop Frye" label="Northrop Frye"/>
<link wikidata="Q776439" start="20140" end="20160" title="Archetypal literary criticism" label="archetypal criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q742302" start="20431" end="20444" title="New Criticism" label="New Criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628663" start="21295" end="21321" title="World Bank Chief Economist" label="World Bank Chief Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q709764" start="21322" end="21337" title="Justin Yifu Lin" label="Justin Yifu Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="21377" end="21399" title="neoclassical economics" label="neoclassical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q335833" start="21450" end="21481" title="Base and superstructure" label="the base and the superstructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q877496" start="21777" end="21794" title="Transaction cost" label="transaction costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="21909" end="21927" title="post-structuralism" label="post-structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="21932" end="21946" title="deconstruction" label="deconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="22028" end="22041" title="Determinism" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951828" start="22069" end="22093" title="Agency (philosophy)" label="ability of people to act"/>
<link wikidata="Q257758" start="22164" end="22193" title="Protests of 1968" label="student uprisings of May 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q180348" start="22316" end="22330" title="deconstruction" label="deconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387659" start="22517" end="22534" title="school of thought" label="school of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="22734" end="22745" title="hermeneutic" label="hermeneutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192066" start="22758" end="22769" title="Paul Ricœur" label="Paul Ricœur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047000" start="22832" end="22840" title="Validity (logic)" label="validity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724007" start="22918" end="22928" title="Kantianism" label="Kantianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051382" start="22939" end="22961" title="transcendental subject" label="transcendental subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679378" start="22986" end="22996" title="Adam Kuper" label="Adam Kuper"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="23156" end="23170" title="secret society" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237041" start="23313" end="23331" title="Philip Noel Pettit" label="Philip Noel Pettit"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="23377" end="23387" title="Positivism" label="positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="23425" end="23434" title="semiology" label="semiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="23495" end="23511" title="natural sciences" label="natural sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q158030" start="23513" end="23534" title="Cornelius Castoriadis" label="Cornelius Castoriadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="23589" end="23607" title="Symbolic system" label="symbolic mediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193627" start="23681" end="23689" title="Logical empiricism" label="logicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110857" start="23863" end="23875" title="Two-valued logic" label="binary logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749902" start="23879" end="23890" title="Square of opposition" label="oppositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q301751" start="23894" end="23911" title="Critical theorist" label="Critical theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q76357" start="23912" end="23927" title="Jürgen Habermas" label="Jürgen Habermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="23963" end="23971" title="Michel Foucault" label="Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="23981" end="23992" title="Positivism" label="positivists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24141" end="24167" title="Performative contradiction#Usage in philosophy" label="Performative contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164732" start="24184" end="24208" title="Foucault–Habermas debate" label="Foucault–Habermas debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q220008" start="24229" end="24244" title="Anthony Giddens, Baron Giddens" label="Anthony Giddens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639378" start="24414" end="24427" title="social system" label="social system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24491" end="24503" title="Antihumanism#Structuralism" label="Antihumanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377408" start="24506" end="24520" title="Engaged theory" label="Engaged theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q513448" start="24523" end="24544" title="Genetic structuralism" label="Genetic structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="24546" end="24552" title="Holism" label="Holism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="24555" end="24566" title="Isomorphism" label="Isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="24569" end="24587" title="Post-structuralism" label="Post-structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q742779" start="24590" end="24607" title="Russian formalism" label="Russian formalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533517" start="24610" end="24635" title="Structuralist film theory" label="Structuralist film theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768288" start="24638" end="24658" title="Structuration theory" label="Structuration theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="24661" end="24675" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Émile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="24678" end="24702" title="Structural functionalism" label="Structural functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357279" start="24705" end="24742" title="Structuralism (philosophy of science)" label="Structuralism (philosophy of science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625074" start="24745" end="24786" title="Structuralism (philosophy of mathematics)" label="Structuralism (philosophy of mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895066" start="24789" end="24815" title="Structuralism (psychology)" label="Structuralism (psychology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969120" start="24818" end="24835" title="Structural change" label="Structural change"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909499" start="24838" end="24861" title="Structuralist economics" label="Structuralist economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927789" start="24903" end="24924" title="Johannes Angermuller" label="Angermuller, Johannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q274705" start="25053" end="25074" title="Élisabeth Roudinesco" label="Roudinesco, Élisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q433741" start="25119" end="25129" title="Canguilhem" label="Canguilhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="25131" end="25137" title="Sartre" label="Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="25139" end="25147" title="Michel Foucault" label="Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q184169" start="25149" end="25158" title="Althusser" label="Althusser"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="25160" end="25167" title="Deleuze" label="Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="25169" end="25176" title="Derrida" label="Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q184169" start="25245" end="25261" title="Louis Althusser" label="Althusser, Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242338" start="25269" end="25284" title="Reading Capital" label="Reading Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="25294" end="25309" title="Roland Barthes" label="Barthes, Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379903" start="25317" end="25320" title="S/Z" label="S/Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="25330" end="25345" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Deleuze, Gilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450977" start="25510" end="25521" title="François Châtelet" label="F. Châtelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q349566" start="25530" end="25538" title="Hachette (publisher)" label="Hachette"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="25541" end="25563" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="de Saussure, Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q13231" start="25577" end="25606" title="Course in General Linguistics" label="Course in General Linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="25616" end="25632" title="Michel Foucault" label="Foucault, Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215306" start="25640" end="25659" title="The order of things" label="The Order of Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="25668" end="25683" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Jakobson, Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="25732" end="25746" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Lacan, Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510791" start="25754" end="25783" title="Seminars of Jacques Lacan" label="The Seminars of Jacques Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="25792" end="25812" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Lévi-Strauss, Claude"/>
<link wikidata="Q742171" start="25973" end="25986" title="Mythologiques" label="Mythologiques"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27764" wikidata="Q682496" url="?curid=27764" title="Systems engineering">
<text>Systems engineering is an interdisciplinary field of engineering and engineering management that focuses on how to design, integrate, and manage complex systems over their life cycles. At its core, systems engineering utilizes systems thinking principles to organize this body of knowledge. The individual outcome of such efforts, an engineered system, can be defined as a combination of components that work in synergy to collectively perform a useful function.

Issues such as requirements engineering, reliability, logistics, coordination of different teams, testing and evaluation, maintainability, and many other disciplines, aka &quot;ilities&quot;, necessary for successful system design, development, implementation, and ultimate decommission become more difficult when dealing with large or complex projects. Systems engineering deals with work processes, optimization methods, and risk management tools in such projects. It overlaps technical and human-centered disciplines such as industrial engineering, production systems engineering, process systems engineering, mechanical engineering, manufacturing engineering, production engineering, control engineering, software engineering, electrical engineering, cybernetics, aerospace engineering, organizational studies, civil engineering and project management. Systems engineering ensures that all likely aspects of a project or system are considered and integrated into a whole.

The systems engineering process is a discovery process that is quite unlike a manufacturing process. A manufacturing process is focused on repetitive activities that achieve high-quality outputs with minimum cost and time. The systems engineering process must begin by discovering the real problems that need to be resolved and identifying the most probable or highest-impact failures that can occur. Systems engineering involves finding solutions to these problems.

==History==
The term &quot;systems engineering&quot; can be traced back to Bell Telephone Laboratories in the 1940s. The need to identify and manipulate the properties of a system as a whole, which in complex engineering projects may greatly differ from the sum of the parts&#x27; properties, motivated various industries, especially those developing systems for the U.S. military, to apply the discipline.

When it was no longer possible to rely on design evolution to improve upon a system and the existing tools were not sufficient to meet growing demands, new methods began to be developed that addressed the complexity directly. The continuing evolution of systems engineering comprises the development and identification of new methods and modeling techniques. These methods aid in a better comprehension of the design and developmental control of engineering systems as they grow more complex. Popular tools that are often used in the systems engineering context were developed during these times, including USL, UML, QFD, and IDEF.

In 1990, a professional society for systems engineering, the &quot;National Council on Systems Engineering&quot; (NCOSE), was founded by representatives from a number of U.S. corporations and organizations. NCOSE was created to address the need for improvements in systems engineering practices and education. As a result of growing involvement from systems engineers outside of the U.S., the name of the organization was changed to the International Council on Systems Engineering (INCOSE) in 1995. Schools in several countries offer graduate programs in systems engineering, and continuing education options are also available for practicing engineers.

==Concept==

Systems engineering signifies only an approach and, more recently, a discipline in engineering. The aim of education in systems engineering is to formalize various approaches simply and in doing so, identify new methods and research opportunities similar to that which occurs in other fields of engineering. As an approach, systems engineering is holistic and interdisciplinary in flavor.

===Origins and traditional scope===
The traditional scope of engineering embraces the conception, design, development, production, and operation of physical systems. Systems engineering, as originally conceived, falls within this scope. &quot;Systems engineering&quot;, in this sense of the term, refers to the building of engineering concepts.

===Evolution to a broader scope===
The use of the term &quot;systems engineer&quot; has evolved over time to embrace a wider, more holistic concept of &quot;systems&quot; and of engineering processes. This evolution of the definition has been a subject of ongoing controversy, and the term continues to apply to both the narrower and a broader scope.

Traditional systems engineering was seen as a branch of engineering in the classical sense, that is, as applied only to physical systems, such as spacecraft and aircraft. More recently, systems engineering has evolved to take on a broader meaning especially when humans were seen as an essential component of a system. Peter Checkland, for example, captures the broader meaning of systems engineering by stating that &#x27;engineering&#x27; &quot;can be read in its general sense; you can engineer a meeting or a political agreement.&quot;

Consistent with the broader scope of systems engineering, the Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK) has defined three types of systems engineering:
* Product Systems Engineering (PSE) is the traditional systems engineering focused on the design of physical systems consisting of hardware and software.
* Enterprise Systems Engineering (ESE) pertains to the view of enterprises, that is, organizations or combinations of organizations, as systems.
* Service Systems Engineering (SSE) has to do with the engineering of service systems. Checkland defines a service system as a system which is conceived as serving another system. Most civil infrastructure systems are service systems.

===Holistic view===
Systems engineering focuses on analyzing and eliciting customer needs and required functionality early in the development cycle, documenting requirements, then proceeding with design synthesis and system validation while considering the complete problem, the system lifecycle. This includes fully understanding all of the stakeholders involved. Oliver et al. claim that the systems engineering process can be decomposed into:
* A &quot;Systems Engineering Technical Process&quot;
* A &quot;Systems Engineering Management Process&quot;

Within Oliver&#x27;s model, the goal of the Management Process is to organize the technical effort in the lifecycle, while the Technical Process includes &quot;assessing available information&quot;, &quot;defining effectiveness measures&quot;, to &quot;create a behavior model&quot;, &quot;create a structure model&quot;, &quot;perform trade-off analysis&quot;, and &quot;create sequential build &amp; test plan&quot;.

Depending on their application, although there are several models that are used in the industry, all of them aim to identify the relation between the various stages mentioned above and incorporate feedback. Examples of such models include the Waterfall model and the VEE model (also called the V model).

===Interdisciplinary field===
System development often requires contribution from diverse technical disciplines. By providing a systems (holistic) view of the development effort, systems engineering helps mold all the technical contributors into a unified team effort, forming a structured development process that proceeds from concept to production to operation and, in some cases, to termination and disposal. In an acquisition, the holistic integrative discipline combines contributions and balances tradeoffs among cost, schedule, and performance while maintaining an acceptable level of risk covering the entire life cycle of the item.

This perspective is often replicated in educational programs, in that systems engineering courses are taught by faculty from other engineering departments, which helps create an interdisciplinary environment.

===Managing complexity===
The need for systems engineering arose with the increase in complexity of systems and projects, in turn exponentially increasing the possibility of component friction, and therefore the unreliability of the design. When speaking in this context, complexity incorporates not only engineering systems but also the logical human organization of data. At the same time, a system can become more complex due to an increase in size as well as with an increase in the amount of data, variables, or the number of fields that are involved in the design. The International Space Station is an example of such a system.

The development of smarter control algorithms, microprocessor design, and analysis of environmental systems also come within the purview of systems engineering. Systems engineering encourages the use of tools and methods to better comprehend and manage complexity in systems. Some examples of these tools can be seen here:
* &quot;System architecture&quot;
* &quot;System model, modeling, and simulation&quot;
* &quot;Mathematical optimization&quot;
* &quot;System dynamics&quot;
* &quot;Systems analysis&quot;
* &quot;Statistical analysis&quot;
* &quot;Reliability engineering&quot;
* &quot;Decision making&quot;

Taking an interdisciplinary approach to engineering systems is inherently complex since the behavior of and interaction among system components is not always immediately well defined or understood. Defining and characterizing such systems and subsystems and the interactions among them is one of the goals of systems engineering. In doing so, the gap that exists between informal requirements from users, operators, marketing organizations, and technical specifications is successfully bridged.

===Scope===
The principles of systems engineering – holism, emergent behavior, boundary, et al. – can be applied to any system, complex or otherwise, provided systems thinking is employed at all levels. Besides defense and aerospace, many information and technology-based companies, software development firms, and industries in the field of electronics &amp; communications require systems engineers as part of their team.

An analysis by the INCOSE Systems Engineering Center of Excellence (SECOE) indicates that optimal effort spent on systems engineering is about 15–20% of the total project effort. At the same time, studies have shown that systems engineering essentially leads to a reduction in costs among other benefits. However, no quantitative survey at a larger scale encompassing a wide variety of industries has been conducted until recently. Such studies are underway to determine the effectiveness and quantify the benefits of systems engineering.

Systems engineering encourages the use of modeling and simulation to validate assumptions or theories on systems and the interactions within them.

Use of methods that allow early detection of possible failures, in safety engineering, are integrated into the design process. At the same time, decisions made at the beginning of a project whose consequences are not clearly understood can have enormous implications later in the life of a system, and it is the task of the modern systems engineer to explore these issues and make critical decisions. No method guarantees today&#x27;s decisions will still be valid when a system goes into service years or decades after first conceived. However, there are techniques that support the process of systems engineering. Examples include soft systems methodology, Jay Wright Forrester&#x27;s System dynamics method, and the Unified Modeling Language (UML)—all currently being explored, evaluated, and developed to support the engineering decision process.

==Education==

Education in systems engineering is often seen as an extension to the regular engineering courses, reflecting the industry attitude that engineering students need a foundational background in one of the traditional engineering disciplines (e.g. aerospace engineering, civil engineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, manufacturing engineering, industrial engineering, chemical engineering)—plus practical, real-world experience to be effective as systems engineers. Undergraduate university programs explicitly in systems engineering are growing in number but remain uncommon, the degrees including such material are most often presented as a BS in Industrial Engineering. Typically programs (either by themselves or in combination with interdisciplinary study) are offered beginning at the graduate level in both academic and professional tracks, resulting in the grant of either a MS/MEng or Ph.D./EngD degree.

INCOSE, in collaboration with the Systems Engineering Research Center at Stevens Institute of Technology maintains a regularly updated directory of worldwide academic programs at suitably accredited institutions. As of 2017, it lists over 140 universities in North America offering more than 400 undergraduate and graduate programs in systems engineering. Widespread institutional acknowledgment of the field as a distinct subdiscipline is quite recent; the 2009 edition of the same publication reported the number of such schools and programs at only 80 and 165, respectively.

Education in systems engineering can be taken as &quot;systems-centric&quot; or &quot;domain-centric&quot;:
* &quot;Systems-centric&quot; programs treat systems engineering as a separate discipline and most of the courses are taught focusing on systems engineering principles and practice.
* &quot;Domain-centric&quot; programs offer systems engineering as an option that can be exercised with another major field in engineering.
Both of these patterns strive to educate the systems engineer who is able to oversee interdisciplinary projects with the depth required of a core engineer.

==Systems engineering topics==
Systems engineering tools are strategies, procedures, and that aid in performing systems engineering on a project or product. The purpose of these tools varies from database management, graphical browsing, simulation, and reasoning, to document production, neutral import/export, and more.

===System===

There are many definitions of what a system is in the field of systems engineering. Below are a few authoritative definitions:

* ANSI/EIA-632-1999: &quot;An aggregation of end products and enabling products to achieve a given purpose.&quot;
* DAU Systems Engineering Fundamentals: &quot;an integrated composite of people, products, and processes that provide a capability to satisfy a stated need or objective.&quot;
* IEEE Std 1220-1998: &quot;A set or arrangement of elements and processes that are related and whose behavior satisfies customer/operational needs and provides for life cycle sustainment of the products.&quot;
* INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook: &quot;homogeneous entity that exhibits predefined behavior in the real world and is composed of heterogeneous parts that do not individually exhibit that behavior and an integrated configuration of components and/or subsystems.&quot;
* INCOSE: &quot;A system is a construct or collection of different elements that together produce results not obtainable by the elements alone. The elements, or parts, can include people, hardware, software, facilities, policies, and documents; that is, all things required to produce systems-level results. The results include system-level qualities, properties, characteristics, functions, behavior, and performance. The value added by the system as a whole, beyond that contributed independently by the parts, is primarily created by the relationship among the parts; that is, how they are interconnected.&quot;
* ISO/IEC 15288:2008: &quot;A combination of interacting elements organized to achieve one or more stated purposes.&quot;
* NASA Systems Engineering Handbook: &quot;(1) The combination of elements that function together to produce the capability to meet a need. The elements include all hardware, software, equipment, facilities, personnel, processes, and procedures needed for this purpose. (2) The end product (which performs operational functions) and enabling products (which provide life-cycle support services to the operational end products) that make up a system.&quot;

===Systems engineering processes===
Systems engineering processes encompass all creative, manual, and technical activities necessary to define the product and which need to be carried out to convert a system definition to a sufficiently detailed system design specification for product manufacture and deployment. Design and development of a system can be divided into four stages, each with different definitions: 
* Task definition (informative definition)
* Conceptual stage (cardinal definition)
* Design stage (formative definition)
* Implementation stage (manufacturing definition)

Depending on their application, tools are used for various stages of the systems engineering process:
===Using models===

Models play important and diverse roles in systems engineering. A model can be defined in several
ways, including:
* An abstraction of reality designed to answer specific questions about the real world
* An imitation, analog, or representation of a real-world process or structure; or
* A conceptual, mathematical, or physical tool to assist a decision-maker.
Together, these definitions are broad enough to encompass physical engineering models used in the verification of a system design, as well as schematic models like a functional flow block diagram and mathematical (i.e. quantitative) models used in the trade study process. This section focuses on the last.

The main reason for using mathematical models and diagrams in trade studies is to provide estimates of system effectiveness, performance or technical attributes, and cost from a set of known or estimable quantities. Typically, a collection of separate models is needed to provide all of these outcome variables. The heart of any mathematical model is a set of meaningful quantitative relationships among its inputs and outputs. These relationships can be as simple as adding up constituent quantities to obtain a total, or as complex as a set of differential equations describing the trajectory of a spacecraft in a gravitational field. Ideally, the relationships express causality, not just correlation. Furthermore, key to successful systems engineering activities are also the methods with which these models are efficiently and effectively managed and used to simulate the systems. However, diverse domains often present recurring problems of modeling and simulation for systems engineering, and new advancements are aiming to cross-fertilize methods among distinct scientific and engineering communities, under the title of &#x27;Modeling &amp; Simulation-based Systems Engineering&#x27;.

===Modeling formalisms and graphical representations===
Initially, when the primary purpose of a systems engineer is to comprehend a complex problem, graphic representations of a system are used to communicate a system&#x27;s functional and data requirements. Common graphical representations include:
* Functional flow block diagram (FFBD)
* Model-based design
* Data flow diagram (DFD)
* N2 chart
* IDEF0 diagram
* Use case diagram
* Sequence diagram
* Block diagram
* Signal-flow graph
* USL function maps and type maps
* Enterprise architecture frameworks

A graphical representation relates the various subsystems or parts of a system through functions, data, or interfaces. Any or each of the above methods is used in an industry based on its requirements. For instance, the N2 chart may be used where interfaces between systems are important. Part of the design phase is to create structural and behavioral models of the system.

Once the requirements are understood, it is now the responsibility of a systems engineer to refine them and to determine, along with other engineers, the best technology for a job. At this point starting with a trade study, systems engineering encourages the use of weighted choices to determine the best option. A decision matrix, or Pugh method, is one way (QFD is another) to make this choice while considering all criteria that are important. The trade study in turn informs the design, which again affects graphic representations of the system (without changing the requirements). In an SE process, this stage represents the iterative step that is carried out until a feasible solution is found. A decision matrix is often populated using techniques such as statistical analysis, reliability analysis, system dynamics (feedback control), and optimization methods.

===Other tools===
====Systems Modeling Language====

Systems Modeling Language (SysML), a modeling language used for systems engineering applications, supports the specification, analysis, design, verification and validation of a broad range of complex systems.

====Lifecycle Modeling Language====

Lifecycle Modeling Language (LML), is an open-standard modeling language designed for systems engineering that supports the full lifecycle: conceptual, utilization, support, and retirement stages.

==Related fields and sub-fields==
Many related fields may be considered tightly coupled to systems engineering. The following areas have contributed to the development of systems engineering as a distinct entity:

===Cognitive systems engineering===

Cognitive systems engineering (CSE) is a specific approach to the description and analysis of human-machine systems or sociotechnical systems. The three main themes of CSE are how humans cope with complexity, how work is accomplished by the use of artifacts, and how human-machine systems and socio-technical systems can be described as joint cognitive systems. CSE has since its beginning become a recognized scientific discipline, sometimes also referred to as cognitive engineering. The concept of a Joint Cognitive System (JCS) has in particular become widely used as a way of understanding how complex socio-technical systems can be described with varying degrees of resolution. The more than 20 years of experience with CSE has been described extensively.

===Configuration management===

Like systems engineering, configuration management as practiced in the defense and aerospace industry is a broad systems-level practice. The field parallels the taskings of systems engineering; where systems engineering deals with requirements development, allocation to development items and verification, configuration management deals with requirements capture, traceability to the development item, and audit of development item to ensure that it has achieved the desired functionality and outcomes that systems engineering and/or Test and Verification Engineering have obtained and proven through objective testing.

===Control engineering===

Control engineering and its design and implementation of control systems, used extensively in nearly every industry, is a large sub-field of systems engineering. The cruise control on an automobile and the guidance system for a ballistic missile are two examples. Control systems theory is an active field of applied mathematics involving the investigation of solution spaces and the development of new methods for the analysis of the control process.

===Industrial engineering===

Industrial engineering is a branch of engineering that concerns the development, improvement, implementation, and evaluation of integrated systems of people, money, knowledge, information, equipment, energy, material, and process. Industrial engineering draws upon the principles and methods of engineering analysis and synthesis, as well as mathematical, physical, and social sciences together with the principles and methods of engineering analysis and design to specify, predict, and evaluate results obtained from such systems.

===Production Systems Engineering===
Production Systems Engineering (PSE) is an emerging branch of Engineering intended to uncover fundamental principles of production systems and utilize them for analysis, continuous improvement, and design.

===Interface design===

Interface design and its specification are concerned with assuring that the pieces of a system connect and inter-operate with other parts of the system and with external systems as necessary. Interface design also includes assuring that system interfaces are able to accept new features, including mechanical, electrical, and logical interfaces, including reserved wires, plug-space, command codes, and bits in communication protocols. This is known as extensibility. Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) or Human-Machine Interface (HMI) is another aspect of interface design and is a critical aspect of modern systems engineering. Systems engineering principles are applied in the design of communication protocols for local area networks and wide area networks.

===Mechatronic engineering===

Mechatronic engineering, like systems engineering, is a multidisciplinary field of engineering that uses dynamic systems modeling to express tangible constructs. In that regard, it is almost indistinguishable from Systems Engineering, but what sets it apart is the focus on smaller details rather than larger generalizations and relationships. As such, both fields are distinguished by the scope of their projects rather than the methodology of their practice.

===Operations research===

Operations research supports systems engineering. Operations research, briefly, is concerned with the optimization of a process under multiple constraints.

===Performance engineering===

Performance engineering is the discipline of ensuring a system meets customer expectations for performance throughout its life. Performance is usually defined as the speed with which a certain operation is executed or the capability of executing a number of such operations in a unit of time. Performance may be degraded when operations queued to execute are throttled by limited system capacity. For example, the performance of a packet-switched network is characterized by the end-to-end packet transit delay or the number of packets switched in an hour. The design of high-performance systems uses analytical or simulation modeling, whereas the delivery of high-performance implementation involves thorough performance testing. Performance engineering relies heavily on statistics, queueing theory, and probability theory for its tools and processes.

===Program management and project management===

Program management (or project management) has many similarities with systems engineering, but has broader-based origins than the engineering ones of systems engineering. Project management is also closely related to both program management and systems engineering. Both include scheduling as engineering support tool in assessing interdisciplinary concerns under management process. In particular, the direct relationship of resources, performance features, and risk to the duration of a task or the dependency links among tasks and impacts across the system lifecycle are systems engineering concerns.

===Proposal engineering===
Proposal engineering is the application of scientific and mathematical principles to design, construct, and operate a cost-effective proposal development system. Basically, proposal engineering uses the &quot;systems engineering process&quot; to create a cost-effective proposal and increase the odds of a successful proposal.

===Reliability engineering===

Reliability engineering is the discipline of ensuring a system meets customer expectations for reliability throughout its life (i.e. it does not fail more frequently than expected). Next to the prediction of failure, it is just as much about the prevention of failure. Reliability engineering applies to all aspects of the system. It is closely associated with maintainability, availability (dependability or RAMS preferred by some), and integrated logistics support. Reliability engineering is always a critical component of safety engineering, as in failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) and hazard fault tree analysis, and of security engineering.

===Risk management===

Risk management, the practice of assessing and dealing with risk is one of the interdisciplinary parts of Systems Engineering. In development, acquisition, or operational activities, the inclusion of risk in tradeoffs with cost, schedule, and performance features, involves the iterative complex configuration management of traceability and evaluation to the scheduling and requirements management across domains and for the system lifecycle that requires the interdisciplinary technical approach of systems engineering. Systems Engineering has Risk Management define, tailor, implement, and monitor a structured process for risk management which is integrated into the overall effort.

===Safety engineering===

The techniques of safety engineering may be applied by non-specialist engineers in designing complex systems to minimize the probability of safety-critical failures. The &quot;System Safety Engineering&quot; function helps to identify &quot;safety hazards&quot; in emerging designs and may assist with techniques to &quot;mitigate&quot; the effects of (potentially) hazardous conditions that cannot be designed out of systems.

===Security engineering===

Security engineering can be viewed as an interdisciplinary field that integrates the community of practice for control systems design, reliability, safety, and systems engineering. It may involve such sub-specialties as authentication of system users, system targets, and others: people, objects, and processes.

===Software engineering===

From its beginnings, software engineering has helped shape modern systems engineering practice. The techniques used in the handling of the complexities of large software-intensive systems have had a major effect on the shaping and reshaping of the tools, methods, and processes of Systems Engineering.

==See also==
* Arcadia (engineering)
* Control engineering
* Design review (U.S. government)
* Engineering management
* Engineering information management
* Enterprise systems engineering
* Industrial engineering
* Interdisciplinarity
* List of production topics
* List of requirements engineering tools
* List of systems engineers
* List of types of systems engineering
* Management cybernetics
* Model-based systems engineering
* Operations management
* Structured systems analysis and design method
* System of systems engineering (SoSE)
* System accident
* Systems architecture
* Systems development life cycle 
* Systems thinking (e.g. theory of constraints, value-stream mapping)
* System information modelling
* Tricotyledon theory of system design
==References==
==Further reading==
* Madhavan, Guru (2024). &quot;Wicked Problems: How to Engineer a Better World&quot;. New York: W.W. Norton &amp; Company. 
* Blockley, D. Godfrey, P. &quot;Doing it Differently: Systems for Rethinking Infrastructure, Second Edition&quot;, ICE Publications, London, 2017.
* Buede, D.M., Miller, W.D. &quot;The Engineering Design of Systems: Models and Methods, Third Edition&quot;, John Wiley and Sons, 2016.
* Chestnut, H., &quot;Systems Engineering Methods&quot;. Wiley, 1967.
* Gianni, D. et al. (eds.), &quot;Modeling and Simulation-Based Systems Engineering Handbook&quot;, CRC Press, 2014 at CRC
* Goode, H.H., Robert E. Machol &quot;System Engineering: An Introduction to the Design of Large-scale Systems&quot;, McGraw-Hill, 1957.
* Hitchins, D. (1997) &quot;World Class Systems Engineering&quot; at hitchins.net.
* Lienig, J., Bruemmer, H., &quot;Fundamentals of Electronic Systems Design&quot;, Springer, 2017 .
* Malakooti, B. (2013). Operations and Production Systems with Multiple Objectives. John Wiley &amp; Sons.
* MITRE, The MITRE Systems Engineering Guide(pdf)
* NASA (2007) &quot;Systems Engineering Handbook&quot;, NASA/SP-2007-6105 Rev1, December 2007. 
* NASA (2013) &quot;NASA Systems Engineering Processes and Requirements &quot; NPR 7123.1B, April 2013 NASA Procedural Requirements
* Oliver, D.W., et al. &quot;Engineering Complex Systems with Models and Objects. McGraw-Hill&quot;, 1997.
* Parnell, G.S., Driscoll, P.J., Henderson, D.L. (eds.), &quot;Decision Making in Systems Engineering and Management&quot;, 2nd. ed., Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2011. This is a textbook for undergraduate students of engineering.
* Ramo, S., St.Clair, R.K. &quot;The Systems Approach: Fresh Solutions to Complex Problems Through Combining Science and Practical Common Sense&quot;, Anaheim, CA: KNI, Inc, 1998.
* Sage, A.P., &quot;Systems Engineering&quot;. Wiley IEEE, 1992. .
* Sage, A.P., Olson, S.R., &quot;Modeling and Simulation in Systems Engineering&quot;, 2001.
* SEBOK.org, Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK)
* Shermon, D. &quot;Systems Cost Engineering&quot;, Gower Publishing, 2009
* Shishko, R., et al. (2005) &quot;NASA Systems Engineering Handbook&quot;. NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, 2005.
* Stevens, R., et al. &quot;Systems Engineering: Coping with Complexity&quot;. Prentice Hall, 1998.
* US Air Force, SMC Systems Engineering Primer &amp; Handbook, 2004
* US DoD Systems Management College (2001) &quot;Systems Engineering Fundamentals.&quot; Defense Acquisition University Press, 2001
* US DoD Guide for Integrating Systems Engineering into DoD Acquisition Contracts , 2006
* US DoD MIL-STD-499 System Engineering Management

==External links==
* ICSEng homepage
* INCOSE homepage
* INCOSE UK homepage
* PPI SE Goldmine homepage
* Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge
* Systems Engineering Tools
* AcqNotes DoD Systems Engineering Overview 
* NDIA Systems Engineering Division</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q682496" start="0" end="19" title="Systems engineering" label="Systems engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="26" end="43" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="53" end="64" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314146" start="69" end="91" title="engineering management" label="engineering management"/>
<link wikidata="Q854457" start="145" end="159" title="complex system" label="complex system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380394" start="172" end="183" title="Enterprise life cycle" label="life cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340474" start="227" end="243" title="systems thinking" label="systems thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q619544" start="272" end="289" title="body of knowledge" label="body of knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q682496" start="334" end="351" title="Systems engineering" label="engineered system"/>
<link wikidata="Q540614" start="412" end="419" title="synergy" label="synergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528683" start="453" end="461" title="Function (engineering)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q376937" start="479" end="503" title="requirements engineering" label="requirements engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="518" end="527" title="logistics" label="logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="618" end="629" title="Discipline (academia)" label="disciplines"/>
<link wikidata="Q12403222" start="635" end="654" title="List of system quality attributes" label="&amp;quot;ilities&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750474" start="681" end="694" title="system design" label="system design"/>
<link wikidata="Q245962" start="709" end="723" title="implementation" label="implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170584" start="808" end="815" title="project" label="project"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="891" end="906" title="risk management" label="risk management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="992" end="1014" title="industrial engineering" label="industrial engineering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1016" end="1046" title="production systems engineering" label="production systems engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144042" start="1048" end="1075" title="process systems engineering" label="process systems engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="1077" end="1099" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11049265" start="1101" end="1126" title="manufacturing engineering" label="manufacturing engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11049265" start="1128" end="1150" title="production engineering" label="production engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917288" start="1152" end="1171" title="control engineering" label="control engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="1173" end="1193" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="1195" end="1217" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q123637" start="1219" end="1230" title="cybernetics" label="cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="1232" end="1253" title="aerospace engineering" label="aerospace engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029930" start="1255" end="1277" title="organizational studies" label="organizational studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="1279" end="1296" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q179012" start="1301" end="1319" title="project management" label="project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="1984" end="2011" title="Bell Telephone Laboratories" label="Bell Telephone Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894081" start="2924" end="2927" title="Universal Systems Language" label="USL"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="2929" end="2932" title="UML" label="UML"/>
<link wikidata="Q763591" start="2934" end="2937" title="Quality function deployment" label="QFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515863" start="2943" end="2947" title="IDEF" label="IDEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288548" start="3387" end="3431" title="International Council on Systems Engineering" label="International Council on Systems Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q828748" start="3531" end="3551" title="continuing education" label="continuing education"/>
<link wikidata="Q503806" start="5026" end="5041" title="Peter Checkland" label="Peter Checkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60752525" start="5310" end="5347" title="Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge" label="Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q838667" start="6004" end="6013" title="Requirements elicitation" label="eliciting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904257" start="6069" end="6086" title="development cycle" label="development cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q559486" start="6218" end="6234" title="system lifecycle" label="system lifecycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658317" start="6281" end="6293" title="Project stakeholders" label="stakeholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q478175" start="7158" end="7173" title="Waterfall model" label="Waterfall model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142155" start="7182" end="7191" title="VEE model" label="VEE model"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="7357" end="7365" title="holistic" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="8648" end="8675" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="8744" end="8754" title="algorithms" label="algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303814" start="8756" end="8777" title="microprocessor design" label="microprocessor design"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112450" start="8783" end="8816" title="Environmental systems analysis" label="analysis of environmental systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q477538" start="9040" end="9059" title="System architecture" label="System architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070446" start="9074" end="9086" title="System model" label="System model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116876" start="9088" end="9096" title="Scientific modelling" label="modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="9102" end="9112" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="9127" end="9152" title="Mathematical optimization" label="Mathematical optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q598451" start="9167" end="9182" title="System dynamics" label="System dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q679871" start="9197" end="9213" title="Systems analysis" label="Systems analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="9228" end="9248" title="Statistical analysis" label="Statistical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193887" start="9263" end="9286" title="Reliability engineering" label="Reliability engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="9301" end="9316" title="Decision making" label="Decision making"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="9334" end="9351" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="9416" end="9424" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q371730" start="9494" end="9506" title="well defined" label="well defined"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="9555" end="9561" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q875146" start="9729" end="9737" title="Sysop" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="9740" end="9749" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101564" start="9769" end="9793" title="technical specifications" label="technical specifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340474" start="9979" end="9995" title="systems thinking" label="systems thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="10103" end="10123" title="software development" label="software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q126095" start="10162" end="10194" title="Electronics &amp;amp; Communications Engineering" label="electronics &amp;amp; communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888384" start="10827" end="10850" title="modeling and simulation" label="modeling and simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496962" start="11000" end="11018" title="safety engineering" label="safety engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q92763" start="11592" end="11612" title="Jay Wright Forrester" label="Jay Wright Forrester"/>
<link wikidata="Q598451" start="11620" end="11635" title="System dynamics" label="System dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q169411" start="11652" end="11677" title="Unified Modeling Language" label="Unified Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="12045" end="12066" title="aerospace engineering" label="aerospace engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="12068" end="12085" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="12087" end="12109" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="12111" end="12133" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11049265" start="12135" end="12160" title="manufacturing engineering" label="manufacturing engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="12162" end="12184" title="industrial engineering" label="industrial engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q83588" start="12186" end="12206" title="chemical engineering" label="chemical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="12461" end="12463" title="Bachelor of Science" label="BS"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="12701" end="12703" title="Master of Science" label="MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907867" start="12704" end="12708" title="MEng" label="MEng"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="12712" end="12717" title="Ph.D." label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q11965851" start="12718" end="12722" title="EngD" label="EngD"/>
<link wikidata="Q657222" start="12805" end="12836" title="Stevens Institute of Technology" label="Stevens Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q185451" start="13959" end="13969" title="strategies" label="strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170584" start="14035" end="14042" title="project" label="project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="14046" end="14053" title="Product (business)" label="product"/>
<link wikidata="Q58778" start="14271" end="14277" title="system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="14364" end="14368" title="ANSI" label="ANSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156461" start="14369" end="14372" title="Electronic Industries Alliance" label="EIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251354" start="14478" end="14481" title="Defense Acquisition University" label="DAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="14654" end="14658" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q911765" start="15753" end="15760" title="ISO/IEC" label="ISO/IEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="15875" end="15879" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623243" start="17041" end="17046" title="Abstract model" label="Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493425" start="17567" end="17596" title="functional flow block diagram" label="functional flow block diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="17735" end="17753" title="mathematical model" label="mathematical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574851" start="17759" end="17767" title="Mathematical diagram" label="diagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11214" start="18255" end="18276" title="differential equation" label="differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="18325" end="18344" title="gravitational field" label="gravitational field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264234" start="19130" end="19140" title="functional requirement" label="functional"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493425" start="19208" end="19237" title="Functional flow block diagram" label="Functional flow block diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888132" start="19247" end="19265" title="Model-based design" label="Model-based design"/>
<link wikidata="Q747385" start="19268" end="19285" title="Data flow diagram" label="Data flow diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951940" start="19294" end="19302" title="N2 chart" label="N2 chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522551" start="19305" end="19318" title="IDEF0" label="IDEF0 diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q613417" start="19321" end="19337" title="Use case" label="Use case diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391624" start="19340" end="19356" title="Sequence diagram" label="Sequence diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q884718" start="19359" end="19372" title="Block diagram" label="Block diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786523" start="19375" end="19392" title="Signal-flow graph" label="Signal-flow graph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19395" end="19426" title="Universal Systems Language#Formalism for a theory of control" label="USL function maps and type maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380897" start="19429" end="19462" title="Enterprise architecture framework" label="Enterprise architecture framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q664166" start="19792" end="19802" title="Structural model (software)" label="structural"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318160" start="19807" end="19823" title="behavioral model" label="behavioral model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249239" start="20156" end="20171" title="decision matrix" label="decision matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q763591" start="20201" end="20204" title="Quality function deployment" label="QFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="20665" end="20681" title="feedback control" label="feedback control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117885" start="20764" end="20789" title="Systems Modeling Language" label="Systems Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097234" start="21011" end="21038" title="Lifecycle Modeling Language" label="Lifecycle Modeling Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q469666" start="21554" end="21574" title="human-machine system" label="human-machine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639361" start="21579" end="21601" title="sociotechnical systems" label="sociotechnical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q16978439" start="21708" end="21716" title="Artifact (software development)" label="artifact"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807891" start="21923" end="21944" title="cognitive engineering" label="cognitive engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153495" start="22281" end="22305" title="configuration management" label="configuration management"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="22326" end="22333" title="Defence industry" label="defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q936518" start="22338" end="22356" title="aerospace industry" label="aerospace industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917288" start="22904" end="22923" title="Control engineering" label="Control engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q959968" start="22961" end="22976" title="control systems" label="control systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="23387" end="23409" title="Industrial engineering" label="Industrial engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="23425" end="23436" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q135707" start="24188" end="24204" title="Interface design" label="Interface design"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115054" start="24641" end="24654" title="extensibility" label="extensibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q207434" start="24656" end="24682" title="Human-Computer Interaction" label="Human-Computer Interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="24876" end="24899" title="communication protocols" label="communication protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="24904" end="24923" title="local area networks" label="local area networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11384" start="24928" end="24946" title="wide area networks" label="wide area networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180165" start="24980" end="25003" title="Mechatronic engineering" label="Mechatronic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="25469" end="25488" title="Operations research" label="Operations research"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117135" start="25657" end="25680" title="Performance engineering" label="Performance engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q870845" start="26037" end="26052" title="system capacity" label="system capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="26088" end="26111" title="packet-switched network" label="packet-switched network"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="26430" end="26440" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q847526" start="26442" end="26457" title="queueing theory" label="queueing theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="26463" end="26481" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q603948" start="26561" end="26579" title="Program management" label="Program management"/>
<link wikidata="Q179012" start="26732" end="26750" title="Project management" label="Project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751609" start="26840" end="26850" title="Schedule (project management)" label="scheduling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260617" start="27062" end="27072" title="Dependency (project management)" label="dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q559486" start="27114" end="27130" title="system lifecycle" label="system lifecycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q682496" start="27402" end="27429" title="systems engineering process" label="systems engineering process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193887" start="27552" end="27575" title="Reliability engineering" label="Reliability engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389965" start="27913" end="27928" title="maintainability" label="maintainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q384871" start="27930" end="27942" title="availability" label="availability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689057" start="27944" end="27957" title="dependability" label="dependability"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964149" start="27961" end="27965" title="RAMS" label="RAMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063793" start="27990" end="28018" title="integrated logistics support" label="integrated logistics support"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389268" start="28104" end="28137" title="failure mode and effects analysis" label="failure mode and effects analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q428453" start="28149" end="28166" title="Fault tree" label="hazard fault tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q365674" start="28184" end="28204" title="security engineering" label="security engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="28230" end="28245" title="Risk management" label="Risk management"/>
<link wikidata="Q104493" start="28290" end="28294" title="risk" label="risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q559486" start="28655" end="28671" title="system lifecycle" label="system lifecycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496962" start="28961" end="28979" title="safety engineering" label="safety engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q365674" start="29399" end="29419" title="Security engineering" label="Security engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="29440" end="29457" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q936635" start="29484" end="29505" title="community of practice" label="community of practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q212108" start="29619" end="29633" title="authentication" label="authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="29761" end="29781" title="software engineering" label="software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q21973909" start="30058" end="30079" title="Arcadia (engineering)" label="Arcadia (engineering)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917288" start="30082" end="30101" title="Control engineering" label="Control engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264371" start="30104" end="30135" title="Design review (U.S. government)" label="Design review (U.S. government)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314146" start="30138" end="30160" title="Engineering management" label="Engineering management"/>
<link wikidata="Q109974282" start="30163" end="30197" title="Engineering information management" label="Engineering information management"/>
<link wikidata="Q11606385" start="30200" end="30230" title="Enterprise systems engineering" label="Enterprise systems engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="30233" end="30255" title="Industrial engineering" label="Industrial engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="30258" end="30277" title="Interdisciplinarity" label="Interdisciplinarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112706" start="30280" end="30305" title="List of production topics" label="List of production topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q106391210" start="30308" end="30346" title="List of requirements engineering tools" label="List of requirements engineering tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811900" start="30349" end="30374" title="List of systems engineers" label="List of systems engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644183" start="30377" end="30413" title="List of types of systems engineering" label="List of types of systems engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544281" start="30416" end="30438" title="Management cybernetics" label="Management cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807984" start="30441" end="30472" title="Model-based systems engineering" label="Model-based systems engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423657" start="30475" end="30496" title="Operations management" label="Operations management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187450" start="30499" end="30544" title="Structured systems analysis and design method" label="Structured systems analysis and design method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663738" start="30547" end="30576" title="System of systems engineering" label="System of systems engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328179" start="30586" end="30601" title="System accident" label="System accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q477538" start="30604" end="30624" title="Systems architecture" label="Systems architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q559486" start="30627" end="30657" title="Systems development life cycle" label="Systems development life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340474" start="30661" end="30677" title="Systems thinking" label="Systems thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q956095" start="30684" end="30705" title="theory of constraints" label="theory of constraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345067" start="30707" end="30727" title="value-stream mapping" label="value-stream mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134178" start="30731" end="30759" title="System information modelling" label="System information modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098574" start="30762" end="30798" title="Tricotyledon theory of system design" label="Tricotyledon theory of system design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735452" start="31245" end="31257" title="Harold Chestnut" label="Chestnut, H."/>
<link wikidata="Q2237494" start="31438" end="31449" title="Harry H. Goode" label="Goode, H.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q5262037" start="31575" end="31587" title="Derek Hitchins" label="Hitchins, D."/>
<link wikidata="Q2918925" start="32472" end="32480" title="Simon Ramo" label="Ramo, S."/>
<link wikidata="Q15429427" start="32652" end="32662" title="Andrew P. Sage" label="Sage, A.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q15429427" start="32719" end="32729" title="Andrew P. Sage" label="Sage, A.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q4805028" start="32921" end="32937" title="Gower Publishing" label="Gower Publishing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27765" wikidata="Q2855" url="?curid=27765" title="September 4">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
* 476 – Romulus Augustulus is deposed when Odoacer proclaims himself &quot;King of Italy&quot;, thus ending the Western Roman Empire.
* 626 – Li Shimin, posthumously known as Emperor Taizong of Tang, assumes the throne over the Tang dynasty of China.
* 929 – Battle of Lenzen: Slavic forces (the Redarii and the Obotrites) are defeated by a Saxon army near the fortified stronghold of Lenzen in Brandenburg.
*1260 – The Sienese Ghibellines, supported by the forces of Manfred, King of Sicily, defeat the Florentine Guelphs at Montaperti.
*1282 – Peter III of Aragon becomes the King of Sicily.
*1479 – The Treaty of Alcáçovas is signed by the Catholic Monarchs of Castile and Aragon on one side and Afonso V and his son, Prince John of Portugal.
===1601–1900===
*1607 – The Flight of the Earls takes place in Ireland.
*1666 – In London, England, the most destructive damage from the Great Fire occurs.
*1774 – New Caledonia is first sighted by Europeans, during the second voyage of Captain James Cook.
*1781 – Los Angeles is founded as El Pueblo de Nuestra Señora La Reina de los Ángeles (The Village of Our Lady, the Queen of the Angels) by 44 Spanish settlers.
*1797 – Coup of 18 Fructidor in France.
*1800 – The French garrison in Valletta surrenders to British troops who had been called at the invitation of the Maltese. The islands of Malta and Gozo become the Malta Protectorate.
*1812 – War of 1812: The Siege of Fort Harrison begins when the fort is set on fire.
*1827 – The Great Fire of Turku almost completely destroys Finland&#x27;s former capital city.
*1839 – Battle of Kowloon: British vessels open fire on Chinese war junks enforcing a food sales embargo on the British community in China in the first armed conflict of the First Opium War.
*1862 – American Civil War Maryland Campaign: General Robert E. Lee takes the Army of Northern Virginia, and the war, into the North.
*1870 – Emperor Napoleon III of France is deposed and the Third Republic is declared.
*1882 – The Pearl Street Station in New York City becomes the first power plant to supply electricity to paying customers.
*1886 – American Indian Wars: After almost 30 years of fighting, Apache leader Geronimo, with his remaining warriors, surrenders to General Nelson Miles in Arizona.
*1888 – George Eastman registers the trademark &quot;Kodak&quot; and receives a patent for his camera that uses roll film.
===1901–present===
*1912 – Albanian rebels succeed in their revolt when the Ottoman Empire agrees to fulfill their demands
*1919 – Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, who founded the Republic of Turkey, gathers a congress in Sivas to make decisions as to the future of Anatolia and Thrace.
*1923 – Maiden flight of the first U.S. airship, the .
*1936 – Spanish Civil War: Largo Caballero forms a war cabinet to direct the republican war effort.
*1939 – World War II: William J. Murphy commands the first Royal Air Force attack on Germany.
*1941 – World War II: A German submarine makes the first attack of the war against a United States warship, the .
*1944 – World War II: The British 11th Armoured Division liberates the Belgian city of Antwerp.
* 1944 – World War II: Finland exits from the war with Soviet Union. 
*1948 – Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands abdicates for health reasons.
*1949 – Paul Robeson performs a second concert in Peekskill, New York eight days after the Peekskill riots.
*1950 – Darlington Raceway is the site of the inaugural Southern 500, the first 500-mile NASCAR race.
*1951 – The first live transcontinental television broadcast takes place in San Francisco, United States, from the Japanese Peace Treaty Conference.
*1957 – American Civil Rights Movement: Little Rock Crisis: The governor of Arkansas calls out the National Guard to prevent African American students from enrolling in Little Rock Central High School, resulting in the lawsuit &quot;Cooper v. Aaron&quot; the following year.
*1963 – Swissair Flight 306 crashes near Dürrenäsch, Switzerland, killing all 80 people on board.
*1964 – Scotland&#x27;s Forth Road Bridge near Edinburgh officially opens.
*1967 – Vietnam War: Operation Swift begins when U.S. Marines engage the North Vietnamese in battle in the Que Son Valley.
*1970 – Salvador Allende is elected President of Chile.
*1971 – Alaska Airlines Flight 1866 crashes near Juneau, Alaska, killing all 111 people on board.
*1972 – Mark Spitz becomes the first competitor to win seven medals at a single Olympic Games.
* 1972 – &quot;The Price Is Right&quot; premieres on CBS. It currently is the longest running game show on American television.
*1975 – The Sinai Interim Agreement relating to the Arab–Israeli conflict is signed.
*1977 – The Golden Dragon massacre takes place in San Francisco.
*1985 – The discovery of Buckminsterfullerene, the first fullerene molecule of carbon.
*1989 – In Leipzig, East Germany, the first of weekly demonstration for the legalisation of opposition groups and democratic reforms takes place.
*1998 – Google is founded by Larry Page and Sergey Brin, two PhD students at Stanford University.

*2001 – Tokyo DisneySea opens to the public as part of the Tokyo Disney Resort in Urayasu, Chiba, Japan.
*2002 – The Oakland Athletics win their 20th consecutive game, an American League record, until the Cleveland Indians surpassed it in 2017.
*2007 – Three terrorists suspected to be a part of Al-Qaeda are arrested in Germany after allegedly planning attacks on both the Frankfurt International airport and US military installations.
*2020 – Pope Benedict XVI becomes the longest-lived pope, 93 years, four months, 16 days, surpassing Pope Leo XIII, who died in 1903.
*2022 – Ten people are killed and 15 are injured in a stabbing spree in 13 locations on the James Smith Cree Nation and in Weldon, Saskatchewan.
*2024 – A 14-year-old gunman kills four people and injures seven in a mass shooting at Apalachee High School near Winder, Georgia.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
* 973 – Al-Biruni, Persian physician and polymath (d. 1048)
*1241 – Alexander III, king of Scotland (d. 1286)
*1383 – Felix V, antipope of Rome (d. 1451)
*1454 – Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham, English politician, Lord High Constable of England (d. 1483)
*1557 – Sophie of Mecklenburg-Güstrow, queen consort of Denmark and Norway (d. 1631)
*1563 – Wanli, Chinese emperor (d. 1620)
*1580 – George Percy, English explorer (d. 1632)
*1596 – Constantijn Huygens, Dutch poet and composer (d. 1687)
===1601–1900===
*1681 – Carl Heinrich Biber, Austrian violinist and composer (d. 1749)
*1717 – Job Orton, English minister and author (d. 1783)
*1745 – Shneur Zalman, Russian rabbi, author and founder of Chabad (d. 1812)
*1755 – Axel von Fersen the Younger, Swedish general and politician (d. 1810)
*1768 – François-René de Chateaubriand, French historian and politician, Minister of Foreign Affairs for France (d. 1848)
*1776 – Stephen Whitney, American businessman (d. 1860)
*1798 – Raynold Kaufgetz, Swiss soldier, economist, and politician (d. 1869)
*1803 – Sarah Childress Polk, First Lady of the United States (d. 1891)
*1809 – Manuel Montt, Chilean scholar and politician, 6th President of Chile (d. 1880)
* 1809 – Juliusz Słowacki, Polish poet and playwright (d. 1849)
*1824 – Anton Bruckner, Austrian organist and composer (d. 1896)
*1825 – Dadabhai Naoroji, Indian academic and politician, President of the Indian National Congress (d. 1917)
*1826 – Martin Wiberg, Swedish philosopher and engineer (d. 1905)
*1832 – Antonio Agliardi, Italian cardinal (d. 1915)
*1846 – Daniel Burnham, American architect, designed the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition (d. 1912)
*1877 – Kārlis Ulmanis, Latvian prime minister and president (d. 1942)
*1848 – Lewis Howard Latimer, American inventor (d. 1928)
* 1848 – Jennie Lee, American actress (d. 1925)
*1850 – Luigi Cadorna, Italian field marshal (d. 1928)
*1851 – John Dillon, Irish poet and politician (d. 1927)
*1862 – Franjo Krežma, Croatian violinist and composer (d. 1881)
*1885 – Antonio Bacci, Italian cardinal (d. 1971)
*1886 – Albert Orsborn, English 6th General of The Salvation Army (d. 1967)
*1887 – Roy William Neill, Irish-English director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 1946)
*1888 – Oskar Schlemmer, German painter, sculptor, designer and choreographer (d. 1943)
*1890 – Gunnar Sommerfeldt, Danish actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 1947)
*1891 – Fritz Todt, German engineer and politician (d. 1942)
*1892 – Darius Milhaud, French composer and educator (d. 1974)
*1896 – Antonin Artaud, French actor, director, and playwright (d. 1948)
===1901–present===
*1901 – William Lyons, English businessman, co-founded Jaguar Cars (d. 1985)
*1902 – Tommy Mitchell, English cricketer (d. 1996)
*1905 – Mary Renault, English-South African author (d. 1983)
* 1905 – Walter Zapp, Latvian-Estonian inventor, invented the Minox (d. 2003)
*1906 – Ruben Oskar Auervaara, Finnish fraudster (d. 1964)
* 1906 – Max Delbrück, German-American biophysicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1981)
*1907 – Reggie Nalder, Austrian-American actor (d. 1991)
*1908 – Edward Dmytryk, Canadian-American director and producer (d. 1999)
* 1908 – Richard Wright, American novelist, short story writer, essayist, and poet (d. 1960)
*1909 – Eduard Wirths, German physician (d. 1945)
*1910 – Denis Tomlinson, Zimbabwean-South African cricketer (d. 1993)
*1912 – Syd Hoff, American author and illustrator (d. 2004)
* 1912 – Alexander Liberman, Russian-American publisher, painter, photographer, and sculptor (d. 1999)
*1913 – Mickey Cohen, American mob boss (d. 1976)
* 1913 – Victor Kiernan, English historian and academic (d. 2009)
* 1913 – Stanford Moore, American biochemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1982)
* 1913 – Kenzō Tange, Japanese architect (d. 2005)
* 1913 – Shmuel Wosner, Austrian-Israeli rabbi and author (d. 2015)
*1914 – Rudolf Leiding, German businessman (d. 2003)
*1917 – Henry Ford II, American businessman (d. 1987)
*1918 – Paul Harvey, American radio host (d. 2009)
* 1918 – Gerald Wilson, American trumpet player and composer (d. 2014)
*1919 – Émile Bouchard, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 2012)
* 1919 – Howard Morris, American actor, director, and screenwriter (d. 2005)
*1920 – Clemar Bucci, Argentine race car driver (d. 2011)
* 1920 – Craig Claiborne, American journalist, author, and critic (d. 2000)
* 1920 – Konstantin Kalser, German-American film producer and advertising executive (d. 1994)
*1922 – Per Olof Sundman, Swedish author and politician (d. 1992)
*1923 – Ram Kishore Shukla, Indian lawyer and politician (d. 2003)
*1924 – Joan Aiken, English author (d. 2004)
* 1924 – Justinas Lagunavičius, Lithuanian basketball player (d. 1997)
*1925 – Asa Earl Carter, American Ku Klux Klan leader and author (d. 1979)
*1926 – George William Gray, British chemist (d. 2013)
* 1926 – Ivan Illich, Austrian priest and philosopher (d. 2002)
* 1926 – Bert Olmstead, Canadian ice hockey player and coach (d. 2015)
*1927 – John McCarthy, American computer scientist and academic (d. 2011)
* 1927 – Ferenc Sánta, Hungarian author and screenwriter (d. 2008)
*1928 – Dick York, American actor (d. 1992)
*1929 – Thomas Eagleton, American lawyer and politician, 38th Lieutenant Governor of Missouri (d. 2007)
* 1929 – Robert V. Keeley, Lebanese-American soldier and diplomat, United States Ambassador to Greece (d. 2015)
*1930 – Robert Arneson, American sculptor and academic (d. 1992)
* 1930 – William Maxson, American general (d. 2013)
*1931 – Mitzi Gaynor, American actress, singer, and dancer (d. 2024)
* 1931 – Antonios Trakatellis, Greek biochemist and politician
*1932 – Carlos Romero Barceló, Puerto Rican lawyer and politician, 5th Governor of Puerto Rico (d. 2021)
*1932 – Vince Dooley, American football player and coach (d. 2022)
*1934 – Clive Granger, Welsh-American economist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2009)
* 1934 – Antoine Redin, French footballer and manager (d. 2012)
* 1934 – Eduard Khil, Russian baritone singer (d. 2012)
* 1934 – Jan Švankmajer, Czech filmmaker and artist 
*1935 – Charles A. Hines, American general and academic (d. 2013)
* 1935 – Dallas Willard, American philosopher and academic (d. 2013)
*1937 – Dawn Fraser, Australian swimmer and politician
* 1937 – Gene Ludwig, American organist and composer (d. 2010)
* 1937 – Virgil A. Richard, American general (d. 2013)
* 1937 – Les Allen, English footballer and manager
*1939 – Denis Lindsay, South African cricketer and referee (d. 2005)
*1941 – Marilena de Souza Chaui, Brazilian philosopher and academic
* 1941 – Ken Harrelson, American baseball player and sportscaster
* 1941 – Ramesh Sethi, Kenyan cricketer and coach
* 1941 – Sushilkumar Shinde, Indian lawyer and politician, 19th Governor of Andhra Pradesh
*1942 – Raymond Floyd, American golfer
* 1942 – Jerry Jarrett, American wrestler and promoter (d. 2023)
* 1942 – Merald &quot;Bubba&quot; Knight, American singer
*1944 – Tony Atkinson, English economist and academic (d. 2017) 
* 1944 – Dave Bassett, English footballer and manager
* 1944 – Gene Parsons, American singer-songwriter, drummer, guitarist, and banjo player
* 1944 – Jerry Relph, American politician and member of the Minnesota Senate (d. 2020)
* 1944 – Jennifer Salt, American actress, screenwriter, and producer
*1945 – Danny Gatton, American guitarist (d. 1994)
* 1945 – Bill Kenwright, English actor, singer, and producer (d. 2023)
*1946 – Gary Duncan, American guitarist (d. 2019)
* 1946 – Dave Liebman, American saxophonist, flute player, and composer
* 1946 – Bryan Mauricette, Saint Lucian-Canadian cricketer
*1947 – Bob Jenkins, American sportscaster (d. 2021)
* 1947 – Paul Sait, Australian rugby league player (d. 2023)
*1949 – Darryl Cotton, Australian singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2012)
* 1949 – Dean Pees, American football player and coach
* 1949 – Tom Watson, American golfer and sportscaster
*1950 – Doyle Alexander, American baseball player
* 1950 – Frank White, American baseball player and politician
*1951 – Martin Chambers, English drummer and singer 
* 1951 – Judith Ivey, American actress
* 1951 – Marita Ulvskog, Swedish politician, Deputy Prime Minister of Sweden
*1952 – Stephen Easley, American businessman and politician (d. 2013)
*1953 – Janet Biehl, American philosopher and author
* 1953 – Michael Stean, English chess player and author
* 1953 – Fatih Terim, Turkish footballer and manager
*1955 – David Broza, Israeli singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1955 – Garth Le Roux, South African cricketer
* 1955 – Brian Schweitzer, American politician, 23rd Governor of Montana
*1956 – Blackie Lawless, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1957 – Khandi Alexander, American actress, dancer, and choreographer
*1958 – Jacqueline Hewitt, American astrophysicist and astronomer
* 1958 – Marzio Innocenti, Italian rugby player and coach
* 1958 – Drew Pinsky, American radio and television host
*1959 – Kevin Harrington, Australian actor 
* 1959 – Armin Kogler, Austrian ski jumper
*1960 – Kim Thayil, American guitarist and songwriter 
* 1960 – Shailesh Vara, Ugandan-English lawyer and politician
* 1960 – Damon Wayans, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter
*1961 – Nick Blinko, English singer-songwriter and guitarist 
* 1961 – Lars Jönsson, Swedish film producer
*1962 – Kiran More, Indian cricketer
* 1962 – Ulla Tørnæs, Danish politician, Danish Minister of Education
* 1962 – Shinya Yamanaka, Japanese physician and biologist, Nobel Prize laureate
*1963 – Bobby Jarzombek, American drummer 
* 1963 – John Vanbiesbrouck, American ice hockey player, coach, and manager
* 1963 – Sami Yaffa, Finnish singer-songwriter and bass player 
*1964 – Guy Boros, American golfer 
* 1964 – Tomas Sandström, Finnish-Swedish ice hockey player
* 1964 – Aadesh Shrivastava, Indian singer-songwriter (d. 2015)
*1965 – Sergio Momesso, Canadian ice hockey player and sportscaster
*1966 – Yanka Dyagileva, Russian singer-songwriter (d. 1991)
* 1966 – Jeff Tremaine, American director, producer, and screenwriter
*1967 – Darrin Murray, New Zealand cricketer and accountant
* 1967 – Dezső Szabó, Hungarian decathlete
*1968 – John DiMaggio, American voice actor 
* 1968 – Mike Piazza, American baseball player 
*1969 – Sasha, Welsh DJ and producer 
* 1969 – Ramon Dekkers, Dutch kick-boxer and mixed martial artist (d. 2013)
* 1969 – Giorgi Margvelashvili, Georgian academic and politician, 4th President of Georgia
* 1969 – Richard Speight Jr., American actor and director
* 1969 – Noah Taylor, Australian actor
* 1969 – Inga Tuigamala, Samoan-New Zealand rugby player
*1970 – Igor Cavalera, Brazilian drummer 
* 1970 – Deni Hines, Australian singer-songwriter
* 1970 – Ivan Iusco, Italian composer
* 1970 – Sven Meyer, German footballer
* 1970 – Ione Skye, English-American actress
*1971 – Craig Conroy, American ice hockey player and executive
* 1971 – Lance Klusener, South African cricketer and coach
* 1971 – Maik Taylor, German-Irish footballer and coach
*1972 – Steve Leonard, Northern Irish veterinarian and television personality
*1973 – Jason David Frank, American actor and mixed martial artist (d. 2022)
*1973 – Aaron Fultz, American baseball player and coach
* 1973 – Lazlow Jones, American radio presenter, producer and screenwriter 
*1974 – Mati Pari, Estonian footballer and coach
* 1974 – Lincoln Roberts, Tobagonian cricketer
*1975 – Sergio Ballesteros, Spanish footballer
* 1975 – Mark Ronson, English DJ, producer, and songwriter, co-founded Allido Records
* 1975 – Dave Salmoni, Canadian zoologist, television host, and producer
*1976 – Denilson Martins Nascimento, Brazilian footballer
* 1976 – Mario-Ernesto Rodríguez, Uruguayan-Italian footballer
*1977 – Sun-woo Kim, South Korean baseball player
* 1977 – Lucie Silvas, English singer-songwriter and pianist
* 1977 – Kia Stevens, American wrestler
*1978 – Wes Bentley, American actor and producer
* 1978 – Terence Newman, American football player
* 1978 – Frederik Veuchelen, Belgian cyclist
* 1978 – Christian Walz, Swedish singer-songwriter and producer
*1979 – Maxim Afinogenov, Russian ice hockey player
* 1979 – Pedro Macedo Camacho, Portuguese pianist, composer, and producer
* 1979 – Max Greenfield, American actor
* 1979 – Kosuke Matsuura, Japanese race car driver
*1980 – Pat Neshek, American baseball player
*1981 – Beyoncé, American singer-songwriter, producer, dancer, and actress
* 1981 – Richard Garcia, Australian footballer
* 1981 – Lacey Sturm, American singer-songwriter 
*1982 – Whitney Cummings, American comedian, actress, producer, and screenwriter
* 1982 – Mark Lewis-Francis, English sprinter
*1983 – Yuichi Nakamaru, Japanese singer-songwriter, actor, and radio host 
* 1983 – Guy Pnini, Israeli basketball player
* 1983 – Margit Rüütel, Estonian tennis player
* 1983 – Armands Šķēle, Latvian basketball player
*1984 – Jonathan Adam, Scottish race car driver
* 1984 – Hamish McIntosh, Australian footballer
* 1984 – Kyle Mooney, American comedian, actor, and screenwriter
*1985 – Raúl Albiol, Spanish footballer
* 1985 – Ri Kwang-chon, North Korean footballer
* 1985 – Walid Mesloub, Algerian footballer
*1986 – Ayumi Kaihori, Japanese footballer
* 1986 – Xavier Woods, American wrestler
*1987 – Wesley Blake, American wrestler
*1987 – Marisa Kabas, American journalist
*1988 – Adam Duvall, American baseball player
* 1988 – John Tyler Hammons, American politician
* 1988 – JJ Hickson, American basketball player
*1989 – Andrelton Simmons, Curaçaoan baseball player
* 1989 – Elliott Whitehead, English rugby league player
*1990 – James Bay, English singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1990 – Jonny Lomax, English rugby player
* 1990 – Danny Worsnop, English singer-songwriter
*1991 – Adrien Bart, French sprint canoeist
* 1991 – Anders Zachariassen, Danish handball player
*1992 – Kevin Lee, American mixed martial artist
* 1992 – Hanna Schwamborn, German actress
* 1992 – Zerkaa, English YouTuber
*1993 – Emma Brownlie, Scottish footballer
* 1993 – Yannick Carrasco, Belgian footballer
* 1993 – Jody Fannin, English race car driver
* 1993 – Chantal Škamlová, Slovak tennis player
* 1993 – Mark Tuan, American rapper
*1994 – Kenny McEvoy, Irish footballer
* 1994 – Thomas Minns, English rugby player
* 1994 – Sabina Sharipova, Uzbekistan tennis player
*1995 – Jazz Tevaga, New Zealand rugby league player
*1996 – Ashton Golding, English rugby league player
* 1996 – Jordan Lilley, English rugby league player
*1998 – Neru Nagahama, Japanese television personality
*2000 – Sergio Gómez, Spanish footballer
*2001 – Talitha Bateman, American actress
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 422 – Boniface I, pope of the Catholic Church
* 799 – Musa al-Kadhim, Arabic imam (b. 745)
*1037 – Bermudo III, king of León (b. c. 1017)
*1063 – Tughril, Seljuq sultan (b. 990)
*1199 – Joan of England, queen of Sicily (b. 1165)
*1308 – Margaret of Burgundy, queen of Sicily (b. 1250)
*1323 – Gegeen Khan, Chinese emperor (b. 1302)
*1332 – García de Ayerbe, Spanish bishop and crusade theorist
*1342 – Anna Anachoutlou, empress of Trebizond
*1416 – John I, Count of Nassau-Siegen, German count
*1417 – Robert Hallam, English Catholic bishop
*1537 – Johann Dietenberger, German theologian and translator (b. 1475)
*1571 – Matthew Stewart, 4th Earl of Lennox, English nobleman (b. 1516)
*1588 – Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester, English academic and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Norfolk (b. 1532)

===1601–1900===
*1625 – Thomas Smythe, English diplomat (b. 1558)
*1676 – John Ogilby, Scottish-born impresario and cartographer (b. 1600)
*1767 – Charles Townshend, English politician, Chancellor of the Exchequer (b. 1725)
*1780 – John Fielding, English lawyer and judge (b. 1721)
*1784 – César-François Cassini de Thury, French astronomer and cartographer (b. 1714)
*1794 – John Hely-Hutchinson, Anglo-Irish lawyer and politician (b. 1724)
*1804 – Richard Somers, American lieutenant (b. 1778)
*1820 – Timothy Brown, English banker and merchant (b. 1743/4)
*1821 – José Miguel Carrera, Chilean general and politician (b. 1785)
*1849 – Friedrich Laun, German author (b. 1770)
*1852 – William MacGillivray, Scottish biologist and ornithologist (b. 1796)
*1864 – John Hunt Morgan, American general (b. 1825)
===1901–present===
*1907 – Edvard Grieg, Norwegian pianist and composer (b. 1843)
*1909 – Clyde Fitch, American playwright and songwriter (b. 1865)
*1911 – John Francon Williams, Welsh-born writer, journalist, geographer, historian, cartographer and inventor (b. 1854)
*1914 – Charles Péguy, French poet and philosopher (b. 1873)
*1923 – Howdy Wilcox, American racing driver (b. 1889) 
*1940 – George William de Carteret, French-English journalist and author (b. 1869)
*1944 – Erich Fellgiebel, German general (b. 1886)
*1963 – Robert Schuman, Luxembourgian-French politician, 130th Prime Minister of France (b. 1886)
*1965 – Albert Schweitzer, French-Gabonese physician, theologian, and missionary, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1875)
*1974 – Creighton Abrams, American general (b. 1914)
* 1974 – Marcel Achard, French playwright and screenwriter (b. 1899)
* 1974 – Charles Arnison, English airman (b. 1893)
* 1974 – Lewi Pethrus, Swedish minister and hymn-writer (b. 1884)
*1977 – Stelios Perpiniadis, Greek singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1899)
* 1977 – Jean Rostand, French biologist and philosopher (b. 1894)
* 1977 – E. F. Schumacher, German-English economist and statistician (b. 1911)
*1982 – Jack Tworkov, Polish-American painter (b. 1900)
*1985 – Vasyl Stus, Ukrainian poet, publicist, and dissident (b. 1938)
* 1985 – George O&#x27;Brien, American actor and singer (b. 1899)
*1986 – Otto Glória, Brazilian footballer and manager (b. 1917)
* 1986 – Hank Greenberg, American baseball player and manager (b. 1911)
*1987 – Bill Bowes, English cricketer and coach (b. 1908)
*1989 – Georges Simenon, Belgian-Swiss author (b. 1903)
* 1989 – Ronald Syme, New Zealand historian and author (b. 1903)
*1990 – Lawrence A. Cremin, American historian and author (b. 1925)
* 1990 – Irene Dunne, American actress and singer (b. 1898)
* 1990 – Turan Dursun, Turkish scholar and author (b. 1934)
*1991 – Charlie Barnet, American saxophonist, composer, and bandleader (b. 1913)
* 1991 – Tom Tryon, American actor and author (b. 1926)
* 1991 – Dottie West, American singer-songwriter and actress (b. 1932)
*1993 – Hervé Villechaize, French-American actor (b. 1943)
*1995 – Chuck Greenberg, American saxophonist, composer, and producer (b. 1950)
* 1995 – William Kunstler, American lawyer and activist (b. 1919)
*1996 – Joan Clarke, English cryptanalyst and numismatist (b. 1917)
* 1996 – Rose Ouellette, Canadian actress and manager (b. 1903)
*1997 – Dharamvir Bharati, Indian author, poet, and playwright (b. 1926)
* 1997 – Aldo Rossi, Italian architect, designed the Bonnefanten Museum and Teatro Carlo Felice (b. 1931)
*1998 – Ernst Jaakson, Estonian diplomat (b. 1905)
* 1998 – Elizabeth Kata, Australian author and screenwriter (b. 1912)
*1999 – Georg Gawliczek, German footballer and manager (b. 1919)
*2002 – Vlado Perlemuter, Lithuanian-French pianist and educator (b. 1904)
*2003 – Lola Bobesco, Romanian-Belgian violinist and educator (b. 1921)
* 2003 – Tibor Varga, Hungarian violinist and conductor (b. 1921)
*2004 – Alphonso Ford, American basketball player (b. 1971)
* 2004 – Moe Norman, Canadian golfer (b. 1929)
*2006 – Giacinto Facchetti, Italian footballer and manager (b. 1942)
* 2006 – Steve Irwin, Australian zoologist and television host (b. 1962)
* 2006 – Colin Thiele, Australian author, poet, and educator (b. 1920)
* 2006 – Astrid Varnay, Swedish-American soprano (b. 1918)
*2007 – John Scott, 9th Duke of Buccleuch, Scottish soldier and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Roxburghshire (b. 1923)
*2011 – Lee Roy Selmon, American football player (b. 1954)
*2012 – Abraham Avigdorov, Israeli soldier (b. 1929)
* 2012 – Albert Marre, American actor, director, and producer (b. 1924)
* 2012 – George Savitsky, American football player (b. 1924)
* 2012 – Syed Mustafa Siraj, Indian author (b. 1930)
* 2012 – Hakam Sufi, Indian singer-songwriter (b. 1952)
*2013 – Michel Pagé, Canadian businessman and politician (b. 1949)
* 2013 – Dick Raaymakers, Dutch composer and theorist (b. 1930)
* 2013 – Daniele Seccarecci, Italian bodybuilder (b. 1980)
* 2013 – Stanislav Stepashkin, Russian boxer (b. 1940)
* 2013 – Casey Viator, American bodybuilder and journalist (b. 1951)
*2014 – Ron Mulock, Australian lawyer and politician, 10th Deputy Premier of New South Wales (b. 1930)
* 2014 – Gustavo Cerati, Argentine Musician (b.1959)
* 2014 – Wolfhart Pannenberg, Polish-German theologian and academic (b. 1928)
* 2014 – Joan Rivers, American comedian, television host, and author (b. 1933)
*2015 – Graham Brazier, New Zealand singer-songwriter (b. 1952)
* 2015 – Jean Darling, American actress (b. 1922)
* 2015 – Wilfred de Souza, Indian surgeon and politician, 7th Chief Minister of Goa (b. 1927)
* 2015 – Warren Murphy, American author and screenwriter (b. 1933)
*2016 – Clarence D. Rappleyea Jr., lawyer and politician (b. 1933)
*2018 – Bill Daily, American actor, comedian (b. 1927)
*2020 – Lloyd Cadena, Filipino YouTuber and vlogger (b. 1993)
*2021 – Tunch Ilkin, Turkish-American football player (b. 1957)
* 2021 – Willard Scott, American weather presenter and television personality (b. 1934)
*2022 – Cyrus Mistry, Indian-Irish businessman (b. 1968)
* 2022 – Peter Straub, American novelist (b. 1943)
* 2023 – Steve Harwell, American singer (b. 1967)
* 2024 – Bora Đorđević, Serbian singer (b. 1952)
==Holidays and observances==
*Christian feast day:
**Candida the Elder
**Blessed Catherine of Racconigi
**Blessed Dina Bélanger
**Hermione of Ephesus
**Ida of Herzfeld
**Irmgardis (of Süchteln)
**Moses and Aaron (Lutheran Church and Eastern Orthodox Church)
**Paul Jones (Episcopal Church)
**Rosalia
**Rose of Viterbo
**Rufinus, Silvanus, and Vitalicus
**Thamel and companions
**Ultan of Ardbraccan
**September 4 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*Immigrant&#x27;s Day (Argentina)
*Newspaper Carrier Day (United States)
*Toothfish Day (South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands) 

==References==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23478" start="28" end="31" title="476" label="476"/>
<link wikidata="Q130601" start="34" end="52" title="Romulus Augustulus" label="Romulus Augustulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="69" end="76" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="101" end="114" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="127" end="158" title="Fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="ending the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q31052" start="162" end="165" title="626" label="626"/>
<link wikidata="Q696100" start="179" end="191" title="Posthumous name" label="posthumously"/>
<link wikidata="Q9701" start="201" end="224" title="Emperor Taizong of Tang" label="Emperor Taizong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="254" end="266" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q23821" start="279" end="282" title="929" label="929"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787252" start="285" end="301" title="Battle of Lenzen" label="Battle of Lenzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="303" end="309" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q697224" start="322" end="329" title="Veleti" label="Redarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q156108" start="338" end="347" title="Obotrites" label="Obotrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q164092" start="367" end="372" title="Duchy of Saxony" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q625768" start="411" end="417" title="Lenzen (Elbe)" label="Lenzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="421" end="432" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508" start="435" end="439" title="1260" label="1260"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="446" end="453" title="Siena" label="Sienese"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="454" end="465" title="Ghibellines" label="Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q164889" start="494" end="517" title="Manfred, King of Sicily" label="Manfred, King of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="530" end="540" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="541" end="548" title="Guelphs" label="Guelphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q587095" start="552" end="562" title="battle of Montaperti" label="Montaperti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541" start="565" end="569" title="1282" label="1282"/>
<link wikidata="Q312311" start="572" end="591" title="Peter III of Aragon" label="Peter III of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620" start="621" end="625" title="1479" label="1479"/>
<link wikidata="Q593355" start="632" end="651" title="Treaty of Alcáçovas" label="Treaty of Alcáçovas"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="669" end="686" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="690" end="697" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="702" end="708" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q299119" start="725" end="733" title="Afonso V of Portugal" label="Afonso V"/>
<link wikidata="Q217637" start="747" end="758" title="John II of Portugal" label="Prince John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756" start="789" end="793" title="1607" label="1607"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430504" start="800" end="819" title="Flight of the Earls" label="Flight of the Earls"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="835" end="842" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585" start="845" end="849" title="1666" label="1666"/>
<link wikidata="Q164679" start="909" end="919" title="Great Fire of London" label="Great Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697" start="929" end="933" title="1774" label="1774"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="936" end="949" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="1017" end="1027" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719" start="1030" end="1034" title="1781" label="1781"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410547" start="1063" end="1114" title="Pueblo de Los Ángeles" label="El Pueblo de Nuestra Señora La Reina de los Ángeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682303" start="1169" end="1188" title="Los Pobladores" label="44 Spanish settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820" start="1191" end="1195" title="1797" label="1797"/>
<link wikidata="Q248033" start="1198" end="1218" title="Coup of 18 Fructidor" label="Coup of 18 Fructidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875" start="1231" end="1235" title="1800" label="1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q23800" start="1261" end="1269" title="Valletta" label="Valletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286876" start="1344" end="1351" title="Maltese people" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q193896" start="1368" end="1373" title="Malta (island)" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q170488" start="1378" end="1382" title="Gozo" label="Gozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744683" start="1394" end="1412" title="Malta Protectorate" label="Malta Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933" start="1415" end="1419" title="1812" label="1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="1422" end="1433" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510011" start="1439" end="1461" title="Siege of Fort Harrison" label="Siege of Fort Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008" start="1500" end="1504" title="1827" label="1827"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989671" start="1511" end="1530" title="Great Fire of Turku" label="Great Fire of Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="1558" end="1565" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="1573" end="1592" title="Turku" label="former capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616" start="1595" end="1599" title="1839" label="1839"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871489" start="1602" end="1619" title="Battle of Kowloon" label="Battle of Kowloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q205011" start="1662" end="1667" title="Junk (ship)" label="junks"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="1768" end="1783" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698" start="1786" end="1790" title="1862" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1793" end="1811" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342042" start="1812" end="1829" title="Maryland Campaign" label="Maryland Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="1839" end="1852" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741" start="1920" end="1924" title="1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="1935" end="1947" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="1977" end="1991" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="2006" end="2010" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373852" start="2017" end="2037" title="Pearl Street Station" label="Pearl Street Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822" start="2129" end="2133" title="1886" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="2136" end="2156" title="American Indian Wars" label="American Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="2193" end="2199" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="2207" end="2215" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q549005" start="2268" end="2280" title="Nelson Miles" label="Nelson Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="2284" end="2291" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="2294" end="2298" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q189147" start="2301" end="2315" title="George Eastman" label="George Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="2346" end="2351" title="Kodak" label="Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="2388" end="2394" title="camera" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="2436" end="2440" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="2443" end="2450" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280245" start="2470" end="2482" title="Albanian Revolt of 1912" label="their revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="2540" end="2544" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="2547" end="2568" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2598" end="2604" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573094" start="2628" end="2633" title="Sivas Congress" label="Sivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="2672" end="2680" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="2685" end="2691" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="2694" end="2698" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="2733" end="2740" title="airship" label="airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="2749" end="2753" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="2756" end="2773" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q312040" start="2775" end="2790" title="Largo Caballero" label="Largo Caballero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788796" start="2799" end="2810" title="war cabinet" label="war cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456351" start="2825" end="2835" title="Republican faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="2849" end="2853" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2856" end="2868" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069587" start="2870" end="2887" title="William J. Murphy (RAF officer)" label="William J. Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="2943" end="2947" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="3057" end="3061" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280081" start="3090" end="3112" title="11th Armoured Division (United Kingdom)" label="11th Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="3143" end="3150" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="3198" end="3219" title="Continuation War" label="war with Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="3223" end="3227" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q150747" start="3236" end="3265" title="Wilhelmina of the Netherlands" label="Wilhelmina of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="3297" end="3301" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q273233" start="3304" end="3316" title="Paul Robeson" label="Paul Robeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q876191" start="3346" end="3365" title="Peekskill, New York" label="Peekskill, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160186" start="3387" end="3402" title="Peekskill riots" label="Peekskill riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="3405" end="3409" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166378" start="3412" end="3430" title="Darlington Raceway" label="Darlington Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505841" start="3460" end="3472" title="Southern 500 (1950–2004)" label="Southern 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="3493" end="3499" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="3507" end="3511" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3582" end="3595" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q392541" start="3621" end="3653" title="Japanese Peace Treaty Conference" label="Japanese Peace Treaty Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="3656" end="3660" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="3663" end="3693" title="American Civil Rights Movement" label="American Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190828" start="3695" end="3713" title="Little Rock Crisis" label="Little Rock Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140040" start="3824" end="3855" title="Little Rock Central High School" label="Little Rock Central High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167841" start="3888" end="3903" title="Cooper v. Aaron" label="Cooper v. Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="3931" end="3935" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q173973" start="3938" end="3957" title="Swissair Flight 306" label="Swissair Flight 306"/>
<link wikidata="Q64979" start="3971" end="3981" title="Dürrenäsch" label="Dürrenäsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="4029" end="4033" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q933000" start="4052" end="4069" title="Forth Road Bridge" label="Forth Road Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="4075" end="4084" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="4104" end="4108" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4111" end="4122" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097605" start="4124" end="4139" title="Operation Swift" label="Operation Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="4152" end="4163" title="United States Marines" label="U.S. Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="4176" end="4189" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924264" start="4210" end="4224" title="Khe Sanh" label="Que Son Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="4227" end="4231" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="4234" end="4250" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="4275" end="4280" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="4283" end="4287" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708491" start="4290" end="4317" title="Alaska Airlines Flight 1866" label="Alaska Airlines Flight 1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="4331" end="4345" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="4381" end="4385" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q180748" start="4388" end="4398" title="Mark Spitz" label="Mark Spitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="4460" end="4473" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231565" start="4490" end="4508" title="The Price Is Right (U.S. game show)" label="The Price Is Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="4604" end="4608" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384685" start="4615" end="4638" title="Sinai Interim Agreement" label="Sinai Interim Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="4655" end="4676" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="4689" end="4693" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579337" start="4700" end="4722" title="Golden Dragon massacre" label="Golden Dragon massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="4738" end="4751" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="4754" end="4758" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075376" start="4778" end="4798" title="Buckminsterfullerene" label="Buckminsterfullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q178026" start="4810" end="4819" title="fullerene" label="fullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="4841" end="4845" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="4851" end="4858" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="4860" end="4872" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q263047" start="4887" end="4907" title="Monday demonstrations in East Germany" label="weekly demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="4954" end="4964" title="democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="4987" end="4991" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="4994" end="5000" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934" start="5015" end="5025" title="Larry Page" label="Larry Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q92764" start="5030" end="5041" title="Sergey Brin" label="Sergey Brin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="5063" end="5082" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="5086" end="5090" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202341" start="5093" end="5108" title="Tokyo DisneySea" label="Tokyo DisneySea"/>
<link wikidata="Q605492" start="5144" end="5163" title="Tokyo Disney Resort" label="Tokyo Disney Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q319729" start="5167" end="5181" title="Urayasu, Chiba" label="Urayasu, Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="5191" end="5195" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="5202" end="5219" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="5256" end="5271" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="5290" end="5307" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="5331" end="5335" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="5381" end="5389" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743757" start="5420" end="5446" title="2007 bomb plot in Germany" label="allegedly planning attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="5523" end="5527" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="5530" end="5547" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="5623" end="5636" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="5657" end="5661" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q113711090" start="5710" end="5724" title="2022 Saskatchewan stabbings" label="stabbing spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143359" start="5748" end="5771" title="James Smith Cree Nation" label="James Smith Cree Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205294" start="5779" end="5799" title="Weldon, Saskatchewan" label="Weldon, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="5802" end="5806" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q130236251" start="5869" end="5884" title="2024 Apalachee High School shooting" label="a mass shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16160534" start="5888" end="5909" title="Apalachee High School" label="Apalachee High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443384" start="5915" end="5930" title="Winder, Georgia" label="Winder, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23754" start="5961" end="5964" title="973" label="973"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="5967" end="5976" title="Al-Biruni" label="Al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436" start="6020" end="6024" title="1241" label="1241"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="6027" end="6040" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341" start="6070" end="6074" title="1383" label="1383"/>
<link wikidata="Q312636" start="6077" end="6084" title="Antipope Felix V" label="Felix V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476" start="6114" end="6118" title="1454" label="1454"/>
<link wikidata="Q714480" start="6121" end="6159" title="Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham" label="Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q955642" start="6181" end="6211" title="Lord High Constable of England" label="Lord High Constable of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595" start="6223" end="6227" title="1557" label="1557"/>
<link wikidata="Q57654" start="6230" end="6259" title="Sophie of Mecklenburg-Güstrow" label="Sophie of Mecklenburg-Güstrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629" start="6308" end="6312" title="1563" label="1563"/>
<link wikidata="Q10061" start="6315" end="6320" title="Wanli Emperor" label="Wanli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712" start="6349" end="6353" title="1580" label="1580"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358099" start="6356" end="6368" title="George Percy (governor)" label="George Percy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785" start="6398" end="6402" title="1596" label="1596"/>
<link wikidata="Q560746" start="6405" end="6424" title="Constantijn Huygens" label="Constantijn Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645" start="6477" end="6481" title="1681" label="1681"/>
<link wikidata="Q695765" start="6484" end="6503" title="Carl Heinrich Biber" label="Carl Heinrich Biber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895" start="6548" end="6552" title="1717" label="1717"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206680" start="6555" end="6564" title="Job Orton" label="Job Orton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586" start="6605" end="6609" title="1745" label="1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q547033" start="6612" end="6625" title="Shneur Zalman" label="Shneur Zalman"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="6664" end="6670" title="Chabad" label="Chabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627" start="6682" end="6686" title="1755" label="1755"/>
<link wikidata="Q455071" start="6689" end="6716" title="Axel von Fersen the Younger" label="Axel von Fersen the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675" start="6760" end="6764" title="1768" label="1768"/>
<link wikidata="Q49767" start="6767" end="6797" title="François-René de Chateaubriand" label="François-René de Chateaubriand"/>
<link wikidata="Q789848" start="6832" end="6870" title="Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs (France)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs for France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703" start="6882" end="6886" title="1776" label="1776"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610844" start="6889" end="6904" title="Stephen Whitney" label="Stephen Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823" start="6938" end="6942" title="1798" label="1798"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6945" end="6961" title="Raynold Kaufgetz" label="Raynold Kaufgetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887" start="7015" end="7019" title="1803" label="1803"/>
<link wikidata="Q234285" start="7022" end="7042" title="Sarah Childress Polk" label="Sarah Childress Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919" start="7087" end="7091" title="1809" label="1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328" start="7094" end="7106" title="Manuel Montt" label="Manuel Montt"/>
<link wikidata="Q466956" start="7144" end="7162" title="President of Chile" label="President of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q243267" start="7182" end="7198" title="Juliusz Słowacki" label="Juliusz Słowacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994" start="7238" end="7242" title="1824" label="1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q81752" start="7245" end="7259" title="Anton Bruckner" label="Anton Bruckner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6997" start="7303" end="7307" title="1825" label="1825"/>
<link wikidata="Q10240" start="7310" end="7326" title="Dadabhai Naoroji" label="Dadabhai Naoroji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850500" start="7360" end="7401" title="President of the Indian National Congress" label="President of the Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004" start="7413" end="7417" title="1826" label="1826"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090428" start="7420" end="7433" title="Martin Wiberg" label="Martin Wiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7584" start="7479" end="7483" title="1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q599501" start="7486" end="7502" title="Antonio Agliardi" label="Antonio Agliardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640" start="7532" end="7536" title="1846" label="1846"/>
<link wikidata="Q316639" start="7539" end="7553" title="Daniel Burnham" label="Daniel Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="7588" end="7621" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="7633" end="7637" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q298041" start="7640" end="7654" title="Kārlis Ulmanis" label="Kārlis Ulmanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647" start="7704" end="7708" title="1848" label="1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q732229" start="7711" end="7731" title="Lewis Howard Latimer" label="Lewis Howard Latimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807871" start="7770" end="7780" title="Jennie Lee (American actress)" label="Jennie Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653" start="7810" end="7814" title="1850" label="1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q333809" start="7817" end="7830" title="Luigi Cadorna" label="Luigi Cadorna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656" start="7865" end="7869" title="1851" label="1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504529" start="7872" end="7883" title="John Dillon" label="John Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698" start="7922" end="7926" title="1862" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254741" start="7929" end="7942" title="Franjo Krežma" label="Franjo Krežma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="7987" end="7991" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q551527" start="7994" end="8007" title="Antonio Bacci" label="Antonio Bacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822" start="8037" end="8041" title="1886" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577616" start="8044" end="8058" title="Albert Orsborn" label="Albert Orsborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q847768" start="8072" end="8101" title="General of The Salvation Army" label="General of The Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826" start="8113" end="8117" title="1887" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485848" start="8120" end="8137" title="Roy William Neill" label="Roy William Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="8201" end="8205" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q458816" start="8208" end="8223" title="Oskar Schlemmer" label="Oskar Schlemmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832" start="8289" end="8293" title="1890" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619126" start="8296" end="8314" title="Gunnar Sommerfeldt" label="Gunnar Sommerfeldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="8368" end="8372" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q57149" start="8375" end="8385" title="Fritz Todt" label="Fritz Todt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="8429" end="8433" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q186264" start="8436" end="8450" title="Darius Milhaud" label="Darius Milhaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="8492" end="8496" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q187166" start="8499" end="8513" title="Antonin Artaud" label="Antonin Artaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035" start="8584" end="8588" title="1901" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347549" start="8591" end="8604" title="William Lyons" label="William Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="8638" end="8649" title="Jaguar Cars" label="Jaguar Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="8661" end="8665" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792500" start="8668" end="8682" title="Tommy Mitchell" label="Tommy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="8713" end="8717" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q235354" start="8720" end="8732" title="Mary Renault" label="Mary Renault"/>
<link wikidata="Q123906" start="8782" end="8793" title="Walter Zapp" label="Walter Zapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q688121" start="8835" end="8840" title="Minox" label="Minox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="8852" end="8856" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q11891310" start="8859" end="8880" title="Ruben Oskar Auervaara" label="Ruben Oskar Auervaara"/>
<link wikidata="Q76807" start="8919" end="8931" title="Max Delbrück" label="Max Delbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="8976" end="8987" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="9008" end="9012" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q113713" start="9015" end="9028" title="Reggie Nalder" label="Reggie Nalder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="9065" end="9069" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q72229" start="9072" end="9086" title="Edward Dmytryk" label="Edward Dmytryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q319820" start="9147" end="9161" title="Richard Wright (author)" label="Richard Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="9232" end="9236" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q77330" start="9239" end="9252" title="Eduard Wirths" label="Eduard Wirths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="9282" end="9286" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257557" start="9289" end="9304" title="Denis Tomlinson" label="Denis Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="9352" end="9356" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659694" start="9359" end="9367" title="Syd Hoff" label="Syd Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q593715" start="9420" end="9438" title="Alexander Liberman" label="Alexander Liberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="9515" end="9519" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371363" start="9522" end="9534" title="Mickey Cohen" label="Mickey Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251027" start="9573" end="9587" title="Victor Kiernan" label="Victor Kiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q110952" start="9639" end="9653" title="Stanford Moore" label="Stanford Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="9689" end="9700" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q151794" start="9729" end="9740" title="Kenzō Tange" label="Kenzō Tange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778134" start="9780" end="9793" title="Shmuel Wosner" label="Shmuel Wosner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="9840" end="9844" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q76245" start="9847" end="9861" title="Rudolf Leiding" label="Rudolf Leiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="9893" end="9897" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q516858" start="9900" end="9913" title="Henry Ford II" label="Henry Ford II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="9947" end="9951" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q772302" start="9954" end="9965" title="Paul Harvey" label="Paul Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q201500" start="10006" end="10019" title="Gerald Wilson" label="Gerald Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="10069" end="10073" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q274947" start="10076" end="10090" title="Émile Bouchard" label="Émile Bouchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q322266" start="10138" end="10151" title="Howard Morris" label="Howard Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="10207" end="10211" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q173281" start="10214" end="10226" title="Clemar Bucci" label="Clemar Bucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138516" start="10273" end="10288" title="Craig Claiborne" label="Craig Claiborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824180" start="10349" end="10366" title="Konstantin Kalser" label="Konstantin Kalser"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="10435" end="10439" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q728197" start="10442" end="10458" title="Per Olof Sundman" label="Per Olof Sundman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="10501" end="10505" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288499" start="10508" end="10526" title="Ram Kishore Shukla" label="Ram Kishore Shukla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="10568" end="10572" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q263648" start="10575" end="10585" title="Joan Aiken" label="Joan Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710469" start="10621" end="10642" title="Justinas Lagunavičius" label="Justinas Lagunavičius"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="10684" end="10688" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192885" start="10691" end="10706" title="Asa Earl Carter" label="Asa Earl Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="10717" end="10729" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="10759" end="10763" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q32707" start="10766" end="10785" title="George William Gray" label="George William Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q84186" start="10822" end="10833" title="Ivan Illich" label="Ivan Illich"/>
<link wikidata="Q365718" start="10886" end="10899" title="Bert Olmstead" label="Bert Olmstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="10949" end="10953" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q92739" start="10956" end="10969" title="John McCarthy (computer scientist)" label="John McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q720395" start="11031" end="11043" title="Ferenc Sánta" label="Ferenc Sánta"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="11090" end="11094" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q708140" start="11097" end="11106" title="Dick York" label="Dick York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="11134" end="11138" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176929" start="11141" end="11156" title="Thomas Eagleton" label="Thomas Eagleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853532" start="11195" end="11226" title="Lieutenant Governor of Missouri" label="Lieutenant Governor of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350545" start="11246" end="11262" title="Robert V. Keeley" label="Robert V. Keeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889305" start="11304" end="11338" title="United States Ambassador to Greece" label="United States Ambassador to Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="11350" end="11354" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341594" start="11357" end="11371" title="Robert Arneson" label="Robert Arneson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015261" start="11423" end="11437" title="William Maxson" label="William Maxson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="11467" end="11471" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q255794" start="11474" end="11486" title="Mitzi Gaynor" label="Mitzi Gaynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777110" start="11544" end="11564" title="Antonios Trakatellis" label="Antonios Trakatellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="11599" end="11603" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183412" start="11606" end="11627" title="Carlos Romero Barceló" label="Carlos Romero Barceló"/>
<link wikidata="Q456951" start="11669" end="11692" title="Governor of Puerto Rico" label="Governor of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="11704" end="11708" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931484" start="11711" end="11723" title="Vince Dooley" label="Vince Dooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="11771" end="11775" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q312575" start="11778" end="11791" title="Clive Granger" label="Clive Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="11832" end="11843" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q923320" start="11872" end="11885" title="Antoine Redin" label="Antoine Redin"/>
<link wikidata="Q360190" start="11936" end="11947" title="Eduard Khil" label="Eduard Khil"/>
<link wikidata="Q316165" start="11992" end="12006" title="Jan Švankmajer" label="Jan Švankmajer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="12037" end="12041" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712152" start="12044" end="12060" title="Charles A. Hines" label="Charles A. Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158014" start="12111" end="12125" title="Dallas Willard" label="Dallas Willard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="12172" end="12176" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q229040" start="12179" end="12190" title="Dawn Fraser" label="Dawn Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q584074" start="12235" end="12246" title="Gene Ludwig" label="Gene Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933737" start="12298" end="12315" title="Virgil A. Richard" label="Virgil A. Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3830807" start="12353" end="12362" title="Les Allen" label="Les Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="12396" end="12400" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257358" start="12403" end="12416" title="Denis Lindsay (cricketer)" label="Denis Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="12465" end="12469" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891586" start="12472" end="12495" title="Marilena de Souza Chaui" label="Marilena de Souza Chaui"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814472" start="12541" end="12554" title="Ken Harrelson" label="Ken Harrelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289440" start="12607" end="12619" title="Ramesh Sethi" label="Ramesh Sethi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504490" start="12657" end="12675" title="Sushilkumar Shinde" label="Sushilkumar Shinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282296" start="12712" end="12738" title="List of governors of Andhra Pradesh" label="Governor of Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="12740" end="12744" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388888" start="12747" end="12760" title="Raymond Floyd" label="Raymond Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q938809" start="12787" end="12800" title="Jerry Jarrett" label="Jerry Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188130" start="12852" end="12883" title="Merald &amp;quot;Bubba&amp;quot; Knight" label="Merald &amp;quot;Bubba&amp;quot; Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="12902" end="12906" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q564905" start="12909" end="12922" title="Tony Atkinson" label="Tony Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173108" start="12975" end="12987" title="Dave Bassett" label="Dave Bassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501423" start="13029" end="13041" title="Gene Parsons" label="Gene Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q28001421" start="13117" end="13128" title="Jerry Relph" label="Jerry Relph"/>
<link wikidata="Q917311" start="13168" end="13184" title="Minnesota Senate" label="Minnesota Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178791" start="13204" end="13217" title="Jennifer Salt" label="Jennifer Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="13265" end="13269" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164608" start="13272" end="13284" title="Danny Gatton" label="Danny Gatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q352846" start="13324" end="13338" title="Bill Kenwright" label="Bill Kenwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="13387" end="13391" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098546" start="13394" end="13405" title="Gary Duncan" label="Gary Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175237" start="13445" end="13457" title="Dave Liebman" label="Dave Liebman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980245" start="13517" end="13533" title="Bryan Mauricette" label="Bryan Mauricette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="13568" end="13572" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932931" start="13575" end="13586" title="Bob Jenkins" label="Bob Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153406" start="13629" end="13638" title="Paul Sait" label="Paul Sait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="13682" end="13686" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225362" start="13689" end="13702" title="Darryl Cotton" label="Darryl Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246407" start="13766" end="13775" title="Dean Pees" label="Dean Pees"/>
<link wikidata="Q532111" start="13821" end="13831" title="Tom Watson (golfer)" label="Tom Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="13867" end="13871" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303738" start="13874" end="13889" title="Doyle Alexander" label="Doyle Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299372" start="13925" end="13936" title="Frank White (baseball)" label="Frank White"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="13979" end="13983" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775133" start="13986" end="14001" title="Martin Chambers" label="Martin Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q533613" start="14040" end="14051" title="Judith Ivey" label="Judith Ivey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115681" start="14079" end="14093" title="Marita Ulvskog" label="Marita Ulvskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189744" start="14115" end="14146" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Sweden" label="Deputy Prime Minister of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="14148" end="14152" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q15992934" start="14155" end="14169" title="Stephen Easley" label="Stephen Easley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="14218" end="14222" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q535664" start="14225" end="14236" title="Janet Biehl" label="Janet Biehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q344466" start="14279" end="14292" title="Michael Stean" label="Michael Stean"/>
<link wikidata="Q262203" start="14335" end="14346" title="Fatih Terim" label="Fatih Terim"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="14380" end="14384" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q731076" start="14387" end="14398" title="David Broza" label="David Broza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524362" start="14449" end="14462" title="Garth Le Roux" label="Garth Le Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q445823" start="14497" end="14513" title="Brian Schweitzer" label="Brian Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q878613" start="14541" end="14560" title="Governor of Montana" label="Governor of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="14562" end="14566" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q353366" start="14569" end="14584" title="Blackie Lawless" label="Blackie Lawless"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="14628" end="14632" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q242634" start="14635" end="14651" title="Khandi Alexander" label="Khandi Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="14698" end="14702" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192750" start="14705" end="14722" title="Jacqueline Hewitt" label="Jacqueline Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q924641" start="14772" end="14788" title="Marzio Innocenti" label="Marzio Innocenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039412" start="14830" end="14841" title="Drew Pinsky" label="Drew Pinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="14879" end="14883" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195711" start="14886" end="14902" title="Kevin Harrington (actor)" label="Kevin Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q526316" start="14931" end="14943" title="Armin Kogler" label="Armin Kogler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="14966" end="14970" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q464619" start="14973" end="14983" title="Kim Thayil" label="Kim Thayil"/>
<link wikidata="Q267234" start="15029" end="15042" title="Shailesh Vara" label="Shailesh Vara"/>
<link wikidata="Q382420" start="15091" end="15103" title="Damon Wayans" label="Damon Wayans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="15159" end="15163" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026787" start="15166" end="15177" title="Nick Blinko" label="Nick Blinko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994186" start="15229" end="15241" title="Lars Jönsson (film producer)" label="Lars Jönsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="15266" end="15270" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723699" start="15273" end="15283" title="Kiran More" label="Kiran More"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082669" start="15311" end="15322" title="Ulla Tørnæs" label="Ulla Tørnæs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340905" start="15343" end="15371" title="Education Minister of Denmark" label="Danish Minister of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q80917" start="15381" end="15396" title="Shinya Yamanaka" label="Shinya Yamanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="15432" end="15443" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="15454" end="15458" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517310" start="15461" end="15476" title="Bobby Jarzombek" label="Bobby Jarzombek"/>
<link wikidata="Q734620" start="15505" end="15523" title="John Vanbiesbrouck" label="John Vanbiesbrouck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530734" start="15581" end="15591" title="Sami Yaffa" label="Sami Yaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="15637" end="15641" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622108" start="15644" end="15653" title="Guy Boros" label="Guy Boros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376695" start="15681" end="15696" title="Tomas Sandström" label="Tomas Sandström"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661119" start="15741" end="15759" title="Aadesh Shrivastava" label="Aadesh Shrivastava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="15797" end="15801" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273152" start="15804" end="15818" title="Sergio Momesso" label="Sergio Momesso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="15865" end="15869" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q998702" start="15872" end="15887" title="Yanka Dyagileva" label="Yanka Dyagileva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394603" start="15934" end="15947" title="Jeff Tremaine" label="Jeff Tremaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="15996" end="16000" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225293" start="16003" end="16016" title="Darrin Murray" label="Darrin Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268610" start="16064" end="16075" title="Dezső Szabó (athlete)" label="Dezső Szabó"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="16099" end="16103" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q313266" start="16106" end="16119" title="John DiMaggio" label="John DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q613319" start="16152" end="16163" title="Mike Piazza" label="Mike Piazza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="16192" end="16196" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q556024" start="16199" end="16204" title="Sasha (DJ)" label="Sasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q379502" start="16238" end="16251" title="Ramon Dekkers" label="Ramon Dekkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107337" start="16314" end="16335" title="Giorgi Margvelashvili" label="Giorgi Margvelashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q843405" start="16375" end="16395" title="President of Georgia" label="President of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365036" start="16405" end="16424" title="Richard Speight Jr." label="Richard Speight Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q563177" start="16463" end="16474" title="Noah Taylor" label="Noah Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553044" start="16502" end="16516" title="Inga Tuigamala" label="Inga Tuigamala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="16551" end="16555" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q201459" start="16558" end="16571" title="Igor Cavalera" label="Igor Cavalera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022464" start="16601" end="16611" title="Deni Hines" label="Deni Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804715" start="16651" end="16661" title="Ivan Iusco" label="Ivan Iusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371284" start="16689" end="16699" title="Sven Meyer (footballer)" label="Sven Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q271590" start="16728" end="16737" title="Ione Skye" label="Ione Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="16765" end="16769" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138521" start="16772" end="16784" title="Craig Conroy" label="Craig Conroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313088" start="16836" end="16850" title="Lance Klusener" label="Lance Klusener"/>
<link wikidata="Q76538" start="16895" end="16906" title="Maik Taylor" label="Maik Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="16943" end="16947" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613134" start="16950" end="16963" title="Steve Leonard" label="Steve Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="17021" end="17025" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550078" start="17028" end="17045" title="Jason David Frank" label="Jason David Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="17098" end="17102" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820046" start="17105" end="17116" title="Aaron Fultz" label="Aaron Fultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782807" start="17162" end="17174" title="Lazlow Jones" label="Lazlow Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="17230" end="17234" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908791" start="17237" end="17246" title="Mati Pari" label="Mati Pari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215068" start="17287" end="17302" title="Lincoln Roberts" label="Lincoln Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="17326" end="17330" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q643286" start="17333" end="17351" title="Sergio Ballesteros" label="Sergio Ballesteros"/>
<link wikidata="Q425821" start="17381" end="17392" title="Mark Ronson" label="Mark Ronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732512" start="17443" end="17457" title="Allido Records" label="Allido Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443967" start="17467" end="17479" title="Dave Salmoni" label="Dave Salmoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="17532" end="17536" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q488508" start="17539" end="17566" title="Denilson Martins Nascimento" label="Denilson Martins Nascimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764501" start="17598" end="17621" title="Mario-Ernesto Rodríguez" label="Mario-Ernesto Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="17653" end="17657" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q626590" start="17660" end="17671" title="Sun-woo Kim" label="Sun-woo Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q241989" start="17711" end="17723" title="Lucie Silvas" label="Lucie Silvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q237363" start="17772" end="17783" title="Kia Stevens" label="Kia Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="17804" end="17808" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q368037" start="17811" end="17822" title="Wes Bentley" label="Wes Bentley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518321" start="17861" end="17875" title="Terence Newman" label="Terence Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q493789" start="17911" end="17929" title="Frederik Veuchelen" label="Frederik Veuchelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q943037" start="17956" end="17970" title="Christian Walz" label="Christian Walz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="18012" end="18016" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q706971" start="18019" end="18035" title="Maxim Afinogenov" label="Maxim Afinogenov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159498" start="18072" end="18092" title="Pedro Macedo Camacho" label="Pedro Macedo Camacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q891796" start="18146" end="18160" title="Max Greenfield" label="Max Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052235" start="18186" end="18201" title="Kosuke Matsuura" label="Kosuke Matsuura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="18229" end="18233" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368571" start="18236" end="18246" title="Pat Neshek" label="Pat Neshek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="18274" end="18278" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="18281" end="18288" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q440584" start="18357" end="18371" title="Richard Garcia" label="Richard Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q257764" start="18404" end="18415" title="Lacey Sturm" label="Lacey Sturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="18446" end="18450" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298525" start="18453" end="18469" title="Whitney Cummings" label="Whitney Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q375939" start="18535" end="18553" title="Mark Lewis-Francis" label="Mark Lewis-Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="18573" end="18577" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186415" start="18580" end="18595" title="Yuichi Nakamaru" label="Yuichi Nakamaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629576" start="18657" end="18666" title="Guy Pnini" label="Guy Pnini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742508" start="18703" end="18716" title="Margit Rüütel" label="Margit Rüütel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623021" start="18750" end="18763" title="Armands Šķēle" label="Armands Šķēle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="18792" end="18796" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q662441" start="18799" end="18812" title="Jonathan Adam" label="Jonathan Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645384" start="18848" end="18863" title="Hamish McIntosh" label="Hamish McIntosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16223299" start="18896" end="18907" title="Kyle Mooney" label="Kyle Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="18953" end="18957" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599" start="18960" end="18971" title="Raúl Albiol" label="Raúl Albiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q14135" start="19001" end="19014" title="Ri Kwang-chon" label="Ri Kwang-chon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114155" start="19049" end="19062" title="Walid Mesloub" label="Walid Mesloub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="19085" end="19089" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q292331" start="19092" end="19105" title="Ayumi Kaihori" label="Ayumi Kaihori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026559" start="19136" end="19148" title="Xavier Woods" label="Xavier Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="19169" end="19173" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808529" start="19176" end="19188" title="Wesley Blake" label="Wesley Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325584" start="19216" end="19228" title="Marisa Kabas" label="Marisa Kabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="19251" end="19255" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182656" start="19258" end="19269" title="Adam Duvall" label="Adam Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261504" start="19305" end="19323" title="John Tyler Hammons" label="John Tyler Hammons"/>
<link wikidata="Q533068" start="19354" end="19364" title="JJ Hickson" label="JJ Hickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="19394" end="19398" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846523" start="19401" end="19418" title="Andrelton Simmons" label="Andrelton Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365744" start="19455" end="19472" title="Elliott Whitehead" label="Elliott Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="19503" end="19507" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q17811637" start="19510" end="19519" title="James Bay (singer)" label="James Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183603" start="19570" end="19581" title="Jonny Lomax" label="Jonny Lomax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5799009" start="19613" end="19626" title="Danny Worsnop" label="Danny Worsnop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="19655" end="19659" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q24807917" start="19662" end="19673" title="Adrien Bart" label="Adrien Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19518371" start="19707" end="19726" title="Anders Zachariassen" label="Anders Zachariassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="19752" end="19756" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157401" start="19759" end="19768" title="Kevin Lee (fighter)" label="Kevin Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q122292" start="19809" end="19825" title="Hanna Schwamborn" label="Hanna Schwamborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q107354778" start="19851" end="19857" title="Zerkaa" label="Zerkaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="19877" end="19881" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q62019182" start="19884" end="19897" title="Emma Brownlie" label="Emma Brownlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284482" start="19928" end="19944" title="Yannick Carrasco" label="Yannick Carrasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235358" start="19974" end="19985" title="Jody Fannin" label="Jody Fannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072631" start="20020" end="20036" title="Chantal Škamlová" label="Chantal Škamlová"/>
<link wikidata="Q16075083" start="20068" end="20077" title="Mark Tuan" label="Mark Tuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="20096" end="20100" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q17541413" start="20103" end="20115" title="Kenny McEvoy" label="Kenny McEvoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980087" start="20143" end="20155" title="Thomas Minns" label="Thomas Minns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520541" start="20187" end="20203" title="Sabina Sharipova" label="Sabina Sharipova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="20231" end="20235" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771450" start="20238" end="20249" title="Jazz Tevaga" label="Jazz Tevaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="20284" end="20288" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873577" start="20291" end="20305" title="Ashton Golding" label="Ashton Golding"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621846" start="20344" end="20357" title="Jordan Lilley" label="Jordan Lilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="20388" end="20392" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q42578712" start="20395" end="20408" title="Neru Nagahama" label="Neru Nagahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="20443" end="20447" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q30346413" start="20450" end="20462" title="Sergio Gómez (footballer, born 2000)" label="Sergio Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="20484" end="20488" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q20973748" start="20491" end="20506" title="Talitha Bateman" label="Talitha Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q30906" start="20553" end="20556" title="422" label="422"/>
<link wikidata="Q160907" start="20559" end="20569" title="Pope Boniface I" label="Boniface I"/>
<link wikidata="Q33488" start="20601" end="20604" title="799" label="799"/>
<link wikidata="Q315031" start="20607" end="20621" title="Musa al-Kadhim" label="Musa al-Kadhim"/>
<link wikidata="Q19335" start="20645" end="20649" title="1037" label="1037"/>
<link wikidata="Q345392" start="20652" end="20663" title="Bermudo III of León" label="Bermudo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q175276" start="20673" end="20677" title="Kingdom of León" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q19400" start="20692" end="20696" title="1063" label="1063"/>
<link wikidata="Q144565" start="20699" end="20706" title="Tughril" label="Tughril"/>
<link wikidata="Q19752" start="20732" end="20736" title="1199" label="1199"/>
<link wikidata="Q235418" start="20739" end="20754" title="Joan of England, Queen of Sicily" label="Joan of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723" start="20783" end="20787" title="1308" label="1308"/>
<link wikidata="Q258027" start="20790" end="20810" title="Margaret of Burgundy, Queen of Sicily" label="Margaret of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5771" start="20839" end="20843" title="1323" label="1323"/>
<link wikidata="Q8549" start="20846" end="20857" title="Gegeen Khan" label="Gegeen Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001" start="20886" end="20890" title="1332" label="1332"/>
<link wikidata="Q39600792" start="20893" end="20909" title="García de Ayerbe" label="García de Ayerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069" start="20948" end="20952" title="1342" label="1342"/>
<link wikidata="Q439701" start="20955" end="20971" title="Anna of Trebizond" label="Anna Anachoutlou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189" start="20995" end="20999" title="1416" label="1416"/>
<link wikidata="Q317028" start="21002" end="21032" title="John I, Count of Nassau-Siegen" label="John I, Count of Nassau-Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193" start="21048" end="21052" title="1417" label="1417"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271226" start="21055" end="21068" title="Robert Hallam" label="Robert Hallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461" start="21095" end="21099" title="1537" label="1537"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693238" start="21102" end="21121" title="Johann Dietenberger" label="Johann Dietenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666" start="21167" end="21171" title="1571" label="1571"/>
<link wikidata="Q727905" start="21174" end="21209" title="Matthew Stewart, 4th Earl of Lennox" label="Matthew Stewart, 4th Earl of Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757" start="21239" end="21243" title="1588" label="1588"/>
<link wikidata="Q318017" start="21246" end="21282" title="Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester" label="Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679626" start="21317" end="21343" title="Lord Lieutenant of Norfolk" label="Lord Lieutenant of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826" start="21372" end="21376" title="1625" label="1625"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794061" start="21379" end="21392" title="Thomas Smythe" label="Thomas Smythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628" start="21422" end="21426" title="1676" label="1676"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389271" start="21429" end="21440" title="John Ogilby" label="John Ogilby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672" start="21495" end="21499" title="1767" label="1767"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600750" start="21502" end="21519" title="Charles Townshend" label="Charles Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="21541" end="21568" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716" start="21580" end="21584" title="1780" label="1780"/>
<link wikidata="Q707932" start="21587" end="21600" title="John Fielding" label="John Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752" start="21638" end="21642" title="1784" label="1784"/>
<link wikidata="Q561280" start="21645" end="21676" title="César-François Cassini de Thury" label="César-François Cassini de Thury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811" start="21724" end="21728" title="1794" label="1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238597" start="21731" end="21751" title="John Hely-Hutchinson (statesman)" label="John Hely-Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894" start="21798" end="21802" title="1804" label="1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300739" start="21805" end="21819" title="Richard Somers" label="Richard Somers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973" start="21852" end="21856" title="1820" label="1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807080" start="21859" end="21872" title="Timothy Brown (radical)" label="Timothy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976" start="21915" end="21919" title="1821" label="1821"/>
<link wikidata="Q734977" start="21922" end="21941" title="José Miguel Carrera" label="José Miguel Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650" start="21985" end="21989" title="1849" label="1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503748" start="21992" end="22006" title="Friedrich Laun" label="Friedrich Laun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="22033" end="22037" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388461" start="22040" end="22060" title="William MacGillivray" label="William MacGillivray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704" start="22110" end="22114" title="1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424149" start="22117" end="22133" title="John Hunt Morgan" label="John Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="22182" end="22186" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q80621" start="22189" end="22201" title="Edvard Grieg" label="Edvard Grieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="22245" end="22249" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980425" start="22252" end="22263" title="Clyde Fitch" label="Clyde Fitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="22311" end="22315" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160552" start="22318" end="22339" title="John Francon Williams" label="John Francon Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q36180" start="22352" end="22358" title="writer" label="writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930187" start="22360" end="22370" title="journalist" label="journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q901402" start="22372" end="22382" title="geographer" label="geographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="22384" end="22393" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="22395" end="22407" title="cartographer" label="cartographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="22412" end="22420" title="inventor" label="inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670" start="22425" end="22429" title="1854" label="1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="22432" end="22436" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q334965" start="22439" end="22452" title="Charles Péguy" label="Charles Péguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="22493" end="22497" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q908084" start="22500" end="22512" title="Howdy Wilcox" label="Howdy Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="22549" end="22553" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102018" start="22556" end="22582" title="George William de Carteret" label="George William de Carteret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="22632" end="22636" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q60878" start="22639" end="22655" title="Erich Fellgiebel" label="Erich Fellgiebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="22683" end="22687" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981" start="22690" end="22704" title="Robert Schuman" label="Robert Schuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="22745" end="22769" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Prime Minister of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="22781" end="22785" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q49325" start="22788" end="22805" title="Albert Schweitzer" label="Albert Schweitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="22862" end="22873" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="22894" end="22898" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q280290" start="22901" end="22917" title="Creighton Abrams" label="Creighton Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q314990" start="22955" end="22968" title="Marcel Achard" label="Marcel Achard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075195" start="23024" end="23039" title="Charles Arnison" label="Charles Arnison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822069" start="23075" end="23087" title="Lewi Pethrus" label="Lewi Pethrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="23133" end="23137" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501485" start="23140" end="23159" title="Stelios Perpiniadis" label="Stelios Perpiniadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q287953" start="23218" end="23230" title="Jean Rostand" label="Jean Rostand"/>
<link wikidata="Q76526" start="23284" end="23300" title="E. F. Schumacher" label="E. F. Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="23355" end="23359" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q320821" start="23362" end="23374" title="Jack Tworkov" label="Jack Tworkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="23411" end="23415" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q426509" start="23418" end="23428" title="Vasyl Stus" label="Vasyl Stus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009495" start="23490" end="23509" title="George O&amp;#x27;Brien (actor)" label="George O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="23548" end="23552" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410553" start="23555" end="23566" title="Otto Glória" label="Otto Glória"/>
<link wikidata="Q687282" start="23620" end="23634" title="Hank Greenberg" label="Hank Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="23684" end="23688" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528384" start="23691" end="23701" title="Bill Bowes" label="Bill Bowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="23742" end="23746" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q128790" start="23749" end="23764" title="Georges Simenon" label="Georges Simenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q707856" start="23806" end="23817" title="Ronald Syme" label="Ronald Syme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="23863" end="23867" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828123" start="23870" end="23888" title="Lawrence A. Cremin" label="Lawrence A. Cremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q230099" start="23939" end="23950" title="Irene Dunne" label="Irene Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q693103" start="23999" end="24011" title="Turan Dursun" label="Turan Dursun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="24051" end="24055" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066820" start="24058" end="24072" title="Charlie Barnet" label="Charlie Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448930" start="24140" end="24149" title="Tom Tryon" label="Tom Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q243124" start="24196" end="24207" title="Dottie West" label="Dottie West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="24259" end="24263" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q954841" start="24266" end="24283" title="Hervé Villechaize" label="Hervé Villechaize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="24318" end="24322" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089133" start="24325" end="24340" title="Chuck Greenberg (musician)" label="Chuck Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q957941" start="24406" end="24422" title="William Kunstler" label="William Kunstler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="24464" end="24468" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990084" start="24471" end="24482" title="Joan Clarke" label="Joan Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="24492" end="24504" title="cryptanalyst" label="cryptanalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004963" start="24509" end="24520" title="numismatist" label="numismatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442398" start="24540" end="24554" title="Rose Ouellette" label="Rose Ouellette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="24596" end="24600" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q283267" start="24603" end="24620" title="Dharamvir Bharati" label="Dharamvir Bharati"/>
<link wikidata="Q322953" start="24677" end="24687" title="Aldo Rossi" label="Aldo Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q892727" start="24721" end="24739" title="Bonnefanten Museum" label="Bonnefanten Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299021" start="24744" end="24763" title="Teatro Carlo Felice" label="Teatro Carlo Felice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="24775" end="24779" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358852" start="24782" end="24795" title="Ernst Jaakson" label="Ernst Jaakson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363054" start="24834" end="24848" title="Elizabeth Kata" label="Elizabeth Kata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="24896" end="24900" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504421" start="24903" end="24918" title="Georg Gawliczek" label="Georg Gawliczek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="24961" end="24965" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q725456" start="24968" end="24984" title="Vlado Perlemuter" label="Vlado Perlemuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="25036" end="25040" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370033" start="25043" end="25055" title="Lola Bobesco" label="Lola Bobesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q567359" start="25116" end="25127" title="Tibor Varga (violinist)" label="Tibor Varga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="25174" end="25178" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266392" start="25181" end="25194" title="Alphonso Ford" label="Alphonso Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071767" start="25242" end="25252" title="Moe Norman" label="Moe Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="25281" end="25285" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q219390" start="25288" end="25306" title="Giacinto Facchetti" label="Giacinto Facchetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q126513" start="25358" end="25369" title="Steve Irwin" label="Steve Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108703" start="25431" end="25443" title="Colin Thiele" label="Colin Thiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q254518" start="25502" end="25515" title="Astrid Varnay" label="Astrid Varnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="25553" end="25557" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q333214" start="25560" end="25593" title="John Scott, 9th Duke of Buccleuch" label="John Scott, 9th Duke of Buccleuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679656" start="25628" end="25660" title="Lord Lieutenant of Roxburghshire" label="Lord Lieutenant of Roxburghshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="25672" end="25676" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228929" start="25679" end="25693" title="Lee Roy Selmon" label="Lee Roy Selmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="25731" end="25735" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909254" start="25738" end="25755" title="Abraham Avigdorov" label="Abraham Avigdorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710795" start="25792" end="25804" title="Albert Marre" label="Albert Marre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544312" start="25864" end="25879" title="George Savitsky" label="George Savitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348013" start="25925" end="25943" title="Syed Mustafa Siraj" label="Syed Mustafa Siraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640306" start="25978" end="25988" title="Hakam Sufi" label="Hakam Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="26026" end="26030" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836516" start="26033" end="26044" title="Michel Pagé" label="Michel Pagé"/>
<link wikidata="Q359329" start="26101" end="26116" title="Dick Raaymakers" label="Dick Raaymakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q14828752" start="26165" end="26183" title="Daniele Seccarecci" label="Daniele Seccarecci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368338" start="26224" end="26244" title="Stanislav Stepashkin" label="Stanislav Stepashkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048602" start="26279" end="26291" title="Casey Viator" label="Casey Viator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="26340" end="26344" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364194" start="26347" end="26357" title="Ron Mulock" label="Ron Mulock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261054" start="26398" end="26431" title="Deputy Premier of New South Wales" label="Deputy Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q533284" start="26451" end="26465" title="Gustavo Cerati" label="Gustavo Cerati"/>
<link wikidata="Q61374" start="26504" end="26523" title="Wolfhart Pannenberg" label="Wolfhart Pannenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q240933" start="26582" end="26593" title="Joan Rivers" label="Joan Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="26653" end="26657" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592685" start="26660" end="26674" title="Graham Brazier" label="Graham Brazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646516" start="26725" end="26737" title="Jean Darling" label="Jean Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932365" start="26775" end="26791" title="Wilfred de Souza" label="Wilfred de Souza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837928" start="26828" end="26849" title="Chief Minister of Goa" label="Chief Minister of Goa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669437" start="26869" end="26882" title="Warren Murphy" label="Warren Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="26928" end="26932" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665743" start="26935" end="26960" title="Clarence D. Rappleyea Jr." label="Clarence D. Rappleyea Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="26995" end="26999" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q862055" start="27002" end="27012" title="Bill Daily" label="Bill Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="27050" end="27054" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q97670845" start="27057" end="27069" title="Lloyd Cadena" label="Lloyd Cadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="27112" end="27116" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852870" start="27119" end="27130" title="Tunch Ilkin" label="Tunch Ilkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313464" start="27184" end="27197" title="Willard Scott" label="Willard Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="27264" end="27268" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038037" start="27271" end="27283" title="Cyrus Mistry" label="Cyrus Mistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q364189" start="27329" end="27341" title="Peter Straub" label="Peter Straub"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="27373" end="27377" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q13774475" start="27380" end="27393" title="Steve Harwell" label="Steve Harwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="27423" end="27427" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q834689" start="27430" end="27443" title="Bora Đorđević" label="Bora Đorđević"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="27510" end="27519" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q432813" start="27523" end="27540" title="Candida the Elder" label="Candida the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q466543" start="27551" end="27573" title="Catherine of Racconigi" label="Catherine of Racconigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028232" start="27584" end="27597" title="Dina Bélanger" label="Dina Bélanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q468098" start="27600" end="27619" title="Hermione of Ephesus" label="Hermione of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q517489" start="27622" end="27637" title="Ida of Herzfeld" label="Ida of Herzfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q444949" start="27640" end="27663" title="Saint Irmgardis" label="Irmgardis (of Süchteln)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="27666" end="27671" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q51676" start="27676" end="27681" title="Aaron" label="Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="27683" end="27698" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="27703" end="27726" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151627" start="27730" end="27740" title="Paul Jones (bishop)" label="Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="27742" end="27758" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q254402" start="27762" end="27769" title="Saint Rosalia" label="Rosalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q268141" start="27772" end="27787" title="Rose of Viterbo" label="Rose of Viterbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402440" start="27790" end="27822" title="Saints Rufinus" label="Rufinus, Silvanus, and Vitalicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709842" start="27825" end="27846" title="Thamel (martyr)" label="Thamel and companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003116" start="27849" end="27868" title="Ultan of Ardbraccan" label="Ultan of Ardbraccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452209" start="27871" end="27911" title="September 4 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="September 4 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27913" end="27933" title="Immigration to Argentina#Legacy of immigration" label="Immigrant&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="27935" end="27944" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086720" start="27947" end="27968" title="Newspaper Carrier Day" label="Newspaper Carrier Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q108540687" start="27986" end="27999" title="Toothfish Day" label="Toothfish Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27766" wikidata="Q1892856" url="?curid=27766" title="Sam &amp; Max">
<text>Sam &amp; Max is an American media franchise about Sam and Max, a pair of anthropomorphic vigilante private investigators. The characters, who occupy a universe that parodies American popular culture, were created by Steve Purcell in his youth, and later debuted in a 1987 comic book series. The characters have since been the subject of a graphic adventure video game developed by LucasArts, a television series produced for Fox in cooperation with Nelvana Limited, and a series of episodic adventure games developed by Telltale Games. In addition, a variety of machinima and a webcomic have been produced for the series.

The characters are based in a dilapidated office block in New York City. Sam is a six-foot-tall dog who wears a suit and a fedora, while Max is a short and aggressive &quot;hyperkinetic rabbity thing&quot;. Both enjoy solving problems and cases as maniacally as possible, often with complete disregard for the law. Driving a seemingly indestructible black-and-white 1960 DeSoto Adventurer, the pair travel to many contemporary and historical locations to fight crime, including the Moon, Ancient Egypt, the White House and the Philippines, as well as several fictitious locations.

The series has been very successful despite its relatively limited amount of media, and has gathered a significant fan base. However, the franchise did not gain more widespread recognition until after the 1993 release of LucasArts&#x27; &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot;, which cultivated interest in Purcell&#x27;s original comics. &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot; is regarded as an exceptional adventure game and an iconic classic of computer gaming in the 1990s. Subsequent video games and the television series have also fared well with both critics and fans; critics consider the episodic video games to be the first successful application of the episodic distribution model.

==Overview==
===Creation===
The idea of &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; originated with Steve Purcell&#x27;s younger brother, Dave, who invented the concept of a comic about a detective team consisting of a dog and a rabbit in his youth. Dave often left the comics around the house, so Steve, in a case of sibling rivalry, often finished the incomplete stories in parodies of their original form, deliberately making the characters mix up each other&#x27;s names, over-explain things, shoot at each other and mock the way in which they had been drawn, as &quot;kind of a parody of the way a kid talks when he&#x27;s writing comics&quot;. Over time, this developed from Steve merely mocking his brother&#x27;s work to him creating his own full stories with the characters. Ultimately, in the late 1970s, Dave Purcell gave Steve the rights to the characters, signing them over in a contract on Steve&#x27;s birthday and allowing him to develop the characters in his own way. In 1980, Purcell began to produce &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; comic strips for the weekly newsletter of the California College of Arts and Crafts. While the visual appearance of the characters had not yet been fully developed, the stories were similar in style to those that followed when Purcell was offered by &quot;Fish Police&quot; author Steven Moncuse the chance to publish his work properly in 1987.
Many aspects of the &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; comics were influenced by Purcell&#x27;s own experiences. Rats and cockroaches are common throughout the franchise, the former inspired by Purcell&#x27;s pet rat. In another example, Sam and Max are occasionally shown playing a game called &quot;fizzball&quot;, in which the object of the exercise is to hit a can of beer in mid-air with a solid axe handle. Purcell had previously invented the game with his friends, including fellow comic book writers Art Adams and Mike Mignola.

===Characters===

====Sam====
Sam is a laid-back but enthusiastic, brown-coated anthropomorphic Irish Wolfhound, described as a &quot;canine shamus&quot;. He wears either a gray or blue suit with a matching fedora, to make people more cooperative when conversing with a six-foot talking dog. A warped sense of justice makes Sam the more passionate of the pair for their police work, only held back from taking his job seriously by Max. Nevertheless, he enjoys the mannerisms and dress that come with their line of work. Sam possesses near encyclopedic amounts of knowledge, particularly on obscure topics, and is prone to long-winded sentences filled with elaborate terminology. Although he is always keen to display this information—regardless of its accuracy—Sam can be capable of total ignorance towards more practical matters; for instance, despite his regard for his DeSoto Adventurer, he is severely negligent with the car&#x27;s maintenance. Sam still retains various doglike qualities: he is excitable and enthusiastic, but also susceptible to emotions of embarrassment and guilt. Nevertheless, Sam is &quot;not above sticking his head out the car window and letting his tongue flap in the breeze&quot;. Sam rarely loses his temper, and is able to react to panic-inducing situations with extreme calm. When he does get angry, Sam tends to react in a violent, uncharacteristically savage manner, in which case Max usually calms him down and prevents him from acting upon his anger. Sam usually is armed with an oversized .44 revolver. 

Sam is voiced by Bill Farmer in &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot;, Harvey Atkin in the animated series and David Nowlin from Telltale&#x27;s games onward.

====Max====
Max is an anthropomorphic &quot;hyperkinetic, three-foot rabbity thing&quot; with white fur, but prefers being called a lagomorph. Max retains few characteristics consistent with a rabbit, with permanently rigid ears set in an excited posture and a huge jaw normally stuck in a crazed grin. Unhinged, uninhibited and near psychotic, Max enjoys violence and tends to prefer the aggressive way of solving problems, seeing the world as little more than a vessel for his &quot;pinball-like stream of consciousness&quot;. This creates a seeming disregard for self-preservation; Max will revel in dangerous situations with little impression that he understands the risks he faces. As a result, Max is usually enthusiastic to engage in any activity, including being used by Sam as a cable cutter or an impromptu bludgeon. Despite this, Max possesses a sharp mind and an observational nature, and enjoys interpreting new experiences in as unpredictable a manner as possible. However, Max has a distaste for long stories and occasionally loses focus during lengthy scenes of plot exposition; by his own admission, Max possesses a particularly short attention span. On top of this short attention span, it has been shown numerous times that Max has an extremely poor memory to go along with it. Despite his seemingly heartless personality, he believes strongly in protecting Sam, but Max can still act violently towards his friend, stating that when he dies he will take Sam with him. Moreover, Max is extremely possessive of Sam and their status as partners and best friends. Max traditionally carries a Luger pistol, but as he wears no clothes, other characters often make comments as to where Max keeps it on his person. Purcell considers Max to be representative of pure id, the uncoordinated instinctual trends of the human psyche. 

Max&#x27;s voice is provided by Nick Jameson in &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot; and by Robert Tinkler in the animated series. Andrew Chaikin originally voiced Max in the first episode of Telltale&#x27;s games before being replaced by William Kasten, while Dave Boat voices the character from &quot;Poker Night 2&quot; onward.

==Media==
===Comic books===

Sam and Max debuted in the 1987 comic book series &quot;Sam &amp; Max: Freelance Police&quot;, published by Fishwrap Productions, also the publisher of &quot;Fish Police&quot;. The first comic, &quot;Monkeys Violating the Heavenly Temple&quot;, was Steve Purcell&#x27;s first full story. The comic came about after Purcell agreed to create a full &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; story for publication alongside Steve Moncuse&#x27;s &quot;Fish Police&quot; series. &quot;Monkeys Violating the Heavenly Temple&quot; established many of the key features in the series; the main story of the comic saw the Freelance Police journey to the Philippines to stop a volcano god cult. &quot;Night of the Gilded Heron-Shark&quot; and &quot;Night of the Cringing Wildebeest&quot; accompanied the main story, focusing on a stand-off with a group of gangsters in Sam and Max&#x27;s office and an investigation into a carnival refreshment booth respectively.

Over the subsequent years, several other comics were published, often by different publishers, including and Epic Comics. &quot;Fair Wind to Java&quot; was originally published in 1988 as a Munden&#x27;s Bar story in the pages of First Comics&#x27; &quot;Grimjack&quot;, featuring the Freelance Police fighting pyramid-building aliens in Ancient Egypt, and was followed in 1989 by &quot;On the Road&quot;, a three chapter story showing what Sam and Max do on vacation. In 1990, Christmas-themed story &quot;The Damned Don&#x27;t Dance&quot; was released. 1992 saw the release of two further comics: &quot;Bad Day On The Moon&quot; took the Freelance Police to deal with a roach infestation bothering giant rats on the Moon, and was later adapted as a story for the animated TV series, whilst &quot;Beast From The Cereal Aisle&quot; focused on the duo conducting an exorcism at the local supermarket. Two more comics were produced in 1997, &quot;The Kids Take Over&quot; and &quot;Belly Of The Beast&quot;. The former has Sam and Max wake up from cryogenic sleep to discover that the entire world is now ruled by children while the latter sees the Freelance Police confronting a vampire abducting children at Halloween.

Purcell joined LucasArts in 1988 as an artist and game designer, where he was approached about contributing to LucasArts&#x27; new quarterly newsletter, &quot;The Adventurer&quot;, a publication designed to inform customers about upcoming LucasArts games and company news. From its debut issue in 1990 to 1996, Purcell created twelve comic strips for the newsletter. The strips portrayed a variety of stories, from similar plots as in the comic books to parodies of LucasArts games such as &quot;Monkey Island&quot; and &quot;Full Throttle&quot; and the Lucasfilm franchises &quot;Star Wars&quot; and &quot;Indiana Jones&quot;.

In 1995, all of the comics and &quot;The Adventurer&quot; strips published to that date were released in a compilation, &quot;Sam &amp; Max: Surfin&#x27; the Highway&quot;. Published by Marlowe &amp; Company, the 154 page book was updated and republished in 1996. This original version of &quot;Surfin&#x27; the Highway&quot; went out of print in 1997, becoming a high priced collectors item sold through services such as eBay. In 2007, a 197-page twenty-year anniversary edition, containing all printed comics and strips as well as a variety of other artwork, was co-designed by Steve Purcell and Jake Rodkin and published by Telltale Games. This second publication received an Eisner Award nomination for &quot;Best Graphic Album – Reprint&quot; in 2009.

In December 2005, Purcell started a &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; webcomic, hosted on the website of Telltale Games. Entitled &quot;The Big Sleep&quot;, the webcomic began with Sam and Max bursting out of their graves at Kilpeck Church in England, symbolizing the Freelance Police&#x27;s return after nearly a decade. In the twelve page story, Max has to save Sam after earwigs start a colony in Sam&#x27;s brain. The webcomic concluded in April 2007, and was later awarded the Eisner Award for &quot;Best Digital Comic&quot; of 2007.

===Video games===

Following LucasArts&#x27; employment of Purcell in 1988, the characters of Sam and Max appeared in internal testing material for new SCUMM engine programmers; Purcell created animated versions of the characters and an office backdrop for the programmers to practice on. In 1992, LucasArts offered Purcell the chance to create a video game out of the characters, out of a wish to use new characters after the success of its two other main adventure titles, &quot;Monkey Island&quot; and &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot;, and after a positive reaction from fans to the &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; comic strips featured in LucasArts&#x27; &quot;The Adventurer&quot; newsletter. Consequently, development on a graphic adventure game, &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot;, began shortly after. Based on the SCUMM engine and designed by Sean Clark, Michael Stemmle, Steve Purcell and his future wife Collette Michaud, the game was partially based on the 1989 comic &quot;On The Road&quot;, and featured the Freelance Police travelling across America in search of an escaped bigfoot. Sam was voiced in the game by comedian Bill Farmer, while actor Nick Jameson voiced Max. &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot; was originally released for DOS in November 1993. Soon after &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot;, another &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; game using SCUMM entered planning under Purcell and Dave Grossman, but was abandoned. In a later interview Grossman described this sequel&#x27;s highlight as &quot;a giant spaceship shaped like Max&#x27;s head&quot;.


In September 2001, development began on a new project, &quot;Sam &amp; Max Plunge Through Space&quot;. The game was to be an Xbox exclusive title, developed by Infinite Machine, a small company consisting of a number of former LucasArts employees. The story of the game was developed by Purcell and fellow designer Chuck Jordan and involved the Freelance Police travelling the galaxy to find a stolen Statue of Liberty. Infinite Machine went bankrupt within a year, partially due to the failure of their first game, &quot;New Legends&quot;, and the project was abandoned.

At the 2002 Electronic Entertainment Expo convention, nearly a decade after the release of &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot;, LucasArts announced the production of a PC sequel, entitled &quot;Sam &amp; Max: Freelance Police&quot;. &quot;Freelance Police&quot;, like &quot;Hit the Road&quot;, was to be a point-and-click graphic adventure game, using a new 3D game engine. Development of &quot;Freelance Police&quot; was led by Michael Stemmle. Steve Purcell contributed to the project by writing the story and producing concept art. Farmer and Jameson were also set to reprise their voice acting roles. In March 2004, however, quite far into the game&#x27;s development, &quot;Sam &amp; Max: Freelance Police&quot; was abruptly cancelled by LucasArts, citing &quot;current market place realities and underlying economic considerations&quot; in a short press release. The fan reaction to the cancellation was strong; a petition of 32,000 signatures stating the disappointment of fans was later presented to LucasArts.

After LucasArts&#x27; license with Steve Purcell expired in 2005, the &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; franchise moved to Telltale Games, a company of former LucasArts employees who had worked on a number of LucasArts adventure games, including on the development of &quot;Freelance Police&quot;. Under Telltale Games, a new episodic series of &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; video games was made. Like both &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot; and &quot;Freelance Police&quot;, &quot;Sam &amp; Max Save the World&quot; was in a point-and-click graphic adventure game format. The game used a new 3D game engine, different from the one used in &quot;Freelance Police&quot;. The first season ran for six episodes, each with a self-contained storyline but with an overall story arc involving hypnotism running through the series. The first episode was released on GameTap in October 2006, with episodes following regularly until April 2007. Sam is voiced by David Nowlin, while Max is voiced by William Kasten in all episodes except the first one, where Andrew Chaikin voices the character. In addition, Telltale Games produced fifteen machinima shorts to accompany the main episodes. These shorts were released in groups of three in between the release of each episode, showing the activities of the Freelance Police in between each story.

A second season of episodic video games was developed by Telltale Games. &quot;Sam &amp; Max Beyond Time and Space&quot; followed the same overall format as &quot;Save the World&quot;, with each episode having an overarching storyline involving time travel and laundering of the souls of the dead. As with &quot;Save the World&quot;, episodes were originally published on GameTap before being made available for general release. The season consisted of five episodes and ran from November 2007 to April 2008. Nowlin and Kasten both returned to reprise their voice roles. In addition to the main games, a twenty-minute machinima video was produced, taking the form of a &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; Christmas special.

A third game entitled &quot;Sam &amp; Max: The Devil&#x27;s Playhouse&quot; was scheduled for release in 2009; the title was later pushed back to 2010, with concept art emerging after Telltale&#x27;s completion of &quot;Tales of Monkey Island&quot;. The season again ran for five episodes, released monthly from April to August 2010. &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Playhouse&quot; followed a structure similar to &quot;Tales of Monkey Island&quot;, with each episode forming a part of an ongoing narrative, involving psychic powers and forces that used them for world domination. A two-minute Flash cartoon also accompanied the game, dealing with the origin story of General Skun-ka&#x27;pe, one of the game&#x27;s antagonists. Max also appears in Telltale&#x27;s 2010 casual game &quot;Poker Night at the Inventory&quot; alongside Tycho Brahe from &quot;Penny Arcade&quot;, the Heavy from &quot;Team Fortress 2&quot; and Strong Bad from &quot;Homestar Runner&quot;. Sam and Max (now voiced by Dave Boat) also appear in the game&#x27;s sequel alongside Claptrap from &quot;Borderlands&quot;, Brock Samson from &quot;The Venture Bros.&quot;, Ash Williams from &quot;Evil Dead&quot; and GLaDOS from &quot;Portal&quot;.

A &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; virtual reality game, &quot;Sam &amp; Max: This Time It&#x27;s Virtual&quot;, was developed by HappyGiant. Purcell served as a consultant for game design, Stemmle returned as designer and writer, Jared Emerson-Johnson returned as composer, and Nowlin and Boat returned to voice Sam and Max, respectively. The game was released in July 2021 for Oculus Quest, with releases for SteamVR and Viveport Infinity to follow in late 2021, and for PlayStation VR in 2022. Remasters of all three Telltale seasons were released between 2020 and 2024. The remasters were developed by Skunkape Games, a studio made up of former members of the original development team and named in reference to the General Skun-ka&#x27;pe character from &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Playhouse&quot;.

===Television series===

&quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; was adapted into a cartoon series for Fox in 1997. Produced by Canadian studio Nelvana, the series ran for 24 episodes. Each episode was approximately ten minutes, and were often aired in pairs, with the exception of the first and last episodes, which were 20 minutes long. Broadcast on Fox Kids in the United States, YTV in Canada, and Channel 4 in the United Kingdom, the first episode was aired on October 4, 1997; the series concluded on April 25, 1998. As opposed to the more adult humor in the rest of the series, &quot;The Adventures of Sam &amp; Max: Freelance Police&quot; was aimed more at children, even though some humor in it was often directed at adults. As such, the violence inherent in the franchise is toned down, including removing Sam and Max&#x27;s guns, and the characters do not use the moderate profanity that they use in their other appearances. As in most &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; stories, the series revolves around the Freelance Police accepting missions from their mysterious superior, the commissioner, and embarking on cases to a large variety of implausible locations. Sam is voiced by Harvey Atkin, while Max is voiced by Robert Tinkler. The series performed well and was considered a success, and in 1998 received the Gemini Award for &quot;Best Animated Program or Series&quot;. Despite the series&#x27; success, a second season was never commissioned. In 2007, Shout! Factory acquired the rights for DVD release of the series. In October, as part of their marketing for &quot;Sam &amp; Max Save the World&quot;, GameTap hosted the series on their website. The DVD release of the series was later published in March 2008.

===Music===
The &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; franchise features a variety of soundtracks that accompany its video game products. This music is mostly grounded in film noir jazz, incorporating various other styles at certain points, such as Dixieland, waltz and mariachi, usually to support the cartoon nature of the series. The first &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; game, &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot;, was one of the first games to feature a fully scored music soundtrack, written by LucasArts&#x27; composers Clint Bajakian, Michael Land and Peter McConnell. The music was incorporated into the game using Land and McConnell&#x27;s iMUSE engine, which allowed for audio to be synchronized with the visuals. Although the full soundtrack was never released, audio renders of four of the game&#x27;s MIDI tracks were included on the CD version of the game.

For &quot;Sam &amp; Max Save the World&quot;, &quot;Beyond Time and Space&quot;, and &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Playhouse&quot;, Telltale Games contracted composer Jared Emerson-Johnson, a musician whose previous work included composition and sound editing for LucasArts, to write the scores. The soundtracks for the first two games were released in two disc sets after the release of the games themselves; the &quot;Season One Soundtrack&quot; was published in July 2007, whilst the &quot;Season Two Soundtrack&quot; was released in September 2008. Emerson-Johnson&#x27;s scores use live performances as opposed to synthesized music often used elsewhere in the video game industry. Critics reacted positively to Emerson-Johnson&#x27;s scores, IGN described Emerson-Johnson&#x27;s work as a &quot;breath of fresh air&quot;, while 1UP.com praised his work as &quot;top-caliber&quot; and Music4Games stated that the &quot;whimsical nature of [the classical jazz approach] is well suited to the &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; universe, which approaches American popular culture with a level of irreverence&quot;. Purcell later commented that Emerson-Johnson had seamlessly blended a &quot;huge palette of genres and styles&quot;, whilst in September 2008, Brendan Q. Ferguson, one of the lead designers on &quot;Save the World&quot; and &quot;Beyond Time and Space&quot;, said that he believed that it was Emerson-Johnson&#x27;s scores that created the vital atmosphere in the games, noting that prior to the implementation of the soundtracks, playing the games was an &quot;unrelenting horror&quot;. Emerson-Johnson later returned to compose music for the &quot;Remastered&quot; releases, as well as &quot;This Time It&#x27;s Virtual&quot;.

==Cultural impact and reception==
The &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; franchise has been highly successful critically, and is considered an iconic and influential aspect of the video game industry in the 1990s and the adventure game genre. In 2007, Steve Purcell wrote that he was somewhat surprised at the success of his creation, noting that the series had gained a large fan gathering despite the small size of the franchise. As the series contains only a small number of comics, video games and a short TV series, Purcell commented that there was &quot;certainly not enough material to build that relentless traction of an endlessly renewed sitcom or a syndicated comic that has existed since the Korean Conflict&quot;. The comics were well received by critics, many praising the humor and style of the stories and characters. However, later commentators have noted that the comic book series did not gain much popularity or recognition until after the release of &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot; in 1993; the later episodic video games are seen to have revived interest in the comics again, resulting in the creation of the webcomic &quot;The Big Sleep&quot; and publication of an anniversary edition of &quot;Surfin&#x27; The Highway&quot;.

Upon its release in 1993, &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot; was met with near universal acclaim. Critics praised the title for its humor, voice acting, graphics, music and gameplay. It has since come to be regarded as a classic graphic adventure game, one of the most critically successful projects by LucasArts to date. &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot; is regularly featured in lists of top games, and was nominated for the 1994 Annie Award for &quot;Best Animated CD-ROM&quot;, although the award instead went to LucasArts&#x27; &quot;Star Wars: Rebel Assault&quot;. The abrupt cancellation of the sequel to &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot; in 2004 garnered substantial criticism of LucasArts. In addition to a petition of 32,000 signatures objecting to the termination of development on &quot;Sam &amp; Max: Freelance Police&quot;, both Steve Purcell and the media were critical of LucasArts&#x27; decision. Purcell stated that he failed to understand quite why the game was cancelled, as he believed the development of the game was proceeding without hindrance, while the media put forward the view that LucasArts was moving to consolidate its position with low business risk &quot;Star Wars&quot; video games instead of pursuing the adventure games that had brought them success in earlier years. The cancellation of &quot;Freelance Police&quot; is often cited as the culmination in a perceived decline in the overall adventure game genre, and LucasArts later dismissed many of the designers involved with developing their adventure games, effectively ending their adventure game era.

Although &quot;Sam &amp; Max Save the World&quot; did not receive the critical acclaim that &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot; acquired, it still received a favorable response from critics across its release in 2006 and 2007. Critics praised the game&#x27;s humor, graphics and gameplay, although concerns were voiced over the low difficulty of the puzzles and the effectiveness of the story. &quot;Save the World&quot; is considered by journalists in the video game industry to be the first successful application of episodic gaming, as Telltale Games had managed to release a steady stream content with only small time gaps. Previous attempts by Valve with the &quot;Half-Life&quot; series, Ritual Entertainment with &quot;SiN Episodes&quot; and Telltale Games themselves with &quot;&quot; were for a variety of reasons not considered successful implementations of the distribution model. &quot;Beyond Time and Space&quot; was considered similar to &quot;Save the World&quot; and reviewers equally praised and faulted the game on this, although overall &quot;Beyond Time and Space&quot; received a good reception from critics.

The success of the franchise has spawned a selection of merchandise, including posters and prints, items of clothing and sketchbooks of Purcell&#x27;s work during various stages of the series&#x27; development. Collectable statues of the characters have also been created. However, perhaps due to references in Purcell&#x27;s sketchbooks and demand from both fans and journalists alike, a plush toy of Max has been created and sold, albeit limited edition, as a collaboration between internet shop Hashtag Collectibles and Steve Purcell. A limited edition plush toy of Sam has also been created and sold in late 2023 on Uncute&#x27;s website, and Max being brought back along with him for a limited time once again. Boss Fight Studios produced a new line of action figures based on the Freelance Police for 2019, and the prototypes were first revealed at New York Toy Fair.

== References ==
==External links==

* Sam &amp; Max Funhouse
* Steve Purcell&#x27;s &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; blog
* Sam &amp; Max.co.uk
* &quot;Sam &amp; Max&quot; at Don Markstein&#x27;s Toonopedia. Archived from the original on February 10, 2017.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q196600" start="29" end="44" title="media franchise" label="media franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="74" end="89" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="100" end="120" title="private investigator" label="private investigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="175" end="199" title="Culture of the United States" label="American popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390504" start="217" end="230" title="Steve Purcell" label="Steve Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="273" end="283" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430706" start="340" end="368" title="Sam &amp;amp; Max Hit the Road" label="graphic adventure video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="382" end="391" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="" start="395" end="412" title="The Adventures of Sam &amp;amp; Max: Freelance Police" label="television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="426" end="429" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q428457" start="450" end="465" title="Nelvana Limited" label="Nelvana Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383567" start="483" end="491" title="Episodic video game" label="episodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383563" start="521" end="535" title="Telltale Games" label="Telltale Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="563" end="572" title="machinima" label="machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="579" end="587" title="webcomic" label="webcomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="682" end="695" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q737292" start="995" end="1012" title="DeSoto Adventurer" label="DeSoto Adventurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="1106" end="1110" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1112" end="1125" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="1131" end="1142" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1151" end="1162" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430706" start="1449" end="1475" title="Sam &amp;amp; Max Hit the Road" label="Sam &amp;amp; Max Hit the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438096" start="2199" end="2214" title="sibling rivalry" label="sibling rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026804" start="2972" end="3009" title="California College of the Arts" label="California College of Arts and Crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454560" start="3182" end="3193" title="Fish Police" label="Fish Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="3375" end="3378" title="Rat" label="Rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661828" start="3384" end="3393" title="cockroach" label="cockroach"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="3634" end="3638" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39397" start="3663" end="3673" title="Axe" label="axe handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q705364" start="3770" end="3779" title="Art Adams" label="Art Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q544975" start="3784" end="3796" title="Mike Mignola" label="Mike Mignola"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="3879" end="3894" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38668" start="3895" end="3910" title="Irish Wolfhound" label="Irish Wolfhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="3933" end="3939" title="dog" label="canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058617" start="3940" end="3946" title="Private investigator" label="shamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q737292" start="4671" end="4688" title="DeSoto Adventurer" label="DeSoto Adventurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q94598" start="5327" end="5330" title=".44 Magnum" label=".44"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="5331" end="5339" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364909" start="5360" end="5371" title="Bill Farmer" label="Bill Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237338" start="5415" end="5427" title="Harvey Atkin" label="Harvey Atkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="5573" end="5579" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25401" start="5636" end="5645" title="Lagomorpha" label="lagomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115119" start="6656" end="6670" title="attention span" label="attention span"/>
<link wikidata="Q154199" start="7111" end="7123" title="Luger P08 pistol" label="Luger pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q486893" start="7281" end="7283" title="Id, ego, and super-ego" label="id"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870023" start="7377" end="7389" title="Nick Jameson" label="Nick Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350412" start="7439" end="7453" title="Robert Tinkler" label="Robert Tinkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404427" start="7478" end="7492" title="Kid Beyond" label="Andrew Chaikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228378" start="7608" end="7617" title="Dave Boat" label="Dave Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583301" start="7650" end="7663" title="Poker Night 2" label="Poker Night 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454560" start="7866" end="7877" title="Fish Police" label="Fish Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="8336" end="8347" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="8370" end="8374" title="cult (religious practice)" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465548" start="8755" end="8766" title="Epic Comics" label="Epic Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q362844" start="8876" end="8888" title="First Comics" label="First Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609264" start="8901" end="8909" title="Grimjack" label="Grimjack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="8984" end="8997" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="9124" end="9133" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661828" start="9318" end="9323" title="Cockroach" label="roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="9352" end="9355" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="9364" end="9368" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="9854" end="9863" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="9881" end="9890" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="Q858057" start="9916" end="9929" title="game designer" label="game designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866573" start="10025" end="10039" title="The Adventurer (magazine)" label="The Adventurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q533239" start="10362" end="10375" title="Monkey Island (series)" label="Monkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q847471" start="10392" end="10405" title="Full Throttle (1995 video game)" label="Full Throttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q242446" start="10420" end="10429" title="Lucasfilm" label="Lucasfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="10447" end="10456" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562640" start="10473" end="10486" title="Indiana Jones" label="Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207215" start="10681" end="10702" title="Marlowe &amp;amp; Company" label="Marlowe &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="10917" end="10921" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124946" start="11093" end="11104" title="Jake Rodkin" label="Jake Rodkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383563" start="11122" end="11136" title="Telltale Games" label="Telltale Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q842614" start="11174" end="11186" title="Eisner Award" label="Eisner Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="11315" end="11323" title="webcomic" label="webcomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585627" start="11470" end="11484" title="Church of St Mary and St David, Kilpeck" label="Kilpeck Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="11488" end="11495" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q13676" start="11619" end="11625" title="earwig" label="earwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q20053723" start="11750" end="11768" title="Eisner Award for Best Digital Comic" label="Best Digital Comic"/>
<link wikidata="Q836102" start="11937" end="11942" title="SCUMM" label="SCUMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="11943" end="11949" title="game engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q533239" start="12266" end="12279" title="Monkey Island (series)" label="Monkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q240143" start="12296" end="12310" title="Maniac Mansion" label="Maniac Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="12502" end="12524" title="graphic adventure game" label="graphic adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430706" start="12532" end="12558" title="Sam &amp;amp; Max Hit the Road" label="Sam &amp;amp; Max Hit the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953562" start="12629" end="12639" title="Sean Clark" label="Sean Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856273" start="12641" end="12656" title="Michael Stemmle" label="Michael Stemmle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44810" start="12866" end="12873" title="bigfoot" label="bigfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364909" start="12914" end="12925" title="Bill Farmer" label="Bill Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870023" start="12939" end="12951" title="Nick Jameson" label="Nick Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="13031" end="13034" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q902541" start="13190" end="13203" title="Dave Grossman (game developer)" label="Dave Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="13482" end="13486" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115552" start="13672" end="13684" title="Chuck Jordan (game designer)" label="Chuck Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="13758" end="13775" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079037" start="13879" end="13890" title="New Legends" label="New Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q336168" start="13942" end="13971" title="E3 (Electronic Entertainment Expo)" label="Electronic Entertainment Expo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14127" end="14158" title="Sam &amp;amp; Max: Freelance Police" label="Sam &amp;amp; Max: Freelance Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="14291" end="14293" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="14294" end="14305" title="game engine" label="game engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123841" start="14455" end="14466" title="concept art" label="concept art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383563" start="15068" end="15082" title="Telltale Games" label="Telltale Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q958821" start="15154" end="15179" title="LucasArts adventure games" label="LucasArts adventure games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383567" start="15271" end="15286" title="Episodic video game" label="episodic series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130980" start="15427" end="15455" title="Sam &amp;amp; Max Save the World" label="Sam &amp;amp; Max Save the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="15731" end="15740" title="hypnotism" label="hypnotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293583" start="15803" end="15810" title="GameTap" label="GameTap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404427" start="15993" end="16007" title="Kid Beyond" label="Andrew Chaikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="16075" end="16084" title="machinima" label="machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216367" start="16360" end="16395" title="Sam &amp;amp; Max Beyond Time and Space" label="Sam &amp;amp; Max Beyond Time and Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="16560" end="16564" title="Soul (spirit)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17024" end="17065" title="Sam &amp;amp; Max: The Devil&amp;#x27;s Playhouse" label="Sam &amp;amp; Max: The Devil&amp;#x27;s Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337860" start="17216" end="17238" title="Tales of Monkey Island" label="Tales of Monkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369644" start="17581" end="17594" title="Flash animation" label="Flash cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102502" start="17639" end="17651" title="origin story" label="origin story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963135" start="17775" end="17803" title="Poker Night at the Inventory" label="Poker Night at the Inventory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17820" end="17831" title="Penny Arcade#Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069159" start="17843" end="17855" title="Penny Arcade" label="Penny Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q382108" start="17884" end="17899" title="Team Fortress 2" label="Team Fortress 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624458" start="17910" end="17920" title="Strong Bad" label="Strong Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545845" start="17932" end="17947" title="Homestar Runner" label="Homestar Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228378" start="17982" end="17991" title="Dave Boat" label="Dave Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13583301" start="18012" end="18030" title="Poker Night 2" label="game&amp;#x27;s sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q893423" start="18061" end="18072" title="Borderlands (video game)" label="Borderlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198588" start="18080" end="18092" title="Brock Samson" label="Brock Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636213" start="18104" end="18121" title="The Venture Bros." label="The Venture Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q2552758" start="18129" end="18141" title="Ash Williams" label="Ash Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q921605" start="18153" end="18162" title="Evil Dead" label="Evil Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q605125" start="18173" end="18179" title="GLaDOS" label="GLaDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q274897" start="18185" end="18203" title="Portal (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Portal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="18234" end="18249" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159952" start="18430" end="18451" title="Jared Emerson-Johnson" label="Jared Emerson-Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q63777286" start="18578" end="18590" title="Oculus Quest" label="Oculus Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q337535" start="18610" end="18617" title="SteamVR" label="SteamVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q122977992" start="18622" end="18639" title="HTC Vive" label="Viveport Infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011703" start="18672" end="18686" title="PlayStation VR" label="PlayStation VR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18696" end="18705" title="Remaster#Video_games" label="Remasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="19069" end="19083" title="animated series" label="cartoon series"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="19088" end="19091" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q428457" start="19129" end="19136" title="Nelvana" label="Nelvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q626178" start="19337" end="19345" title="Fox Kids" label="Fox Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789910" start="19368" end="19371" title="YTV (TV channel)" label="YTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="19387" end="19396" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237338" start="20169" end="20181" title="Harvey Atkin" label="Harvey Atkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350412" start="20206" end="20220" title="Robert Tinkler" label="Robert Tinkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q923408" start="20303" end="20315" title="Gemini Award" label="Gemini Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502767" start="20448" end="20462" title="Shout! Factory" label="Shout! Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="20487" end="20490" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="20868" end="20877" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="20878" end="20882" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="20946" end="20955" title="Dixieland" label="Dixieland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="20957" end="20962" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q464129" start="20967" end="20975" title="mariachi" label="mariachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101568" start="21220" end="21234" title="Clint Bajakian" label="Clint Bajakian"/>
<link wikidata="Q992923" start="21236" end="21248" title="Michael Land" label="Michael Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707671" start="21253" end="21268" title="Peter McConnell" label="Peter McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q285624" start="21343" end="21348" title="iMUSE" label="iMUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="21508" end="21512" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159952" start="21726" end="21747" title="Jared Emerson-Johnson" label="Jared Emerson-Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="22306" end="22309" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595902" start="22392" end="22399" title="1UP.com" label="1UP.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q641453" start="22448" end="22459" title="Music4Games" label="Music4Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q941594" start="23468" end="23487" title="video game industry" label="video game industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="23509" end="23523" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="23936" end="23942" title="situation comedy" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="23992" end="24007" title="Korean War" label="Korean Conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q566905" start="24986" end="24997" title="Annie Award" label="Annie Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25093" end="25117" title="Star Wars: Rebel Assault" label="Star Wars: Rebel Assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="25748" end="25757" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q958821" start="26132" end="26150" title="LucasArts adventure games" label="adventure game era"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383567" start="26675" end="26690" title="Episodic video game" label="episodic gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="26805" end="26810" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q752241" start="26820" end="26848" title="Half-Life (series)" label="&amp;quot;Half-Life&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806887" start="26850" end="26870" title="Ritual Entertainment" label="Ritual Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758851" start="26882" end="26894" title="SiN Episodes" label="SiN Episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60520" start="27408" end="27418" title="sketchbook" label="sketchbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q682582" start="27676" end="27685" title="plush toy" label="plush toy"/>
<link wikidata="Q343566" start="28045" end="28058" title="action figure" label="action figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293067" start="28331" end="28362" title="Don Markstein&amp;#x27;s Toonopedia" label="Don Markstein&amp;#x27;s Toonopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27767" wikidata="Q243314" url="?curid=27767" title="Standard-definition television">
<text>Standard-definition television (SDTV; also standard definition or SD) is a television system that uses a resolution that is not considered to be either high or enhanced definition. &quot;Standard&quot; refers to offering a similar resolution to the analog broadcast systems used when it was introduced.

== History and characteristics ==
SDTV originated from the need for a standard to digitize analog TV (defined in BT.601) and is now used for digital TV broadcasts and home appliances such as game consoles and DVD disc players.

Digital SDTV broadcast eliminates the ghosting and noisy images associated with analog systems. However, if the reception has interference or is poor, where the error correction cannot compensate one will encounter various other artifacts such as image freezing, stuttering, or dropouts from missing intra-frames or blockiness from missing macroblocks. The audio encoding is the last to suffer a loss due to the lower bandwidth requirements.

Standards that support digital SDTV broadcast include DVB, ATSC, and ISDB. The last two were originally developed for HDTV, but are also used for their ability to deliver multiple SD video and audio streams via multiplexing.

== PAL and NTSC ==
The two SDTV signal types are 576i (with 576 interlaced lines of resolution, derived from the European-developed PAL and SECAM systems), and 480i (with 480 interlaced lines of resolution, based on the American NTSC system). SDTV refresh rates are 25, 29.97 and 30 frames per second, again based on the analog systems mentioned.

In North America, digital SDTV is broadcast in the same 4:3 fullscreen aspect ratio as NTSC signals, with widescreen content often being center cut.

In other parts of the world that used the PAL or SECAM color systems, digital standard-definition television is now usually shown with a 16:9 aspect ratio, with the transition occurring between the mid-1990s and late-2000s depending on the region. Older programs with a 4:3 aspect ratio are broadcast with a flag that switches the display to 4:3. Some broadcasters prefer to reduce the horizontal resolution by anamorphically scaling the video into a pillarbox.

== Pixel aspect ratio ==
The pixel aspect ratio is the same for 720- and 704-pixel resolutions because the visible image (be it 4:3 or 16:9) is contained in the center 704 horizontal pixels of the digital frame. In the case of a digital video line having 720 horizontal pixels (including horizontal blanking), only the center 704 pixels contain the actual 4:3 or 16:9 image, and the 8-pixel-wide stripes on either side are called nominal analog blanking or horizontal blanking and should be discarded when displaying the image. Nominal analog blanking should not be confused with overscan, as overscan areas are part of the actual 4:3 or 16:9 image.

For SMPTE 259M-C compliance, an SDTV broadcast image is scaled to 720 pixels wide for every 480 NTSC (or 576 PAL) lines of the image with the amount of non-proportional line scaling dependent on either the display or pixel aspect ratio. Only 704 center pixels contain the actual image and 16 pixels are reserved for horizontal blanking, though a number of broadcasters fill the whole 720 frames. The display ratio for broadcast widescreen is commonly 16:9 (pixel aspect ratio of 40:33 for anamorphic); the display ratio for a traditional or letterboxed broadcast is 4:3 (pixel aspect ratio of 10:11).

An SDTV image outside the constraints of the SMPTE standards requires no non-proportional scaling with 640 pixels (defined by the adopted IBM VGA standard) for every line of the image. The display and pixel aspect ratio is generally not required with the line height defining the aspect. For widescreen 16:9, 360 lines define a widescreen image and for traditional 4:3, 480 lines define an image.

== See also ==
* 
* 

== References ==
== External links ==
* Programmer&#x27;s Guide to Video Systems</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="0" end="30" title="Standard-definition television" label="Standard-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="32" end="36" title="Standard-definition television" label="SDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="43" end="62" title="Standard-definition television" label="standard definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="66" end="68" title="Standard-definition television" label="SD"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="152" end="156" title="high-definition television" label="high"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348859" start="160" end="179" title="enhanced definition" label="enhanced definition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="249" end="273" title="broadcast television systems#ITU standards" label="analog broadcast systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499047" start="417" end="423" title="BT.601" label="BT.601"/>
<link wikidata="Q551540" start="570" end="578" title="Ghosting (television)" label="ghosting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210247" start="583" end="595" title="Noise (video)" label="noisy images"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262687" start="832" end="844" title="Intra-frame coding" label="intra-frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632668" start="872" end="882" title="macroblock" label="macroblock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178562" start="1029" end="1032" title="DVB" label="DVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q637801" start="1034" end="1038" title="ATSC" label="ATSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198832" start="1044" end="1048" title="ISDB" label="ISDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="1093" end="1097" title="HDTV" label="HDTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q222903" start="1186" end="1198" title="multiplexing" label="multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q244581" start="1250" end="1254" title="576i" label="576i"/>
<link wikidata="Q184915" start="1265" end="1275" title="interlaced" label="interlaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="1333" end="1336" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q223765" start="1341" end="1346" title="SECAM" label="SECAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195242" start="1361" end="1365" title="480i" label="480i"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="1430" end="1434" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q949326" start="1449" end="1461" title="refresh rate" label="refresh rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q119565" start="1484" end="1501" title="frames per second" label="frames per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q20970432" start="1605" end="1632" title="Fullscreen (aspect ratio)" label="4:3 fullscreen aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1655" end="1665" title="16:9 aspect ratio" label="widescreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048790" start="1686" end="1696" title="center cut" label="center cut"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1836" end="1853" title="16:9 aspect ratio" label="16:9 aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q857787" start="2005" end="2011" title="Active Format Description" label="a flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756901" start="2150" end="2159" title="pillarbox" label="pillarbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186623" start="2592" end="2615" title="nominal analog blanking" label="nominal analog blanking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4444256" start="2619" end="2638" title="horizontal blanking" label="horizontal blanking"/>
<link wikidata="Q246103" start="2742" end="2750" title="overscan" label="overscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302333" start="2817" end="2829" title="SMPTE 259M-C" label="SMPTE 259M-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q588886" start="3030" end="3048" title="pixel aspect ratio" label="pixel aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q21272794" start="3302" end="3312" title="anamorphic widescreen" label="anamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539855" start="3354" end="3365" title="letterboxed" label="letterboxed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17194" start="3557" end="3560" title="VGA" label="VGA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27772" wikidata="Q13085" url="?curid=27772" title="Sandstone">
<text>Sandstone is a clastic sedimentary rock composed mainly of sand-sized (0.0625 to 2 mm) silicate grains, cemented together by another mineral. Sandstones comprise about 20–25% of all sedimentary rocks.

Most sandstone is composed of quartz or feldspar, because they are the most resistant minerals to the weathering processes at the Earth&#x27;s surface. Like uncemented sand, sandstone may be imparted any color by impurities within the minerals, but the most common colors are tan, brown, yellow, red, grey, pink, white, and black. Because sandstone beds can form highly visible cliffs and other topographic features, certain colors of sandstone have become strongly identified with certain regions, such as the red rock deserts of Arches National Park and other areas of the American Southwest.

Rock formations composed of sandstone usually allow the percolation of water and other fluids and are porous enough to store large quantities, making them valuable aquifers and petroleum reservoirs.

Quartz-bearing sandstone can be changed into quartzite through metamorphism, usually related to tectonic compression within orogenic belts.

==Origins==
Sandstones are &quot;clastic&quot; in origin (as opposed to either &quot;organic&quot;, like chalk and coal, or &quot;chemical&quot;, like gypsum and jasper). The silicate sand grains from which they form are the product of physical and chemical weathering of bedrock. Weathering and erosion are most rapid in areas of high relief, such as volcanic arcs, areas of continental rifting, and orogenic belts.

Eroded sand is transported by rivers or by the wind from its source areas to depositional environments where tectonics has created accommodation space for sediments to accumulate. Forearc basins tend to accumulate sand rich in lithic grains and plagioclase. Intracontinental basins and grabens along continental margins are also common environments for deposition of sand.

As sediments continue to accumulate in the depositional environment, older sand is buried by younger sediments, and it undergoes diagenesis. This mostly consists of compaction and lithification of the sand. Early stages of diagenesis, described as &quot;eogenesis&quot;, take place at shallow depths (a few tens of meters) and are characterized by bioturbation and mineralogical changes in the sands, with only slight compaction. The red hematite that gives red bed sandstones their color is likely formed during eogenesis. Deeper burial is accompanied by &quot;mesogenesis&quot;, during which most of the compaction and lithification takes place.

Compaction takes place as the sand comes under increasing pressure from overlying sediments. Sediment grains move into more compact arrangements, ductile grains (such as mica grains) are deformed, and pore space is reduced. In addition to this physical compaction, chemical compaction may take place via pressure solution. Points of contact between grains are under the greatest strain, and the strained mineral is more soluble than the rest of the grain. As a result, the contact points are dissolved away, allowing the grains to come into closer contact.

Lithification follows closely on compaction, as increased temperatures at depth hasten deposition of cement that binds the grains together. Pressure solution contributes to cementing, as the mineral dissolved from strained contact points is redeposited in the unstrained pore spaces.

Mechanical compaction takes place primarily at depths less than . Chemical compaction continues to depths of , and most cementation takes place at depths of .

Unroofing of buried sandstone is accompanied by &quot;telogenesis&quot;, the third and final stage of diagenesis. As erosion reduces the depth of burial, renewed exposure to meteoric water produces additional changes to the sandstone, such as dissolution of some of the cement to produce secondary porosity.


==Components==

===Framework grains===
Framework grains are sand-sized ( diameter) detrital fragments that make up the bulk of a sandstone. Most framework grains are composed of quartz or feldspar, which are the common minerals most resistant to weathering processes at the Earth&#x27;s surface, as seen in the Goldich dissolution series. Framework grains can be classified into several different categories based on their mineral composition:
* Quartz framework grains are the dominant minerals in most clastic sedimentary rocks; this is because they have exceptional physical properties, such as hardness and chemical stability. These physical properties allow the quartz grains to survive multiple recycling events, while also allowing the grains to display some degree of rounding. Quartz grains evolve from plutonic rock, which are felsic in origin and also from older sandstones that have been recycled.
* Feldspathic framework grains are commonly the second most abundant mineral in sandstones. Feldspar can be divided into alkali feldspars and plagioclase feldspars, which can be distinguished under a petrographic microscope.

::*Alkali feldspar range in chemical composition from KAlSi3O8 to NaAlSi3O8.

::*Plagioclase feldspar range in composition from NaAlSi3O8 to CaAl2Si2O8.

* Lithic framework grains (also called lithic fragments or lithic clasts) are pieces of ancient source rock that have yet to weather away to individual mineral grains. Lithic fragments can be any fine-grained or coarse-grained igneous, metamorphic, or sedimentary rock, although the most common lithic fragments found in sedimentary rocks are clasts of volcanic rocks.
* Accessory minerals are all other mineral grains in a sandstone. These minerals usually make up just a small percentage of the grains in a sandstone. Common accessory minerals include micas (muscovite and biotite), olivine, pyroxene, and corundum. Many of these accessory grains are more dense than the silicates that make up the bulk of the rock. These &quot;heavy minerals&quot; are commonly resistant to weathering and can be used as an indicator of sandstone maturity through the ZTR index. Common heavy minerals include zircon, tourmaline, rutile (hence &quot;ZTR&quot;), garnet, magnetite, or other dense, resistant minerals derived from the source rock.

===Matrix===
Matrix is very fine material, which is present within interstitial pore space between the framework grains. The nature of the matrix within the interstitial pore space results in a twofold classification:
* Arenites are texturally &quot;clean&quot; sandstones that are free of or have very little matrix.
* Wackes are texturally &quot;dirty&quot; sandstones that have a significant amount of matrix.

===Cement===
Cement is what binds the siliciclastic framework grains together. Cement is a secondary mineral that forms after deposition and during burial of the sandstone. These cementing materials may be either silicate minerals or non-silicate minerals, such as calcite.
* Silica cement can consist of either quartz or opal minerals. Quartz is the most common silicate mineral that acts as cement. In sandstone where there is silica cement present, the quartz grains are attached to cement, which creates a rim around the quartz grain called overgrowth. The overgrowth retains the same crystallographic continuity of quartz framework grain that is being cemented. Opal cement is found in sandstones that are rich in volcanogenic materials, and very rarely is in other sandstones.
* Calcite cement is the most common carbonate cement. Calcite cement is an assortment of smaller calcite crystals. The cement adheres to the framework grains, cementing the framework grains together.
* Other minerals that act as cements include: hematite, limonite, feldspars, anhydrite, gypsum, barite, clay minerals, and zeolite minerals.

Sandstone that becomes depleted of its cement binder through weathering gradually becomes friable and unstable. This process can be somewhat reversed by the application of tetraethyl orthosilicate (Si(OC2H5)4) which will deposit amorphous silicon dioxide between the sand grains. The reaction is as follows.

:Si(OC2H5)4 (l) + 2 H2O (l) → SiO2 (s) + 4 C2H5OH (g)

===Pore space===
Pore space includes the open spaces within a rock or a soil. The pore space in a rock has a direct relationship to the porosity and permeability of the rock. The porosity and permeability are directly influenced by the way the sand grains are packed together.
* Porosity is the percentage of bulk volume that is inhabited by interstices within a given rock. Porosity is directly influenced by the packing of even-sized spherical grains, rearranged from loosely packed to tightest packed in sandstones.
* Permeability is the rate in which water or other fluids flow through the rock. For groundwater, work permeability may be measured in gallons per day through a one square foot cross section under a unit hydraulic gradient.

==Types of sandstone==
Sandstones are typically classified by point-counting a thin section using a method like the Gazzi-Dickinson Method. This yields the relative percentages of quartz, feldspar, and lithic grains and the amount of clay matrix. The composition of a sandstone can provide important information on the genesis of the sediments when used with a triangular quartz, feldspar, lithic chart (QFL diagrams). However, geologists have not been able to agree on a set of boundaries separating regions of the QFL triangle.
Visual aids are diagrams that allow geologists to interpret different characteristics of a sandstone. For example, a QFL chart can be marked with a provenance model that shows the likely tectonic origin of sandstones with various compositions of framework grains. Likewise, the stage of textural maturity chart illustrates the different stages that a sandstone goes through as the degree of kinetic processing of the sediments increases.

* A QFL chart is a representation of the framework grains and matrix that is present in a sandstone. This chart is similar to those used in igneous petrology. When plotted correctly, this model of analysis creates a meaningful quantitative classification of sandstones.
* A sandstone provenance chart is typically based on a QFL chart but allows geologists to visually interpret the different types of places from which sandstones can originate.
* A stage of textural maturity chart shows the differences between immature, submature, mature, and supermature sandstones. As the sandstone becomes more mature, grains become more rounded, and there is less clay in the matrix of the rock.

===Dott&#x27;s classification scheme===

Dott&#x27;s (1964) sandstone classification scheme is one of many such schemes used by geologists for classifying sandstones. Dott&#x27;s scheme is a modification of Gilbert&#x27;s classification of silicate sandstones, and it incorporates R.L. Folk&#x27;s dual textural and compositional maturity concepts into one classification system. The philosophy behind combining Gilbert&#x27;s and R. L. Folk&#x27;s schemes is that it is better able to &quot;portray the continuous nature of textural variation from mudstone to arenite and from stable to unstable grain composition&quot;. Dott&#x27;s classification scheme is based on the mineralogy of framework grains, and on the type of matrix present in between the framework grains.

In this specific classification scheme, Dott has set the boundary between arenite and wackes at 15% matrix. In addition, Dott also breaks up the different types of framework grains that can be present in a sandstone into three major categories: quartz, feldspar, and lithic grains.
* Arenites are types of sandstone that have less than 15% clay matrix in between the framework grains.
** Quartz arenites are sandstones that contain more than 90% of siliceous grains. Grains can include quartz or chert rock fragments. Quartz arenites are texturally mature to supermature sandstones. These pure quartz sands result from extensive weathering that occurred before and during transport. This weathering removed everything but quartz grains, the most stable mineral. They are commonly affiliated with rocks that are deposited in a stable cratonic environment, such as aeolian beaches or shelf environments. Quartz arenites emanate from multiple recycling of quartz grains, generally as sedimentary source rocks and less regularly as first-cycle deposits derived from primary igneous or metamorphic rocks.
** Feldspathic arenites are sandstones that contain less than 90% quartz, and more feldspar than unstable lithic fragments, and minor accessory minerals. Feldspathic sandstones are commonly immature or sub-mature. These sandstones occur in association with cratonic or stable shelf settings. Feldspathic sandstones are derived from granitic-type, primary crystalline, rocks. If the sandstone is dominantly plagioclase, then it is igneous in origin.
** Lithic arenites are characterised by generally high content of unstable lithic fragments. Examples include volcanic and metamorphic clasts, though stable clasts such as chert are common in lithic arenites. This type of rock contains less than 90% quartz grains and more unstable rock fragments than feldspars. They are commonly immature to submature texturally. They are associated with fluvial conglomerates and other fluvial deposits, or in deeper water marine conglomerates. They are formed under conditions that produce large volumes of unstable material, derived from fine-grained rocks, mostly shales, volcanic rocks, and metamorphic rock.
* Wackes are sandstones that contain more than 15% clay matrix between framework grains.
** Quartz wackes are uncommon because quartz arenites are texturally mature to supermature.
** Felspathic wackes are feldspathic sandstone that contain a matrix that is greater than 15%.
** Lithic wacke is a sandstone in which the matrix greater than 15%.
* Arkose sandstones are more than 25 percent feldspar. The grains tend to be poorly rounded and less well sorted than those of pure quartz sandstones. These feldspar-rich sandstones come from rapidly eroding granitic and metamorphic terrains where chemical weathering is subordinate to physical weathering.
* Greywacke sandstones are a heterogeneous mixture of lithic fragments and angular grains of quartz and feldspar or grains surrounded by a fine-grained clay matrix. Much of this matrix is formed by relatively soft fragments, such as shale and some volcanic rocks, that are chemically altered and physically compacted after deep burial of the sandstone formation.

===Quartzite===

When sandstone is subjected to the great heat and pressure associated with regional metamorphism, the individual quartz grains recrystallize, along with the former cementing material, to form the metamorphic rock called quartzite. Most or all of the original texture and sedimentary structures of the sandstone are erased by the metamorphism. The grains are so tightly interlocked that when the rock is broken, it fractures through the grains to form an irregular or conchoidal fracture.

Geologists had recognized by 1941 that some rocks show the macroscopic characteristics of quartzite, even though they have not undergone metamorphism at high pressure and temperature. These rocks have been subject only to the much lower temperatures and pressures associated with diagenesis of sedimentary rock, but diagenesis has cemented the rock so thoroughly that microscopic examination is necessary to distinguish it from metamorphic quartzite. The term &quot;orthoquartzite&quot; is used to distinguish such sedimentary rock from &quot;metaquartzite&quot; produced by metamorphism. By extension, the term &quot;orthoquartzite&quot; has occasionally been more generally applied to any quartz-cemented quartz arenite. Orthoquartzite (in the narrow sense) is often 99% SiO2 with only very minor amounts of iron oxide and trace resistant minerals such as zircon, rutile and magnetite. Although few fossils are normally present, the original texture and sedimentary structures are preserved.

The typical distinction between a true orthoquartzite and an ordinary quartz sandstone is that an orthoquartzite is so highly cemented that it will fracture across grains, not around them. This is a distinction that can be recognized in the field. In turn, the distinction between an orthoquartzite and a metaquartzite is the onset of recrystallization of existing grains. The dividing line may be placed at the point where strained quartz grains begin to be replaced by new, unstrained, small quartz grains, producing a &quot;mortar texture&quot; that can be identified in thin sections under a polarizing microscope. With increasing grade of metamorphism, further recrystallization produces &quot;foam texture&quot;, characterized by polygonal grains meeting at triple junctions, and then &quot;porphyroblastic texture&quot;, characterized by coarse, irregular grains, including some larger grains (porphyroblasts.)

==Uses==


Sandstone has been used since prehistoric times for construction, decorative art works and tools. It has been widely employed around the world in constructing temples, churches, homes and other buildings, and in civil engineering.

Although its resistance to weathering varies, sandstone is easy to work. That makes it a common building and paving material, including in asphalt concrete. However, some types that have been used in the past, such as the Collyhurst sandstone used in North West England, have had poor long-term weather resistance, necessitating repair and replacement in older buildings. Because of the hardness of individual grains, uniformity of grain size and friability of their structure, some types of sandstone are excellent materials from which to make grindstones, for sharpening blades and other implements. Non-friable sandstone can be used to make grindstones for grinding grain, e.g., gritstone.

A type of pure quartz sandstone, orthoquartzite, with more of 90–95 percent of quartz, has been proposed for nomination to the Global Heritage Stone Resource. In some regions of Argentina, the orthoquartzite-stoned facade is one of the main features of the Mar del Plata style bungalows.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 

==Notes==
==Bibliography==

* Folk, R.L., 1965, &quot;Petrology of sedimentary rocks&quot; PDF version. Austin: Hemphill&#x27;s Bookstore. 2nd ed. 1981, .
* Pettijohn F. J., P.E. Potter and R. Siever, 1987, &quot;Sand and sandstone&quot;, 2nd ed. Springer-Verlag. .
* Scholle, P.A., 1978, &quot;A Color illustrated guide to constituents, textures, cements, and porosities of sandstones and associated rocks&quot;, American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir no. 28. .
* Scholle, P.A., and D. Spearing, 1982, &quot;Sandstone depositional environments: clastic terrigenous sediments &quot;, American Association of Petroleum Geologists Memoir no. 31. .
* USGS Minerals Yearbook: Stone, Dimension , Thomas P. Dolley, U.S. Dept. of the Interior, 2005 (format: PDF).
==Further reading==

* Webb, Jonathan. &quot;Sandstone shapes &#x27;forged by gravity&quot;&#x27; (July 2014), BBC News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="0" end="9" title="Sandstone" label="Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15" end="39" title="Clastic rock#Sedimentary clastic rocks" label="clastic sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q466491" start="59" end="69" title="grain size" label="sand-sized"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="87" end="95" title="silicate mineral" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189315" start="104" end="112" title="Cementation (geology)" label="cemented"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="182" end="198" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="232" end="238" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="242" end="250" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="288" end="295" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="304" end="314" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="370" end="374" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="597" end="608" title="topography" label="topographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223969" start="733" end="753" title="Arches National Park" label="Arches National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="777" end="795" title="Southwestern United States" label="American Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367555" start="854" end="865" title="percolation" label="percolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="900" end="906" title="porosity" label="porous"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="962" end="969" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="975" end="994" title="petroleum reservoir" label="petroleum reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="1043" end="1052" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="1061" end="1073" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421924" start="1122" end="1136" title="orogenic belts" label="orogenic belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q612133" start="1172" end="1179" title="clastic rock" label="clastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="1244" end="1249" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="1254" end="1258" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="1290" end="1296" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q201175" start="1301" end="1307" title="jasper" label="jasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="1397" end="1407" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="1435" end="1442" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426043" start="1491" end="1503" title="volcanic arc" label="volcanic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="1515" end="1534" title="continental rifting" label="continental rifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421924" start="1540" end="1553" title="orogenic belt" label="orogenic belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994702" start="1634" end="1658" title="depositional environment" label="depositional environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="1666" end="1675" title="tectonics" label="tectonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603124" start="1688" end="1707" title="accommodation (geology)" label="accommodation space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630967" start="1737" end="1750" title="Forearc basin" label="Forearc basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714830" start="1802" end="1813" title="plagioclase" label="plagioclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092248" start="1815" end="1837" title="Intracontinental basin" label="Intracontinental basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="1843" end="1849" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="2060" end="2070" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414356" start="2096" end="2106" title="compaction (geology)" label="compaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191052" start="2111" end="2124" title="lithification" label="lithification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864907" start="2279" end="2291" title="bioturbation" label="bioturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="2369" end="2377" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065586" start="2389" end="2396" title="red beds" label="red bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="2750" end="2754" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125457" start="2884" end="2901" title="pressure solution" label="pressure solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q189315" start="3239" end="3245" title="Cementation (geology)" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744363" start="3757" end="3771" title="meteoric water" label="meteoric water"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="3871" end="3889" title="secondary porosity" label="secondary porosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="4071" end="4077" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="4081" end="4089" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="4139" end="4149" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580168" start="4204" end="4230" title="Goldich dissolution series" label="Goldich dissolution series"/>
<link wikidata="Q612133" start="4397" end="4421" title="clastic sedimentary rock" label="clastic sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="4491" end="4499" title="hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="5032" end="5047" title="Alkali feldspar" label="Alkali feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q714830" start="5110" end="5130" title="Plagioclase feldspar" label="Plagioclase feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106532" start="5744" end="5753" title="muscovite" label="muscovite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="5758" end="5765" title="biotite" label="biotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="5768" end="5775" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="5777" end="5785" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q131777" start="5791" end="5799" title="corundum" label="corundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695273" start="5913" end="5926" title="heavy mineral" label="heavy mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063292" start="6037" end="6046" title="ZTR index" label="ZTR index"/>
<link wikidata="Q178928" start="6078" end="6084" title="zircon" label="zircon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179911" start="6086" end="6096" title="tourmaline" label="tourmaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q320603" start="6098" end="6104" title="rutile" label="rutile"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="6130" end="6136" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="6138" end="6147" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463013" start="6228" end="6234" title="Matrix (geology)" label="Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171058" start="6951" end="6955" title="opal" label="opal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="7348" end="7355" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="7658" end="7666" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193565" start="7668" end="7676" title="limonite" label="limonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="7678" end="7686" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q105439" start="7689" end="7698" title="anhydrite" label="anhydrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="7700" end="7706" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q184196" start="7708" end="7714" title="barite" label="barite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799034" start="7716" end="7729" title="clay minerals" label="clay minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q181332" start="7735" end="7742" title="zeolite" label="zeolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="8254" end="8262" title="porosity" label="porosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q256699" start="8267" end="8279" title="permeability (earth sciences)" label="permeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="8722" end="8733" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q369743" start="8841" end="8859" title="hydraulic gradient" label="hydraulic gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q542715" start="8941" end="8953" title="thin section" label="thin section"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529226" start="8978" end="9000" title="Gazzi-Dickinson Method" label="Gazzi-Dickinson Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265428" start="9266" end="9278" title="QFL diagrams" label="QFL diagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582628" start="9540" end="9550" title="Provenance (geology)" label="provenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="11776" end="11782" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="11786" end="11791" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="11919" end="11929" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="12043" end="12050" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="12161" end="12166" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="12360" end="12367" title="igneous" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="12371" end="12387" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="13442" end="13447" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="13450" end="13463" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="13470" end="13486" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q673812" start="13835" end="13841" title="Arkose" label="Arkose"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="13878" end="13886" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995951" start="14041" end="14049" title="granitic" label="granitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="14066" end="14073" title="terrain" label="terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="14081" end="14100" title="chemical weathering" label="chemical weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="14104" end="14115" title="subordinate" label="subordinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="14119" end="14138" title="physical weathering" label="physical weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q917545" start="14142" end="14151" title="Greywacke" label="Greywacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933904" start="14169" end="14182" title="heterogeneous" label="heterogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647900" start="14194" end="14210" title="Lithic Fragment (geology)" label="lithic fragments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799034" start="14292" end="14296" title="Clay mineral" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463013" start="14318" end="14324" title="Matrix (geology)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="14373" end="14378" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="14596" end="14617" title="regional metamorphism" label="regional metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="14717" end="14733" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="14741" end="14750" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="15290" end="15300" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269398" start="15717" end="15731" title="quartz arenite" label="quartz arenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178928" start="15868" end="15874" title="zircon" label="zircon"/>
<link wikidata="Q320603" start="15876" end="15882" title="rutile" label="rutile"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="15887" end="15896" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="15911" end="15917" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="15966" end="15977" title="sedimentary" label="sedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402508" start="16246" end="16251" title="Field work" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q957083" start="16906" end="16919" title="porphyroblast" label="porphyroblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="17147" end="17164" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="17194" end="17204" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q206615" start="17263" end="17271" title="building material" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049667" start="17276" end="17282" title="pavement (material)" label="paving"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="17306" end="17322" title="asphalt concrete" label="asphalt concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147609" start="17389" end="17409" title="Collyhurst sandstone" label="Collyhurst sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q47967" start="17418" end="17436" title="North West England" label="North West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503337" start="17614" end="17624" title="friability" label="friability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990615" start="17712" end="17723" title="grindstone (tool)" label="grindstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048392" start="17849" end="17858" title="gritstone" label="gritstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570377" start="17988" end="18018" title="Global Heritage Stone Resource" label="Global Heritage Stone Resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q183061" start="18076" end="18082" title="facade" label="facade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754461" start="18118" end="18137" title="Mar del Plata style" label="Mar del Plata style"/>
<link wikidata="Q509278" start="18330" end="18345" title="Francis J. Pettijohn" label="Pettijohn F. J."/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="19054" end="19062" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27773" wikidata="Q57224" url="?curid=27773" title="Sophia of Hanover">
<text>Sophia (born Princess Sophia of the Palatinate; – ) was Electress of Hanover from 19 December 1692 until 23 January 1698 as the consort of Prince-Elector Ernest Augustus. She was later the heiress presumptive to the thrones of England and Scotland (later Great Britain) and Ireland under the Act of Settlement 1701, as a granddaughter of King James VI and I. Sophia died less than two months before she would have become Queen of Great Britain and Ireland. Consequently, her son George I succeeded her first cousin once removed, Queen Anne, to the British throne. The succession to the throne has since been composed entirely of, and legally defined as, Sophia&#x27;s legitimate and Protestant descendants.

Sophia was born in The Hague to Frederick V, formerly Elector Palatine and King of Bohemia, and Elizabeth (Stuart), daughter of King James VI and I. She grew up in the Dutch Republic, where her family had sought refuge after the sequestration of their Electorate during the Thirty Years&#x27; War. Sophia&#x27;s brother Charles Louis was restored as elector in the Palatinate as part of the Peace of Westphalia. During this time, the English Stuarts also went into exile and Sophia was courted by her cousin, Charles II of England. 

Sophia instead married Prince Ernest Augustus, her third cousin, in 1658. Despite his temper and frequent absences, Sophia loved him and bore him seven children who survived to adulthood. Born a landless cadet, Ernest Augustus succeeded in having the House of Hanover raised to electoral dignity in 1692. As a result, Princess Sophia became Electress of Hanover, the title by which she is best remembered. A patron of the arts, Sophia commissioned Herrenhausen Palace and its gardens and sponsored philosophers, such as Gottfried Leibniz and John Toland.

== Early life ==

The twelfth child and fifth daughter of Frederick V of the Palatinate and Elizabeth Stuart, also known as the &quot;Winter King and Queen of Bohemia&quot; for their short rule in that country, Sophia was born in The Wassenaer Hof, The Hague, Dutch Republic, where her parents had fled into exile after the Battle of White Mountain. Through her mother, she was the granddaughter of James VI and I, king of Scotland and England in a personal union. At birth, Sophia was granted an annuity of 40 thalers by the Estates of Friesland. Sophia was courted by her first cousin, Charles II of England, but she rebuffed his advances as she thought he was using her in order to get money from her mother&#x27;s supporter, Lord William Craven.

== Marriage ==

Before her marriage, Sophia, as the daughter of Frederick V, Elector Palatine of the Rhine, was referred to as Sophie, Princess Palatine of the Rhine, or as Sophia of the Palatinate. The Electors of the Palatinate were the Calvinist senior branch of House of Wittelsbach, whose Catholic branch ruled the Electorate of Bavaria.

On 30 September 1658, she married Ernest Augustus, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg, at Heidelberg, who in 1692 became the first Elector of Hanover. Ernest Augustus was a second cousin of Sophia&#x27;s mother Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia, as they were both great-grandchildren of Christian III of Denmark.

Sophia became a friend and admirer of Gottfried Leibniz while he was librarian at the Court of Hanover. Their friendship lasted from 1676 until her death in 1714. This friendship resulted in a substantial correspondence, first published in the 19th century (Klopp 1973), that reveals Sophia to have been a woman of exceptional intellectual ability and curiosity. She was well-read in the works of René Descartes and Baruch Spinoza. Together with Ernest Augustus she greatly improved the Herrenhausen Palace, and she was the guiding spirit in the creation of the Herrenhausen Gardens surrounding the palace, where she died.

In 1680, during another long visit to Italy by her husband, Sophia wrote her memories of her first fifty-years of life.

=== Issue ===
Sophia had seven children who reached adulthood:

* George I of Great Britain (7 June 1660 – 22 June 1727)
*Frederick Augustus (3 October 1661 – 10 June 1691), Imperial General
* Stillborn twin sons (February 1664 – February 1664)
* Maximilian William of Brunswick-Lüneburg (13 December 1666 – 27 June 1726), field marshal in the Imperial Army
* Stillborn son (13 December 1666 – 13 December 1666)
* Sophia Charlotte (2 October 1668 – 21 January 1705), Queen in Prussia
* Charles Philip of Brunswick-Lüneburg (13 October 1669 – 1 January 1690), colonel in the Imperial Army
* Christian Henry of Brunswick-Lüneburg (29 September 1671 – 31 July 1703)
* Ernest Augustus of Brunswick-Lüneburg, Duke of York and Albany (7 September 1674 – 14 August 1728), became prince-bishop of Osnabrück

Three of her sons were killed in battle.

Sophia was absent for almost a year, 1664–65, during a long holiday with Ernest Augustus in Italy. She corresponded regularly with her sons&#x27; governess and took a great interest in her sons&#x27; upbringing, even more so on her return. After Sophia&#x27;s tour, she bore Ernest Augustus another four sons and a daughter. In her letters, Sophia describes her eldest son as a responsible, conscientious child who set an example to his younger brothers and sisters.

Sophia was, at first, against the marriage of her son George and Sophia Dorothea of Celle, looking down on Sophia Dorothea&#x27;s mother Éléonore Desmier d&#x27;Olbreuse (who was not of royal birth and to whom Sophia referred as &quot;mouse dirt mixed among the pepper&quot;) and concerned by Sophia Dorothea&#x27;s legitimated status, but was eventually won over by the financial advantages inherent in the marriage.

== Heiress presumptive ==
In September 1700, Sophia met her cousin King William III of England at Het Loo Palace in Apeldoorn, the Netherlands. This happened two months after the death of his nephew Prince William, Duke of Gloucester, son of the future Queen Anne. By this time, given the ailing William III&#x27;s reluctance to remarry, the inclusion of Sophia in the line of succession was becoming more likely because she was a Protestant, as was her son. Her candidature was aided by the fact that she had grown up in the Netherlands close to William III and was able to converse fluently with him in Dutch, his native tongue.

A year after their meeting, the Parliament of England passed the Act of Settlement 1701, which declared that in the event of no legitimate issue from Anne or William III, the crowns of England and Ireland were to settle upon &quot;the most excellent princess Sophia, electress and duchess-dowager of Hanover&quot; and &quot;the heirs of her body, being Protestant&quot;. Scotland being a separate state in international law at the time, this did not mean she would also succeed Anne as Queen of Scotland, which led to a succession crisis and eventually to the Treaty of Union between Scotland and England in 1706/07. 
The key excerpt from the Act, naming Sophia as heir presumptive, reads:

Sophia was made next in line to cut off a claim by the Roman Catholic James Francis Edward Stuart, who would have become James III and VIII and to deny the throne to the many other Roman Catholics and spouses of Roman Catholics who held a claim. The act restricts the British throne to the &quot;Protestant heirs&quot; of Sophia of Hanover who had never been Roman Catholic or married a Roman Catholic. In 1711, the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland recommended that its congregations pray regularly &quot;for the Princess Sophia, Electoress and Duchess Dowager of Hanover, and the Protestant line in that family, upon whom the succession to the crown of these dominions is by law established&quot;.

Some British politicians attempted several times to bring Sophia to England in order to enable her to assume government immediately in the event of Anne&#x27;s death. It was argued that such a course was necessary to ensure Sophia&#x27;s succession, for Anne&#x27;s Roman Catholic half-brother was significantly closer to London than was Sophia. The Electress was eager to move to London, but the proposal was denied, as such action would mortally offend Anne, who was strongly opposed to a rival court in her kingdom. Anne might have been aware that Sophia, who was active and lively despite her old age, could cut a better figure than herself. Sophia was completely uncertain of what would happen after Anne&#x27;s death, saying: &quot;What Parliament does one day, it undoes the next.&quot;

When the law was passed in mid-1701, Sophia at age 70, five of her children from ages 35 to 41, and three legitimate grandchildren from ages 14 to 18, were alive. Although Sophia was 35 years older than Anne, she was very fit and healthy, and invested time and energy in securing the succession either for herself or her son. There are more than 5,000 legitimate descendants of Sophia, although not all are in the line of succession. The Sophia Naturalization Act 1705 (4 &amp; 5 Ann. c. 16) granted the right of British (or more correctly English, as Great Britain only came into existence in 1707) nationality to Sophia&#x27;s non-Roman Catholic descendants; those who had obtained the right to British citizenship via this Act at any time before its repeal by the British Nationality Act 1948 retain this lawful right today.

== Death and legacy ==
Although considerably older than Queen Anne, Sophia enjoyed much better health. According to the Countess of Bückeburg in a letter to Sophia&#x27;s niece, the Raugravine Luise, on 5 June 1714 Sophia felt ill after receiving an angry letter from Queen Anne. Three days later, on 8 June, she was walking in the gardens of Herrenhausen when she ran to shelter from a sudden downpour of rain and collapsed and died in the arms of her granddaughter-in-law Caroline of Ansbach, Electoral Princess of Hanover. Sophia was 83, a very advanced age for the era. Queen Anne died less than two months later on 1 August 1714 at the age of 49. Had Sophia survived Anne, she would have been the oldest person to ascend the British throne.

Upon Sophia&#x27;s death, her eldest son Elector George Louis of Hanover (1660–1727) became heir presumptive in her place and within two months succeeded Anne as George I of Great Britain. Sophia&#x27;s daughter Sophia Charlotte of Hanover (1668–1705) married Frederick I of Prussia, from whom the later Prussian and German monarchs descend.

Sophia was buried in the chapel of Leine Palace in Hanover, as were her husband and their son George I. After the destruction of the palace and its chapel during World War II by Allied aerial raids, their remains were moved into the mausoleum of King Ernest Augustus I in the Berggarten of Herrenhausen Gardens in 1957.

== Ancestry ==

== Works ==
* &quot;Memoirs of Sophia, Electress of Hanover 1630-1680&quot;, translated by H. Forester (London, 1888)

== References ==
* Israel, Johnathan I. Radical Enlightenment. Oxford University Press, 2001, 84.

== Further reading ==
* Duggan, J. N., &quot;Sophia of Hanover, From Winter Princess to Heiress of Great Britain&quot;; London, Peter Owen, 2010
* Klopp, Onno (ed.), &quot;Correspondance de Leibniz avec l&#x27;électrice Sophie&quot;. Hanover, 1864–1875
* Van der Cruysse, Dirk; &quot;Sophie de Hanovre, memoires et lettres de voyage&quot;; Paris, Fayard, 1990

|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57224" start="0" end="6" title="Sophia of Hanover" label="Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57224" start="13" end="46" title="Sophia of Hanover" label="Princess Sophia of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721919" start="56" end="76" title="Electress of Hanover" label="Electress of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q372190" start="139" end="169" title="Prince-Elector Ernest Augustus" label="Prince-Elector Ernest Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="189" end="208" title="heiress presumptive" label="heiress presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="227" end="234" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="239" end="247" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="255" end="268" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="274" end="281" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="292" end="314" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="343" end="357" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="479" end="487" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="529" end="539" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="683" end="693" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="727" end="736" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q57195" start="740" end="751" title="Frederick V, Elector Palatine" label="Frederick V"/>
<link wikidata="Q315710" start="762" end="778" title="Elector Palatine" label="Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44330" start="783" end="798" title="King of Bohemia" label="King of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158252" start="804" end="822" title="Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia" label="Elizabeth (Stuart)"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="876" end="890" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="960" end="970" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Electorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="982" end="1004" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q57989" start="1028" end="1041" title="Charles I Louis, Elector Palatine" label="Charles Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="1099" end="1118" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="1150" end="1157" title="House of Stuart" label="Stuarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1217" end="1238" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016400" start="1446" end="1451" title="cadet (genealogy)" label="cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="1493" end="1509" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966707" start="1690" end="1709" title="Herrenhausen Palace" label="Herrenhausen Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q574773" start="1718" end="1725" title="Herrenhausen Gardens" label="gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="1762" end="1779" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q335820" start="1784" end="1795" title="John Toland" label="John Toland"/>
<link wikidata="Q57195" start="1856" end="1885" title="Frederick V of the Palatinate" label="Frederick V of the Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q158252" start="1890" end="1906" title="Elizabeth Stuart (1596–1662)" label="Elizabeth Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="2047" end="2056" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="2058" end="2072" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373" start="2122" end="2146" title="Battle of White Mountain" label="Battle of White Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="2197" end="2211" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="2221" end="2229" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2234" end="2241" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="2247" end="2261" title="Union of the Crowns" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q162528" start="2309" end="2315" title="thaler" label="thaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="2335" end="2344" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="2386" end="2407" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013185" start="2527" end="2546" title="William Craven, 1st Earl of Craven (1608–1697)" label="Lord William Craven"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="2752" end="2760" title="Prince-elector" label="Electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="2768" end="2778" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="2788" end="2797" title="Calvinist" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="2815" end="2835" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="House of Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q256961" start="2869" end="2890" title="Electorate of Bavaria" label="Electorate of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q372190" start="2927" end="2970" title="Ernest Augustus, Elector of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Ernest Augustus, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966" start="2975" end="2985" title="Heidelberg" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="3016" end="3023" title="prince-elector" label="Elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="3027" end="3034" title="Electorate of Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q158252" start="3096" end="3130" title="Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia" label="Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154998" start="3173" end="3197" title="Christian III of Denmark" label="Christian III of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="3238" end="3255" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="3597" end="3611" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="3616" end="3630" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q48966707" start="3687" end="3706" title="Herrenhausen Palace" label="Herrenhausen Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q574773" start="3762" end="3782" title="Herrenhausen Gardens" label="Herrenhausen Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="4011" end="4036" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4067" end="4085" title="Frederick Augustus (1661-1690)" label="Frederick Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q68229" start="4192" end="4232" title="Maximilian William of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Maximilian William of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="4268" end="4281" title="field marshal" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57674" start="4359" end="4375" title="Sophia Charlotte of Hanover" label="Sophia Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201537" start="4412" end="4428" title="Queen in Prussia" label="Queen in Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q655521" start="4610" end="4672" title="Ernest Augustus, Duke of York and Albany" label="Ernest Augustus of Brunswick-Lüneburg, Duke of York and Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q477035" start="4717" end="4743" title="prince-bishop of Osnabrück" label="prince-bishop of Osnabrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q231876" start="5320" end="5344" title="Sophia Dorothea of Celle" label="Sophia Dorothea of Celle"/>
<link wikidata="Q65304" start="5392" end="5424" title="Éléonore Desmier d&amp;#x27;Olbreuse" label="Éléonore Desmier d&amp;#x27;Olbreuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="5746" end="5768" title="William III of England" label="William III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q692381" start="5772" end="5786" title="Het Loo Palace" label="Het Loo Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q101918" start="5790" end="5799" title="Apeldoorn" label="Apeldoorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q744541" start="5873" end="5907" title="Prince William, Duke of Gloucester" label="Prince William, Duke of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="5933" end="5937" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="6338" end="6359" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="6371" end="6393" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="7067" end="7094" title="James Francis Edward Stuart" label="James Francis Edward Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="8088" end="8094" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8916" end="8934" title="Succession to the British throne#Current line of succession" label="line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047640" start="8940" end="8970" title="Sophia Naturalization Act 1705" label="Sophia Naturalization Act 1705"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509813" start="8972" end="8986" title="4 &amp;amp; 5 Ann." label="4 &amp;amp; 5 Ann."/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="9054" end="9067" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q918305" start="9199" end="9218" title="British citizenship" label="British citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590027" start="9255" end="9261" title="repeal" label="repeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970544" start="9269" end="9297" title="British Nationality Act 1948" label="British Nationality Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="9393" end="9397" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q833360" start="9513" end="9523" title="Raugraves" label="Raugravine"/>
<link wikidata="Q574773" start="9663" end="9686" title="Herrenhausen Gardens" label="gardens of Herrenhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76961" start="9805" end="9824" title="Caroline of Ansbach" label="Caroline of Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832870" start="10050" end="10075" title="Succession to the British throne" label="ascend the British throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="10127" end="10150" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George Louis of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="10170" end="10186" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q57674" start="10290" end="10317" title="Sophia Charlotte of Hanover" label="Sophia Charlotte of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="10338" end="10360" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q450982" start="10456" end="10468" title="Leineschloss" label="Leine Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875556" start="10599" end="10618" title="Bombing of Hanover in World War II" label="Allied aerial raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q162302" start="10672" end="10689" title="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover" label="Ernest Augustus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="10940" end="10963" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27774" wikidata="Q175646" url="?curid=27774" title="Scanning tunneling microscope">
<text>A scanning tunneling microscope (STM) is a type of scanning probe microscope used for imaging surfaces at the atomic level. Its development in 1981 earned its inventors, Gerd Binnig and Heinrich Rohrer, then at IBM Zürich, the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1986. STM senses the surface by using an extremely sharp conducting tip that can distinguish features smaller than 0.1 nm with a 0.01 nm (10 pm) depth resolution. This means that individual atoms can routinely be imaged and manipulated. Most scanning tunneling microscopes are built for use in ultra-high vacuum at temperatures approaching absolute zero, but variants exist for studies in air, water and other environments, and for temperatures over 1000 °C.

STM is based on the concept of quantum tunneling. When the tip is brought very near to the surface to be examined, a bias voltage applied between the two allows electrons to tunnel through the vacuum separating them. The resulting &quot;tunneling current&quot; is a function of the tip position, applied voltage, and the local density of states (LDOS) of the sample. Information is acquired by monitoring the current as the tip scans across the surface, and is usually displayed in image form.

A refinement of the technique known as scanning tunneling spectroscopy consists of keeping the tip in a constant position above the surface, varying the bias voltage and recording the resultant change in current. Using this technique, the local density of the electronic states can be reconstructed. This is sometimes performed in high magnetic fields and in presence of impurities to infer the properties and interactions of electrons in the studied material.

Scanning tunneling microscopy can be a challenging technique, as it requires extremely clean and stable surfaces, sharp tips, excellent vibration isolation, and sophisticated electronics. Nonetheless, many hobbyists build their own microscopes.

== Procedure ==

The tip is brought close to the sample by a coarse positioning mechanism that is usually monitored visually. At close range, fine control of the tip position with respect to the sample surface is achieved by piezoelectric scanner tubes whose length can be altered by a control voltage. A bias voltage is applied between the sample and the tip, and the scanner is gradually elongated until the tip starts receiving the tunneling current. The tip–sample separation &quot;w&quot; is then kept somewhere in the 4–7 Å (0.4–0.7 nm) range, slightly above the height where the tip would experience repulsive interaction but still in the region where attractive interaction exists The tunneling current, being in the sub-nanoampere range, is amplified as close to the scanner as possible. Once tunneling is established, the sample bias and tip position with respect to the sample are varied according to the requirements of the experiment.

As the tip is moved across the surface in a discrete &quot;x&quot;–&quot;y&quot; matrix, the changes in surface height and population of the electronic states cause changes in the tunneling current. Digital images of the surface are formed in one of the two ways: in the &quot;constant-height mode&quot; changes of the tunneling current are mapped directly, while in the &quot;constant-current mode&quot; the voltage that controls the height (&quot;z&quot;) of the tip is recorded while the tunneling current is kept at a predetermined level.

In constant-current mode, feedback electronics adjust the height by a voltage to the piezoelectric height-control mechanism. If at some point the tunneling current is below the set level, the tip is moved towards the sample, and conversely. This mode is relatively slow, as the electronics need to check the tunneling current and adjust the height in a feedback loop at each measured point of the surface. When the surface is atomically flat, the voltage applied to the &quot;z&quot;-scanner mainly reflects variations in local charge density. But when an atomic step is encountered, or when the surface is buckled due to reconstruction, the height of the scanner also have to change because of the overall topography. The image formed of the &quot;z&quot;-scanner voltages that were needed to keep the tunneling current constant as the tip scanned the surface thus contain both topographical and electron density data. In some cases it may not be clear whether height changes came as a result of one or the other.

In constant-height mode, the &quot;z&quot;-scanner voltage is kept constant as the scanner swings back and forth across the surface, and the tunneling current, exponentially dependent on the distance, is mapped. This mode of operation is faster, but on rough surfaces, where there may be large adsorbed molecules present, or ridges and groves, the tip will be in danger of crashing.

The raster scan of the tip is anything from a 128×128 to a 1024×1024 (or more) matrix, and for each point of the raster a single value is obtained. The images produced by STM are therefore grayscale, and color is only added in post-processing in order to visually emphasize important features.

In addition to scanning across the sample, information on the electronic structure at a given location in the sample can be obtained by sweeping the bias voltage (along with a small AC modulation to directly measure the derivative) and measuring current change at a specific location. This type of measurement is called scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) and typically results in a plot of the local density of states as a function of the electrons&#x27; energy within the sample. The advantage of STM over other measurements of the density of states lies in its ability to make extremely local measurements. This is how, for example, the density of states at an impurity site can be compared to the density of states around the impurity and elsewhere on the surface.

== Instrumentation ==
The main components of a scanning tunneling microscope are the scanning tip, piezoelectrically controlled height (&quot;z&quot; axis) and lateral (&quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; axes) scanner, and coarse sample-to-tip approach mechanism. The microscope is controlled by dedicated electronics and a computer. The system is supported on a vibration isolation system.

The tip is often made of tungsten or platinum–iridium wire, though gold is also used. Tungsten tips are usually made by electrochemical etching, and platinum–iridium tips by mechanical shearing. The resolution of an image is limited by the radius of curvature of the scanning tip. Sometimes, image artefacts occur if the tip has more than one apex at the end; most frequently &quot;double-tip imaging&quot; is observed, a situation in which two apices contribute equally to the tunneling. While several processes for obtaining sharp, usable tips are known, the ultimate test of quality of the tip is only possible when it is tunneling in the vacuum. Every so often the tips can be conditioned by applying high voltages when they are already in the tunneling range, or by making them pick up an atom or a molecule from the surface.

In most modern designs the scanner is a hollow tube of a radially polarized piezoelectric with metallized surfaces. The outer surface is divided into four long quadrants to serve as &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; motion electrodes with deflection voltages of two polarities applied on the opposing sides. The tube material is a lead zirconate titanate ceramic with a piezoelectric constant of about 5 nanometres per volt. The tip is mounted at the center of the tube. Because of some crosstalk between the electrodes and inherent nonlinearities, the motion is calibrated, and voltages needed for independent &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot; and &quot;z&quot; motion applied according to calibration tables.

Due to the extreme sensitivity of the tunneling current to the separation of the electrodes, proper vibration isolation or a rigid STM body is imperative for obtaining usable results. In the first STM by Binnig and Rohrer, magnetic levitation was used to keep the STM free from vibrations; now mechanical spring or gas spring systems are often employed. Additionally, mechanisms for vibration damping using eddy currents are sometimes implemented. Microscopes designed for long scans in scanning tunneling spectroscopy need extreme stability and are built in anechoic chambers—dedicated concrete rooms with acoustic and electromagnetic isolation that are themselves floated on vibration isolation devices inside the laboratory.

Maintaining the tip position with respect to the sample, scanning the sample and acquiring the data is computer-controlled. Dedicated software for scanning probe microscopies is used for image processing as well as performing quantitative measurements.

Some scanning tunneling microscopes are capable of recording images at high frame rates. Videos made of such images can show surface diffusion or track adsorption and reactions on the surface. In video-rate microscopes, frame rates of 80 Hz have been achieved with fully working feedback that adjusts the height of the tip.

== Principle of operation ==
Quantum tunneling of electrons is a functioning concept of STM that arises from quantum mechanics. Classically, a particle hitting an impenetrable barrier will not pass through. If the barrier is described by a potential acting along &quot;z&quot; direction, in which an electron of mass &quot;m&quot;e acquires the potential energy &quot;U&quot;(&quot;z&quot;), the electron&#x27;s trajectory will be deterministic and such that the sum &quot;E&quot; of its kinetic and potential energies is at all times conserved:
: formula_1

The electron will have a defined, non-zero momentum &quot;p&quot; only in regions where the initial energy &quot;E&quot; is greater than &quot;U&quot;(&quot;z&quot;). In quantum physics, however, the electron can pass through classically forbidden regions. This is referred to as tunneling.

=== Rectangular barrier model ===

The simplest model of tunneling between the sample and the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope is that of a rectangular potential barrier. An electron of energy &quot;E&quot; is incident upon an energy barrier of height &quot;U&quot;, in the region of space of width &quot;w&quot;. An electron&#x27;s behavior in the presence of a potential &quot;U&quot;(&quot;z&quot;), assuming one-dimensional case, is described by wave functions formula_2 that satisfy Schrödinger&#x27;s equation
: formula_3

where &quot;ħ&quot; is the reduced Planck constant, &quot;z&quot; is the position, and &quot;m&quot;e is the electron mass. In the zero-potential regions on two sides of the barrier, the wave function takes on the forms

: formula_4 for &quot;z&quot; &lt; 0,
: formula_5 for &quot;z&quot; &gt; &quot;w&quot;,

where formula_6. Inside the barrier, where &quot;E&quot; &lt; &quot;U&quot;, the wave function is a superposition of two terms, each decaying from one side of the barrier:
: formula_7 for 0 &lt; &quot;z&quot; &lt; &quot;w&quot;,
where formula_8.

The coefficients &quot;r&quot; and &quot;t&quot; provide measure of how much of the incident electron&#x27;s wave is reflected or transmitted through the barrier. Namely, of the whole impinging particle current formula_9 only formula_10 is transmitted, as can be seen from the probability current expression
: formula_11

which evaluates to formula_12. The transmission coefficient is obtained from the continuity condition on the three parts of the wave function and their derivatives at &quot;z&quot; = 0 and &quot;z&quot; = &quot;w&quot; (detailed derivation is in the article Rectangular potential barrier). This gives formula_13 where formula_14. The expression can be further simplified, as follows:

In STM experiments, typical barrier height is of the order of the material&#x27;s surface work function &quot;W&quot;, which for most metals has a value between 4 and 6 eV. The work function is the minimum energy needed to bring an electron from an occupied level, the highest of which is the Fermi level (for metals at &quot;T&quot; = 0 K), to vacuum level. The electrons can tunnel between two metals only from occupied states on one side into the unoccupied states of the other side of the barrier. Without bias, Fermi energies are flush, and there is no tunneling. Bias shifts electron energies in one of the electrodes higher, and those electrons that have no match at the same energy on the other side will tunnel. In experiments, bias voltages of a fraction of 1 V are used, so formula_15 is of the order of 10 to 12 nm−1, while &quot;w&quot; is a few tenths of a nanometre. The barrier is strongly attenuating. The expression for the transmission probability reduces to formula_16 The tunneling current from a single level is therefore
: formula_17

where both wave vectors depend on the level&#x27;s energy &quot;E&quot;, formula_18 and formula_19

Tunneling current is exponentially dependent on the separation of the sample and the tip, typically reducing by an order of magnitude when the separation is increased by 1 Å (0.1 nm). Because of this, even when tunneling occurs from a non-ideally sharp tip, the dominant contribution to the current is from its most protruding atom or orbital.

=== Tunneling between two conductors ===

As a result of the restriction that the tunneling from an occupied energy level on one side of the barrier requires an empty level of the same energy on the other side of the barrier, tunneling occurs mainly with electrons near the Fermi level. The tunneling current can be related to the density of available or filled states in the sample. The current due to an applied voltage &quot;V&quot; (assume tunneling occurs from the sample to the tip) depends on two factors: 1) the number of electrons between the Fermi level &quot;E&quot;F and &quot;E&quot;F − &quot;eV&quot; in the sample, and 2) the number among them which have corresponding free states to tunnel into on the other side of the barrier at the tip. The higher the density of available states in the tunneling region the greater the tunneling current. By convention, a positive &quot;V&quot; means that electrons in the tip tunnel into empty states in the sample; for a negative bias, electrons tunnel out of occupied states in the sample into the tip.

For small biases and temperatures near absolute zero, the number of electrons in a given volume (the electron concentration) that are available for tunneling is the product of the density of the electronic states &quot;ρ&quot;(&quot;E&quot;F) and the energy interval between the two Fermi levels, &quot;eV&quot;. Half of these electrons will be travelling away from the barrier. The other half will represent the electric current impinging on the barrier, which is given by the product of the electron concentration, charge, and velocity &quot;v&quot; (&quot;I&quot;i = &quot;nev&quot;),
: formula_20

The tunneling electric current will be a small fraction of the impinging current. The proportion is determined by the transmission probability &quot;T&quot;, so\
: formula_21

In the simplest model of a rectangular potential barrier the transmission probability coefficient &quot;T&quot; equals |&quot;t&quot;|2.

=== Bardeen&#x27;s formalism ===
A model that is based on more realistic wave functions for the two electrodes was devised by John Bardeen in a study of the metal–insulator–metal junction. His model takes two separate orthonormal sets of wave functions for the two electrodes and examines their time evolution as the systems are put close together. Bardeen&#x27;s novel method, ingenious in itself, solves a time-dependent perturbative problem in which the perturbation emerges from the interaction of the two subsystems rather than an external potential of the standard Rayleigh–Schrödinger perturbation theory.

Each of the wave functions for the electrons of the sample (S) and the tip (T) decay into the vacuum after hitting the surface potential barrier, roughly of the size of the surface work function. The wave functions are the solutions of two separate Schrödinger&#x27;s equations for electrons in potentials &quot;U&quot;S and &quot;U&quot;T. When the time dependence of the states of known energies formula_22 and formula_23 is factored out, the wave functions have the following general form
: formula_24
: formula_25

If the two systems are put closer together, but are still separated by a thin vacuum region, the potential acting on an electron in the combined system is &quot;U&quot;T + &quot;U&quot;S. Here, each of the potentials is spatially limited to its own side of the barrier. Only because the tail of a wave function of one electrode is in the range of the potential of the other, there is a finite probability for any state to evolve over time into the states of the other electrode. The future of the sample&#x27;s state &quot;μ&quot; can be written as a linear combination with time-dependent coefficients of formula_26 and all formula_27:
: formula_28
with the initial condition formula_29. When the new wave function is inserted into the Schrödinger&#x27;s equation for the potential &quot;U&quot;T + &quot;U&quot;S, the obtained equation is projected onto each separate formula_30 (that is, the equation is multiplied by a formula_31 and integrated over the whole volume) to single out the coefficients formula_32 All formula_33 are taken to be &quot;nearly orthogonal&quot; to all formula_34 (their overlap is a small fraction of the total wave functions), and only first-order quantities retained. Consequently, the time evolution of the coefficients is given by
: formula_35

Because the potential &quot;U&quot;T is zero at the distance of a few atomic diameters away from the surface of the electrode, the integration over &quot;z&quot; can be done from a point &quot;z&quot;0 somewhere inside the barrier and into the volume of the tip (&quot;z&quot; &gt; &quot;z&quot;0).

If the tunneling matrix element is defined as
: formula_36
the probability of the sample&#x27;s state &quot;μ&quot; evolving in time &quot;t&quot; into the state of the tip &quot;ν&quot; is
: formula_37

In a system with many electrons impinging on the barrier, this probability will give the proportion of those that successfully tunnel. If at a time &quot;t&quot; this fraction was formula_38 at a later time &quot;t&quot; + d&quot;t&quot; the total fraction of formula_39 would have tunneled. The &quot;current&quot; of tunneling electrons at each instance is therefore proportional to formula_40 divided by formula_41 which is the time derivative of formula_42
: formula_43

The time scale of the measurement in STM is many orders of magnitude larger than the typical femtosecond time scale of electron processes in materials, and formula_44 is large. The fraction part of the formula is a fast-oscillating function of formula_45 that rapidly decays away from the central peak, where formula_46. In other words, the most probable tunneling process, by far, is the elastic one, in which the electron&#x27;s energy is conserved. The fraction, as written above, is a representation of the delta function, so
: formula_47

Solid-state systems are commonly described in terms of continuous rather than discrete energy levels. The term formula_48 can be thought of as the density of states of the tip at energy formula_49 giving
: formula_50

The number of energy levels in the sample between the energies formula_51 and formula_52 is formula_53 When occupied, these levels are spin-degenerate (except in a few special classes of materials) and contain charge formula_54 of either spin. With the sample biased to voltage formula_55 tunneling can occur only between states whose occupancies, given for each electrode by the Fermi–Dirac distribution formula_56, are not the same, that is, when either one or the other is occupied, but not both. That will be for all energies formula_51 for which formula_58 is not zero. For example, an electron will tunnel from energy level formula_59 in the sample into energy level formula_60 in the tip (formula_61), an electron at formula_60 in the sample will find unoccupied states in the tip at formula_63 (formula_64), and so will be for all energies in between. The tunneling current is therefore the sum of little contributions over all these energies of the product of three factors: formula_65 representing available electrons, formula_58 for those that are allowed to tunnel, and the probability factor formula_67 for those that will actually tunnel:
: formula_68

Typical experiments are run at a liquid-helium temperature (around 4 K), at which the Fermi-level cut-off of the electron population is less than a millielectronvolt wide. The allowed energies are only those between the two step-like Fermi levels, and the integral becomes
: formula_69

When the bias is small, it is reasonable to assume that the electron wave functions and, consequently, the tunneling matrix element do not change significantly in the narrow range of energies. Then the tunneling current is simply the convolution of the densities of states of the sample surface and the tip:
: formula_70

How the tunneling current depends on distance between the two electrodes is contained in the tunneling matrix element
: formula_71

This formula can be transformed so that no explicit dependence on the potential remains. First, the formula_72 part is taken out from the Schrödinger equation for the tip, and the elastic tunneling condition is used so that
: formula_73

Now formula_74 is present in the Schrödinger equation for the sample and equals the kinetic plus the potential operator acting on formula_75 However, the potential part containing &quot;U&quot;S is on the tip side of the barrier nearly zero. What remains,
: formula_76
can be integrated over &quot;z&quot; because the integrand in the parentheses equals formula_77

Bardeen&#x27;s tunneling matrix element is an integral of the wave functions and their gradients over a surface separating the two planar electrodes:
: formula_78

The exponential dependence of the tunneling current on the separation of the electrodes comes from the very wave functions that &quot;leak&quot; through the potential step at the surface and exhibit exponential decay into the classically forbidden region outside of the material.

The tunneling matrix elements show appreciable energy dependence, which is such that tunneling from the upper end of the &quot;eV&quot; interval is nearly an order of magnitude more likely than tunneling from the states at its bottom. When the sample is biased positively, its unoccupied levels are probed as if the density of states of the tip is concentrated at its Fermi level. Conversely, when the sample is biased negatively, its occupied electronic states are probed, but the spectrum of the electronic states of the tip dominates. In this case it is important that the density of states of the tip is as flat as possible.

The results identical to Bardeen&#x27;s can be obtained by considering adiabatic approach of the two electrodes and using the standard time-dependent perturbation theory. This leads to Fermi&#x27;s golden rule for the transition probability formula_79 in the form given above.

Bardeen&#x27;s model is for tunneling between two planar electrodes and does not explain scanning tunneling microscope&#x27;s lateral resolution. Tersoff and Hamann used Bardeen&#x27;s theory and modeled the tip as a structureless geometric point. This helped them disentangle the properties of the tip—which are hard to model—from the properties of the sample surface. The main result was that the tunneling current is proportional to the local density of states of the sample at the Fermi level taken at the position of the center of curvature of a spherically symmetric tip (&quot;s&quot;-wave tip model). With such a simplification, their model proved valuable for interpreting images of surface features bigger than a nanometre, even though it predicted atomic-scale corrugations of less than a picometre. These are well below the microscope&#x27;s detection limit and below the values actually observed in experiments.

In sub-nanometre-resolution experiments, the convolution of the tip and sample surface states will always be important, to the extent of the apparent inversion of the atomic corrugations that may be observed within the same scan. Such effects can only be explained by modeling of the surface and tip electronic states and the ways the two electrodes interact from first principles.

== Gallery of STM images ==
== Early invention ==
An earlier invention similar to Binnig and Rohrer&#x27;s, the &quot;Topografiner&quot; of R. Young, J. Ward, and F. Scire from the NIST, relied on field emission. However, Young is credited by the Nobel Committee as the person who realized that it should be possible to achieve better resolution by using the tunnel effect.

== Other related techniques ==
Many other microscopy techniques have been developed based upon STM. These include photon scanning microscopy (PSTM), which uses an optical tip to tunnel photons; scanning tunneling potentiometry (STP), which measures electric potential across a surface; spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy (SPSTM), which uses a ferromagnetic tip to tunnel spin-polarized electrons into a magnetic sample; multi-tip scanning tunneling microscopy, which enables electrical measurements to be performed at the nanoscale; and atomic force microscopy (AFM), in which the force caused by interaction between the tip and sample is measured.

STM can be used to manipulate atoms and change the topography of the sample. This is attractive for several reasons. Firstly the STM has an atomically precise positioning system, which enables very accurate atomic-scale manipulation. Furthermore, after the surface is modified by the tip, the same instrument can be used to image the resulting structures. IBM researchers famously developed a way to manipulate xenon atoms adsorbed on a nickel surface. This technique has been used to create electron &quot;corrals&quot; with a small number of adsorbed atoms and observe Friedel oscillations in the electron density on the surface of the substrate. Aside from modifying the actual sample surface, one can also use the STM to tunnel electrons into a layer of electron-beam photoresist on the sample, in order to do lithography. This has the advantage of offering more control of the exposure than traditional electron-beam lithography. Another practical application of STM is atomic deposition of metals (gold, silver, tungsten, etc.) with any desired (pre-programmed) pattern, which can be used as contacts to nanodevices or as nanodevices themselves.

== See also ==

* Scanning probe microscopy
* Atomic force microscope
* Electrochemical scanning tunneling microscope
* Microscopy
* Electron microscope
* Multi-tip scanning tunneling microscopy
* IBM (atoms)
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* A scanning tunelling microscope filmed during operation by an electron microscope
* The Inner Workings of an STM - An Animated Explanation WeCanFigureThisOut.org
* Build a simple STM with a cost of materials less than $100 excluding oscilloscope
* Animations and explanations on various types of microscopes including electron microscopes (Université Paris Sud)
* Introduction to STM in plain English (Harvard University)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q175646" start="2" end="31" title="Scanning tunneling microscope" label="scanning tunneling microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q175646" start="33" end="36" title="Scanning tunneling microscope" label="STM"/>
<link wikidata="Q907287" start="51" end="76" title="Scanning probe microscopy" label="scanning probe microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783831" start="94" end="101" title="surface" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="110" end="114" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q76766" start="170" end="181" title="Gerd Binnig" label="Gerd Binnig"/>
<link wikidata="Q123029" start="186" end="201" title="Heinrich Rohrer" label="Heinrich Rohrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146518" start="211" end="221" title="IBM Research – Zurich" label="IBM Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="227" end="249" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="310" end="320" title="electrical conductor" label="conducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="372" end="374" title="nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q192274" start="394" end="396" title="Picometre" label="pm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880334" start="547" end="564" title="ultra-high vacuum" label="ultra-high vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="593" end="606" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q175751" start="744" end="761" title="quantum tunneling" label="quantum tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q719550" start="830" end="834" title="Biasing (electronics)" label="bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="874" end="882" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="906" end="912" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="960" end="967" title="electric current" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1034" end="1057" title="Density of states#Local density of states" label="local density of states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651687" start="1247" end="1278" title="scanning tunneling spectroscopy" label="scanning tunneling spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109968206" start="1806" end="1825" title="vibration isolation" label="vibration isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183759" start="2141" end="2154" title="Piezoelectricity" label="piezoelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428" start="2226" end="2233" title="electric tension" label="voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="2444" end="2445" title="Angstrom" label="Å"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="2455" end="2457" title="Nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="2645" end="2655" title="nanoampere" label="nanoampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q825595" start="4031" end="4045" title="Surface reconstruction" label="reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641959" start="4813" end="4824" title="raster scan" label="raster scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q685727" start="4998" end="5007" title="grayscale" label="grayscale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651687" start="5424" end="5455" title="scanning tunneling spectroscopy" label="scanning tunneling spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q230895" start="5507" end="5524" title="density of states" label="density of states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7216430" start="5770" end="5778" title="impurity" label="impurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="6290" end="6298" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364570" start="6302" end="6318" title="Platinum–iridium alloy" label="platinum–iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="6332" end="6336" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q210521" start="6464" end="6474" title="Image resolution" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136069" start="6505" end="6524" title="radius of curvature" label="radius of curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q883484" start="7426" end="7449" title="lead zirconate titanate" label="lead zirconate titanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q736777" start="7658" end="7668" title="Calibration" label="calibrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061251" start="8025" end="8044" title="magnetic levitation" label="magnetic levitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q266264" start="8117" end="8127" title="gas spring" label="gas spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q208598" start="8209" end="8222" title="eddy currents" label="eddy currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q332774" start="8361" end="8377" title="anechoic chamber" label="anechoic chamber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8665" end="8705" title="Scanning probe microscopy#Visualization and analysis software" label="software for scanning probe microscopies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="8718" end="8734" title="image processing" label="image processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="8918" end="8927" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="9219" end="9236" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q175751" start="9949" end="9958" title="Quantum tunnelling" label="tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q844922" start="10107" end="10136" title="rectangular potential barrier" label="rectangular potential barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="10417" end="10430" title="wave function" label="wave function"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="10455" end="10482" title="Schrödinger&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Schrödinger&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="10523" end="10546" title="reduced Planck constant" label="reduced Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814108" start="10605" end="10618" title="electron mass" label="electron mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q903501" start="11330" end="11349" title="probability current" label="probability current"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11633" end="11662" title="Rectangular potential barrier#Analysis of the obtained expressions" label="Rectangular potential barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q783800" start="11850" end="11863" title="work function" label="work function"/>
<link wikidata="Q783800" start="11937" end="11950" title="work function" label="work function"/>
<link wikidata="Q13633683" start="12053" end="12064" title="Fermi level" label="Fermi level"/>
<link wikidata="Q494243" start="12105" end="12117" title="vacuum level" label="vacuum level"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14736" end="14752" title="Electric current#Drift speed" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q949" start="15365" end="15377" title="John Bardeen" label="John Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312763" start="15396" end="15417" title="metal–insulator–metal" label="metal–insulator–metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q911364" start="15810" end="15850" title="Perturbation theory (quantum mechanics)" label="Rayleigh–Schrödinger perturbation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777507" start="18723" end="18734" title="femtosecond" label="femtosecond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19141" end="19155" title="Dirac delta function#Oscillatory integrals" label="delta function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19321" end="19338" title="Density of states#Definition" label="density of states"/>
<link wikidata="Q274072" start="19772" end="19796" title="Fermi–Dirac distribution" label="Fermi–Dirac distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073295" start="23164" end="23188" title="Fermi&amp;#x27;s golden rule" label="Fermi&amp;#x27;s golden rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q547605" start="24547" end="24563" title="Ab initio quantum chemistry methods" label="first principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="24747" end="24751" title="NIST" label="NIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113121" start="25055" end="25081" title="photon scanning microscopy" label="photon scanning microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577411" start="25227" end="25271" title="spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy" label="spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="25294" end="25307" title="ferromagnetic" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790416" start="25371" end="25410" title="multi-tip scanning tunneling microscopy" label="multi-tip scanning tunneling microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49295" start="25488" end="25511" title="atomic force microscopy" label="atomic force microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="25532" end="25537" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="25957" end="25960" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="26012" end="26017" title="xenon" label="xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="26038" end="26044" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503650" start="26172" end="26192" title="Friedel oscillations" label="Friedel oscillations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439684" start="26373" end="26384" title="photoresist" label="photoresist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="26415" end="26426" title="lithography" label="lithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q256845" start="26509" end="26534" title="electron-beam lithography" label="electron-beam lithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q907287" start="26772" end="26797" title="Scanning probe microscopy" label="Scanning probe microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49295" start="26800" end="26823" title="Atomic force microscope" label="Atomic force microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357978" start="26826" end="26871" title="Electrochemical scanning tunneling microscope" label="Electrochemical scanning tunneling microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="26874" end="26884" title="Microscopy" label="Microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="26887" end="26906" title="Electron microscope" label="Electron microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790416" start="26909" end="26948" title="Multi-tip scanning tunneling microscopy" label="Multi-tip scanning tunneling microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968558" start="26951" end="26962" title="IBM (atoms)" label="IBM (atoms)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27775" wikidata="Q351861" url="?curid=27775" title="STM">
<text>STM may refer to:
==Technology==
* Scanning tunneling microscope, a non-optical microscope
* Signature-tagged mutagenesis, a genetic technique to create random mutants
* STMicroelectronics, a manufacturer of electronics and semiconductors
* STM (Turkish company) (), a military technology company in Turkey
* STM-1, Synchronous Transport Module, the basic rate of transmission of the SDH ITU-T fiber optic network
* STM32, a family of 32-bit microcontroller integrated circuits by STMicroelectronics
* Software transactional memory, a method of handling concurrency in multithreaded systems
* Stepper motor, a type of electric motor
* Canon autofocus lenses that use stepper motor technology which makes them especially quiet
* .stm, a filename extension used by:
** Web administration panel, of Belkin routers 
** Streaming Media File, in Microsoft Exchange Server
** Scream Tracker, music tracker software

==Transportation==
* Société de transport de Montréal, the public transport provider in Montreal, Quebec, Canada
* Amtrak ticketing code for Stamford Transportation Center, a railway station in Stamford, Connecticut, US
* National Rail for St Michaels railway station in Liverpool, England, UK
* Sea traffic management, a set of systems and procedures to guide and monitor sea traffic in a manner similar to air traffic management
* Space traffic management
* Strategic Traffic Manager, a Bus Priority application designed to work as part of an intelligent transportation system
* Santarém-Maestro Wilson Fonseca Airport, Santarém, Pará|Santarém, Brazil, by IATA airport code
* St. Thomas Mount railway station, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India, by station code
* Sydney Tramway Museum, New South Wales, Australia

==Publishing==
* International Association of Scientific, Technical, and Medical Publishers, an association of publishers
* Science, technology, and medical publishing, a market segment of academic publishing
* &quot;Science Translational Medicine&quot;, an American medical journal

==Other uses==
* Sacrae Theologiae Magister, or Master of Sacred Theology, an academic degree
* St Thomas College of Engineering and Technology, Kannur, Kerala, India
* St. Thomas More College, a Catholic, undergraduate, liberal arts college located in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada
* St. Thomas More Collegiate, a Catholic secondary school in Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada
* Short-term memory, the capacity for holding a small amount of information for a short period of time
* Small Tactical Munition, a weapon developed by Raytheon
* Stabilisation Tracking Mechanism, the mirror instrument of the Stabilisation and Association Process (SAP) for Kosovo
* ST&quot;M, a Hebrew acronym meaning a scribe

==See also==
* STM200, a pseudonym for Takeshi Matsumoto, musician featured in the music video game &quot;Dance Dance Revolution 5thMix&quot;
* STEM fields, an education and publishing classification
* ST1M a.k.a. Billy Milligan, real name Nikita Legostev, a Russian rapper</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q351861" start="0" end="3" title="STM" label="STM"/>
<link wikidata="Q175646" start="35" end="64" title="Scanning tunneling microscope" label="Scanning tunneling microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512802" start="93" end="121" title="Signature-tagged mutagenesis" label="Signature-tagged mutagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q661845" start="170" end="188" title="STMicroelectronics" label="STMicroelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834924" start="241" end="262" title="STM (Turkish company)" label="STM (Turkish company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621069" start="309" end="314" title="STM-1" label="STM-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394773" start="416" end="421" title="STM32" label="STM32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189004" start="502" end="531" title="Software transactional memory" label="Software transactional memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q235790" start="593" end="606" title="Stepper motor" label="Stepper motor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="635" end="640" title="Canon EF lens mount#Stepping motor" label="Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186157" start="736" end="754" title="filename extension" label="filename extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q283848" start="796" end="802" title="Belkin" label="Belkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223653" start="840" end="865" title="Microsoft Exchange Server" label="Microsoft Exchange Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860793" start="869" end="883" title="Scream Tracker" label="Scream Tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817151" start="930" end="962" title="Société de transport de Montréal" label="Société de transport de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597415" start="1050" end="1080" title="Stamford Transportation Center" label="Stamford Transportation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817693" start="1149" end="1176" title="St Michaels railway station" label="St Michaels railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440136" start="1205" end="1227" title="Sea traffic management" label="Sea traffic management"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277331" start="1342" end="1366" title="Space traffic management" label="Space traffic management"/>
<link wikidata="Q508378" start="1454" end="1487" title="intelligent transportation system" label="intelligent transportation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661278" start="1490" end="1529" title="Santarém-Maestro Wilson Fonseca Airport" label="Santarém-Maestro Wilson Fonseca Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591984" start="1587" end="1619" title="St. Thomas Mount railway station" label="St. Thomas Mount railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109301" start="1667" end="1688" title="Sydney Tramway Museum" label="Sydney Tramway Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048595" start="1735" end="1809" title="International Association of Scientific, Technical, and Medical Publishers" label="International Association of Scientific, Technical, and Medical Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246046" start="1842" end="1885" title="Science, technology, and medical publishing" label="Science, technology, and medical publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573955" start="1935" end="1965" title="Science Translational Medicine" label="Science Translational Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785242" start="2050" end="2075" title="Master of Sacred Theology" label="Master of Sacred Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q98945697" start="2098" end="2145" title="St Thomas College of Engineering and Technology" label="St Thomas College of Engineering and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591976" start="2171" end="2194" title="St. Thomas More College" label="St. Thomas More College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591977" start="2289" end="2315" title="St. Thomas More Collegiate" label="St. Thomas More Collegiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18599" start="2384" end="2401" title="Short-term memory" label="Short-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705743" start="2487" end="2510" title="Small Tactical Munition" label="Small Tactical Munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595714" start="2545" end="2577" title="Stabilisation Tracking Mechanism" label="Stabilisation Tracking Mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q508743" start="2665" end="2674" title="ST&amp;quot;M" label="ST&amp;quot;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844045" start="2817" end="2846" title="Dance Dance Revolution 5thMix" label="Dance Dance Revolution 5thMix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881523" start="2855" end="2866" title="STEM fields" label="STEM fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920015" start="2913" end="2917" title="ST1M" label="ST1M"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27778" wikidata="Q1935308" url="?curid=27778" title="Svenska Akademiens ordbok">
<text>Svenska Akademiens ordbok (), abbreviated SAOB, is a historical dictionary of the Swedish language published by the Swedish Academy. It is the Swedish counterpart of the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; (OED) or the &quot;Deutsches Wörterbuch&quot; (DWB). 

Work on the dictionary started in 1787. The first edition was published in 39 volumes between 1898 and 2023, in Swedish alphabetical order, and contains over 500,000 entries. Updating of the earlier volumes, A to R, is expected to continue until 2030. About 200 hardcopy sets, totalling 33,111 pages, have been printed. The searchable web version has been available since 1997. Citations date back to 1521.

==Volumes==

==See also==
*&quot;Svenska Akademiens ordlista&quot; — the Swedish Academy&#x27;s single-volume spelling dictionary

==References==
== External links ==
*Svenska Akademiens ordbok
*The Swedish Academy – Official site (in English)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1935308" start="42" end="46" title="Svenska Akademiens ordbok" label="SAOB"/>
<link wikidata="Q45740849" start="53" end="74" title="historical dictionary" label="historical dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="82" end="98" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q207360" start="116" end="131" title="Swedish Academy" label="Swedish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="176" end="201" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q96321" start="227" end="247" title="Deutsches Wörterbuch" label="Deutsches Wörterbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352347" start="375" end="391" title="Swedish alphabet" label="Swedish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279511" start="704" end="731" title="Svenska Akademiens ordlista" label="Svenska Akademiens ordlista"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088390" start="781" end="800" title="spelling dictionary" label="spelling dictionary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27781" wikidata="Q7498543" url="?curid=27781" title="Shirehorses">
<text>The Shirehorses were a spoof band comprising two BBC Radio DJs from Manchester, Mark Radcliffe and Marc Riley, known collectively as Mark and Lard.

As part of their BBC Radio 1 shows, the pair produced pastiches of chart songs, such as &quot;You&#x27;re Gormless&quot;, a parody of Babybird&#x27;s &quot;You&#x27;re Gorgeous&quot;, &quot;Lardy Boy&quot;, a parody of Placebo&#x27;s &quot;Nancy Boy&quot;, and &quot;Why Is It Always Dairylea&quot;, spoofing Travis&#x27;s &quot;Why Does It Always Rain on Me?&quot;, using the band names &#x27;Baby Bloke&#x27;, &#x27;Gazebo&#x27; and &#x27;Dave Lee Travisty&#x27; respectively. When they rewrote The Seahorses&#x27; &quot;Love Is the Law&quot; as &quot;(Now) I Know (Where I&#x27;m Going) Our Kid&quot;, they chose the stage-name Shirehorses, which they then retained for future recordings and performances. Other parodies include &quot;I Want a Roll with It&quot; (spoofing &quot;Roll with It&quot; by Oasis), &quot;Feel Like Shite&quot; (&quot;Alright&quot; by Supergrass), and &quot;Country Spouse&quot; (&quot;Country House&quot; by Blur). 

The band toured extensively, playing many small, university gigs to exploit their popularity with students. However, they also performed at larger venues, supporting Blur on a 1997 UK tour, taking in several stadia, and appearing at Glastonbury Festival in 1997.

Marc Riley was formerly a member of British Manchester band the Fall and later the Creepers before embarking on a radio presentation career alongside Mark Radcliffe. Formerly a double act on BBC Radio 1, in March 2004 they went their separate ways, Radcliffe initially to BBC Radio 2, Riley to BBC Radio 6 Music and later joined at the station by Mark Radcliffe as part of the afternoon Radcliffe and Maconie show.

==Discography==
The Shirehorses have released two albums to date:
* &quot;The Worst...Album in the World...Ever...EVER!&quot;, a parody of the long string of compilation albums released in the UK since the 1990s called &quot;The Best (genre) Album in the world ever!&quot;.
* &quot;Our Kid Eh&quot;, a play on the name of Radiohead&#x27;s album, &quot;Kid A&quot;.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7498543" start="4" end="15" title="Shirehorses" label="Shirehorses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="49" end="58" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="68" end="78" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118229" start="80" end="94" title="Mark Radcliffe (radio broadcaster)" label="Mark Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892774" start="99" end="109" title="Marc Riley" label="Marc Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770501" start="133" end="146" title="Mark and Lard" label="Mark and Lard"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="166" end="177" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q116385" start="283" end="291" title="Babybird" label="Babybird"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056514" start="305" end="325" title="You&amp;#x27;re Gorgeous" label="You&amp;#x27;re Gorgeous"/>
<link wikidata="Q484839" start="368" end="375" title="Placebo (band)" label="Placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746431" start="389" end="398" title="Nancy Boy" label="Nancy Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209593" start="433" end="441" title="Dairylea (cheese)" label="Dairylea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160103" start="458" end="464" title="Travis (band)" label="Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997766" start="478" end="508" title="Why Does It Always Rain on Me?" label="Why Does It Always Rain on Me?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762808" start="646" end="659" title="The Seahorses" label="The Seahorses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722237" start="931" end="943" title="Roll with It (Oasis song)" label="Roll with It"/>
<link wikidata="Q382890" start="953" end="958" title="Oasis (band)" label="Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755306" start="996" end="1003" title="Alright (Supergrass song)" label="Alright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120684" start="1013" end="1023" title="Supergrass" label="Supergrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454712" start="1064" end="1077" title="Country House (song)" label="Country House"/>
<link wikidata="Q485820" start="1087" end="1091" title="Blur (band)" label="Blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="1329" end="1349" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1396" end="1403" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="1404" end="1414" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q909916" start="1420" end="1428" title="The Fall (band)" label="the Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q263792" start="1439" end="1451" title="the Creepers" label="the Creepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="1551" end="1562" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="1632" end="1643" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="1654" end="1671" title="BBC Radio 6 Music" label="BBC Radio 6 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498543" start="1850" end="1895" title="The Worst...Album in the World...Ever...EVER!" label="The Worst...Album in the World...Ever...EVER!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716590" start="2001" end="2042" title="The Best...Album in the World...Ever!" label="The Best (genre) Album in the world ever!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110686" start="2058" end="2068" title="Our Kid Eh" label="Our Kid Eh"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="2098" end="2107" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q220726" start="2128" end="2133" title="Kid A" label="Kid A"/>
</links>
</doc>
