<doc id="27034" wikidata="Q33976" url="?curid=27034" title="Sardinian language">
<text>Sardinian or Sard ( , , (Nuorese), or , ) is a Romance language spoken by the Sardinians on the Western Mediterranean island of Sardinia.

The original character of the Sardinian language among the Romance idioms has long been known among linguists. Many Romance linguists consider it, together with Italian, as the language that is the closest to Latin among all Latin&#x27;s descendants. However, it has also incorporated elements of Pre-Latin (mostly Paleo-Sardinian and, to a much lesser degree, Punic) substratum, as well as a Byzantine Greek, Catalan, Castilian, and Italian superstratum. These elements originate in the political history of Sardinia, whose indigenous society experienced for centuries competition and at times conflict with a series of colonizing newcomers. 

Following the end of the Roman Empire in Western Europe, Sardinia passed through periods of successive control by the Vandals, Byzantines, local Judicates, the Kingdom of Aragon, the Savoyard state, and finally Italy. These regimes varied in their usage of Sardinian as against other languages. For example, under the Judicates, Sardinian was used in administrative documents. Under Aragonese control, Catalan and Castilian became the island&#x27;s prestige languages, and would remain so well into the 18th century. More recently, Italy&#x27;s 
linguistic policies have encouraged diglossia, reducing the predominance of both Sardinian and Catalan.

After a long strife for the acknowledgement of the island&#x27;s cultural patrimony, in 1997, Sardinian, along with the other languages spoken therein, managed to be recognized by regional law in Sardinia without challenge by the central government. In 1999, Sardinian and eleven other &quot;historical linguistic minorities&quot;, i.e. locally indigenous, and not foreign-grown, minority languages of Italy (, as defined by the legislator) were similarly recognized as such by national law (specifically, Law No. 482/1999). Among these, Sardinian is notable as having, in terms of absolute numbers, the largest community of speakers.

Although the Sardinian-speaking community can be said to share &quot;a high level of linguistic awareness&quot;, policies eventually fostering language loss and assimilation have considerably affected Sardinian, whose actual speakers have become noticeably reduced in numbers over the last century. The Sardinian adult population today primarily uses Italian, and less than 15 percent of the younger generations were reported to have been passed down some residual Sardinian, usually in a deteriorated form described by linguist Roberto Bolognesi as &quot;an ungrammatical slang&quot;.

The rather fragile and precarious state in which the Sardinian language now finds itself, where its use has been discouraged and consequently reduced even within the family sphere, is illustrated by the &quot;Euromosaic&quot; report, in which Sardinian &quot;is in 43rd place in the ranking of the 50 languages taken into consideration and of which were analysed (a) use in the family, (b) cultural reproduction, (c) use in the community, (d) prestige, (e) use in institutions, (f) use in education&quot;.

As the Sardinians have almost been completely assimilated into the Italian national mores, including in terms of onomastics, and therefore now only happen to keep but a scant and fragmentary knowledge of their native and once first spoken language, limited in both scope and frequency of use, Sardinian has been classified by UNESCO as &quot;definitely endangered&quot;. In fact, the intergenerational chain of transmission appears to have been broken since at least the 1960s, in such a way that the younger generations, who are predominantly Italian monolinguals, do not identify themselves with the indigenous tongue, which is now reduced to the memory of &quot;little more than the language of their grandparents&quot;.

As the long- to even medium-term future of the Sardinian language looks far from secure in the present circumstances, Martin Harris concluded in 2003 that, assuming the continuation of present trends to language death, it was possible that there would not be a Sardinian language of which to speak in the future, being referred to by linguists as the mere substratum of the now-prevailing idiom, i.e. Italian articulated in its own Sardinian-influenced variety, which may come to wholly supplant the islanders&#x27; once living native tongue.

==Overview==

As an insular language par excellence, Sardinian is considered the most conservative Romance language, as well as one of the most highly individual within the family; its substratum (Paleo-Sardinian or Nuragic) has also been researched. In the first written testimonies, dating to the eleventh century, Sardinian appears as a language already distinct from the dialects of Italy.

A 1949 study by the Italian-American linguist Mario Pei, analyzing the degree to which seven Romance languages diverged from Vulgar Latin with respect to their accent vocalization, yielded the following measurements of divergence (with higher percentages indicating greater divergence from the stressed vowels of Vulgar Latin): Sardinian 8%, Italian 12%, Spanish 20%, Romanian 23.5%, Occitan 25%, Portuguese 31%, and French 44%. The study emphasized, however, that it represented only &quot;a very elementary, incomplete and tentative demonstration&quot; of how statistical methods could measure linguistic change, assigned &quot;frankly arbitrary&quot; point values to various types of change, and did not compare languages in the sample with respect to any characteristics or forms of divergence other than stressed vowels, among other caveats. 

The significant degree to which the Sardinian language has retained its Latin base was also noted by the French geographer Maurice Le Lannou during a research project on the island in 1941.

Although its lexical base is mostly of Latin origin, Sardinian nonetheless retains a number of traces of the linguistic substratum predating the Roman conquest of the island: several words and especially toponyms stem from Paleo-Sardinian and, to a lesser extent, Phoenician-Punic. These etyma might refer to an early Mediterranean substratum, which reveal close relations with Basque.

In addition to the aforementioned substratum, linguists such as Max Leopold Wagner and Benvenuto Aronne Terracini trace much of the distinctive Latin character of Sardinia to the languoids once spoken by the Christian and Jewish Berbers in North Africa, known as African Romance. Indeed, Sardinian was perceived as rather similar to African Latin when the latter was still in use, giving credit to the theory that vulgar Latin in both Africa and Sardinia displayed a significant wealth of parallelisms. J. N. Adams is of the opinion that similarities in many words, such as (), () and (&#x27;reddish-brown&#x27;), prove that there might have been a fair amount of vocabulary shared between Sardinia and Africa. According to Wagner, it is notable that Sardinian is the only Romance language whose name for the Milky Way (, ) also recurs in the Berber languages.

To most Italians Sardinian is unintelligible, reminding them of Spanish, because of the way in which the language is acoustically articulated; characterized as it is by a sharply outlined physiognomy which is displayed from the earliest sources available, it is in fact considered a distinct language, if not an altogether different branch, among the Romance idioms; George Bossong summarises thus: &quot;be this as it may, from a strictly linguistic point of view there can be no doubt that Sardinian is to be classified as an independent Romance language, or even as an independent branch inside the family, and so it is classed alongside the great national languages like French and Italian in all modern manuals of Romance linguistics&quot;.

==History==
Sardinia&#x27;s relative isolation from mainland Europe encouraged the development of a Romance language that preserves traces of its indigenous, pre-Roman language(s). The language is posited to have substratal influences from Paleo-Sardinian, which some scholars have linked to Basque and Etruscan; comparisons have also been drawn with the Berber languages from North Africa to shed more light on the language(s) spoken in Sardinia prior to its Romanization. Subsequent adstratal influences include Catalan, Spanish, and Italian. The situation of the Sardinian language with regard to the politically dominant ones did not change until fascism and, most evidently, the 1950s.

===Origins of modern Sardinian===
;Prenuragic and Nuragic era
The origins of ancient Sardinian, also known as Paleo-Sardinian, are currently unknown. Research has attempted to discover obscure, indigenous, pre-Romance roots. The root &quot;s(a)rd&quot;, indicating many place names as well as the island&#x27;s people, is reportedly either associated with or originating from the Sherden, one of the Sea Peoples. Other sources trace instead the root &quot;s(a)rd&quot; from , a legendary woman from the Anatolian Kingdom of Lydia, or from the Libyan mythological figure of the Sardus Pater &quot;Babai&quot; (&quot;Sardinian Father&quot; or &quot;Father of the Sardinians&quot;).

In 1984, Massimo Pittau claimed to have found the etymology of many Latin words in the Etruscan language, after comparing it with the Nuragic language(s). Etruscan elements, formerly thought to have originated in Latin, would indicate a connection between the ancient Sardinian culture and the Etruscans. According to Pittau, the Etruscan and Nuragic language(s) are descended from Lydian (and therefore Indo-European) as a consequence of contact with Etruscans and other Tyrrhenians from Sardis as described by Herodotus. Although Pittau suggests that the Tirrenii landed in Sardinia and the Etruscans landed in modern Tuscany, his views are not shared by most Etruscologists.

According to Bertoldi and Terracini, Paleo-Sardinian has similarities with the Iberic languages and Siculian; for example, the suffix -&quot;ara&quot; in proparoxytones indicated the plural. Terracini proposed the same for suffixes in -&#x27;, -&#x27;, -&#x27;, -&#x27; + &#x27; + a paragogic vowel (such as the toponym &quot;Bunnànnaru&quot;). Rohlfs, Butler and Craddock add the suffix -&#x27; (such as the toponym &quot;Barùmini&quot;) as a unique element of Paleo-Sardinian. Suffixes in /&quot;a&quot;, &quot;e&quot;, &quot;o&quot;, &quot;u&quot;/ + -&quot;rr&quot;- found a correspondence in north Africa (Terracini), in Iberia (Blasco Ferrer) and in southern Italy and Gascony (Rohlfs), with a closer relationship to Basque (Wagner and Hubschmid). However, these early links to a Basque precursor have been questioned by some Basque linguists. According to Terracini, suffixes in -&#x27;, -&#x27;, -&#x27;, and -&#x27; are common to Paleo-Sardinian and northern African languages. Pittau emphasized that this concerns terms originally ending in an accented vowel, with an attached paragogic vowel; the suffix resisted Latinization in some place names, which show a Latin body and a Nuragic suffix. According to Bertoldi, some toponyms ending in -&#x27; and -&#x27; indicated an Anatolian influence. The suffix -&#x27;, widely used in Iberia and possibly of Celtic origin, and the ethnic suffix in -&#x27; and -&quot;&quot; (for example, the Sardinian ) have also been noted as Paleo-Sardinian elements (Terracini, Ribezzo, Wagner, Hubschmid and Faust).

Some linguists, like Max Leopold Wagner (1931), Blasco Ferrer (2009, 2010) and Arregi (2017) have attempted to revive a theoretical connection with Basque by linking words such as Sardinian and Basque ; Sardinian and Basque ; Sardinian and Basque ; Sardinian and Basque ; Gallurese (Corso-Sardinian) (with &quot;z&quot; for ) and Basque (with &quot;z&quot; for ). Genetic data have found the Basques to be close to the Sardinians.
Since the Neolithic period, some degree of variance across the island&#x27;s regions is also attested. The Arzachena culture, for instance, suggests a link between the northernmost Sardinian region (Gallura) and southern Corsica that finds further confirmation in the Natural History by Pliny the Elder. There are also some stylistic differences across Northern and Southern Nuragic Sardinia, which may indicate the existence of two other tribal groups (Balares and Ilienses) mentioned by the same Roman author. According to the archeologist Giovanni Ugas, these tribes may have in fact played a role in shaping the current regional linguistic differences of the island.

;Classical period

Around the 10th and 9th century BC, Phoenician merchants were known to have made their presence in Sardinia, which acted as a geographical mediator in between the Iberian and the Italian peninsula. In the eighth and seventh centuries, the Phoenicians began to develop permanent settlements, politically arranged as city-states in similar fashion to the Lebanese coastal areas. It did not take long before they started gravitating around the Carthaginian sphere of influence, whose level of prosperity spurred Carthage to send a series of expeditionary forces to the island; although they were initially repelled by the natives, the North African city vigorously pursued a policy of active imperialism and, by the sixth century, managed to establish its political hegemony and military control over South-Western Sardinia. Punic began to be spoken in the area, and many words entered ancient Sardinian as well. Words like &#x27;plateau&#x27; (cf. Hebrew &#x27;forest, scrub&#x27;), &#x27;nasturtium&#x27; (from Punic ), &#x27;fringed rue&#x27; (cf. Arabic &#x27;Syrian rue&#x27;), &#x27;spring&#x27; (cf. Hebrew , &#x27;source, fountainhead&#x27;), &#x27;marsh horsetail&#x27; (from Punic &#x27;common knotgrass&#x27;), &#x27;sprout&#x27; (from , diminutive of Punic &#x27;seed&#x27;), &#x27;dill&#x27; (from Punic ; cf. Hebrew &#x27;ale&#x27;) and &#x27;rosemary&#x27; (from Punic ) are commonly used, especially in the modern Sardinian varieties of the Campidanese plain, while proceeding northwards the influence is more limited to place names, such as the town of Magomadas, in Nuoro or in Gesico and Nureci, all of which deriving from the Punic .

The Roman domination began in 238 BC, but was often contested by the local Sardinian tribes, who had by then acquired a high level of political organization, and would manage to only partly supplant the pre-Latin Sardinian languages, including Punic. Although the colonists and &quot;negotiatores&quot; (businessmen) of strictly Italic descent would later play a relevant role in introducing and spreading Latin to Sardinia, Romanisation proved slow to take hold among the Sardinian natives, whose proximity to the Carthaginian cultural influence was noted by Roman authors. Punic continued to be spoken well into the 3rd–4th century AD, as attested by votive inscriptions, and it is thought that the natives from the most interior areas, led by the tribal chief Hospito, joined their brethren in making the switch to Latin around the 7th century AD, through their conversion to Christianity. Cicero, who loathed the Sardinians on the ground of numerous factors, such as their outlandish language, their kinship with Carthage and their refusal to engage with Rome, would call the Sardinian rebels () or () to emphasize Roman superiority over a population mocked as the refuse of Carthage.

A number of obscure Nuragic roots remained unchanged, and in many cases Latin accepted the local roots (like &quot;nur&quot;, presumably cognate of &quot;Norax&quot;, which makes its appearance in &quot;nuraghe&quot;, &quot;Nurra&quot;, &quot;Nurri&quot; and many other toponyms). Barbagia, the mountainous central region of the island, derives its name from the Latin (a term meaning , similar in origin to the now antiquated word &quot;Barbary&quot;), because its people refused cultural and linguistic assimilation for a long time: 50% of toponyms of central Sardinia, particularly in the territory of Olzai, are actually not related to any known language. According to Terracini, amongst the regions in Europe that went on to draw their language from Latin, Sardinia has overall preserved the highest proportion of pre-Latin toponyms. Besides the place names, on the island there are still a few names of plants, animals and geological formations directly traceable to the ancient Nuragic era.

By the end of the Roman domination, Latin had gradually become however the speech of most of the island&#x27;s inhabitants. As a result of this protracted and prolonged process of Romanisation, the modern Sardinian language is today classified as Romance or neo-Latin, with some phonetic features resembling Old Latin. Some linguists assert that modern Sardinian, being part of the Island Romance group, was the first language to split off from Latin, all others evolving from Latin as Continental Romance. In fact, contact with Rome might have ceased from as early as the first century BC. In terms of vocabulary, Sardinian retains an array of peculiar Latin-based forms that are either unfamiliar to, or have altogether disappeared in, the rest of the Romance-speaking world.

The number of Latin inscriptions on the island is relatively small and fragmented. Some engraved poems in ancient Greek and Latin (the two most prestigious languages in the Roman Empire) are seen in the so-called &quot;Viper&#x27;s Cave&quot; ( in Sardinian, in Italian, in Latin), a burial monument built in Caralis (Cagliari) by Lucius Cassius Philippus (a Roman who had been exiled to Sardinia) in remembrance of his dead spouse Atilia Pomptilla; we also have some religious works by Eusebius and Saint Lucifer, both from Caralis and in the writing style of whom may be noted the lexicon and perifrastic forms typical of Sardinian (e.g. in place of ; compare with Sardinian or ).

After a period of 80 years under the Vandals, Sardinia would again be part of the Byzantine Empire under the Exarchate of Africa for almost another five centuries. Luigi Pinelli believes that the Vandal presence had &quot;estranged Sardinia from Europe, linking its own destiny to Africa&#x27;s territorial expanse&quot; in a bond that was to strengthen further &quot;under Byzantine rule, not only because the Roman Empire included the island in the African Exarchate, but also because it developed from there, albeit indirectly, its ethnic community, causing it to acquire many of the African characteristics&quot; that would allow ethnologists and historians to elaborate the theory of the Paleo-Sardinians&#x27; supposed African origin, now disproved. Casula is convinced that the Vandal domination caused a &quot;clear breaking with the Roman-Latin writing tradition or, at the very least, an appreciable bottleneck&quot; so that the subsequent Byzantine government was able to establish &quot;its own operational institutions&quot; in a &quot;territory disputed between the Greek- and the Latin-speaking world&quot;.

Despite a period of almost five centuries, the Greek language only lent Sardinian a few ritual and formal expressions using Greek structure and, sometimes, the Greek alphabet. Evidence for this is found in the &quot;condaghes&quot;, the first written documents in Sardinian. From the long Byzantine era there are only a few entries but they already provide a glimpse of the sociolinguistical situation on the island in which, in addition to the community&#x27;s everyday Neo-Latin language, Greek was also spoken by the ruling classes. Some toponyms, such as &quot;Jerzu&quot; (thought to derive from the Greek , ), together with the personal names &quot;Mikhaleis&quot;, &quot;Konstantine&quot; and &quot;Basilis&quot;, demonstrate Greek influence.

===Judicates period===

As the Muslims made their way into North Africa, what remained of the Byzantine possession of the Exarchate of Africa was only the Balearic Islands and Sardinia. Pinelli believes that this event constituted a fundamental watershed in the historical course of Sardinia, leading to the definitive severance of those previously close cultural ties between Sardinia and the southern shore of the Mediterranean: any previously held commonality shared between Sardinia and Africa &quot;disappeared, like mist in the sun, as a result of North Africa&#x27;s conquest by Islamic forces, since the latter, due to the fierce resistance of the Sardinians, were not able to spread to the island, as they had in Africa&quot;. Michele Amari, quoted by Pinelli, writes that &quot;the attempts of the Muslims of Africa to conquer Sardinia and Corsica were frustrated by the unconquered valour of the poor and valiant inhabitants of those islands, who saved themselves for two centuries from the yoke of the Arabs&quot;.

As the Byzantines were fully focused on reconquering southern Italy and Sicily, which had in the meanwhile also fallen to the Muslims, their attention on Sardinia was neglected and communications broke down with Constantinople; this spurred the former Byzantine province of Sardinia to become progressively more autonomous from the Byzantine oecumene, and eventually attain independence. Pinelli argues that &quot;the Arab conquest of North Africa separated Sardinia from that continent without, however, causing the latter to rejoin Europe&quot; and that this event &quot;determined a capital turning point for Sardinia, giving rise to a &quot;de facto&quot; independent national government&quot;. Historian Marc Bloch believed that, owing to Sardinia being a country which found itself in &quot;quasi-isolation&quot; from the rest of the continent, the earliest documentary testimonies, written in Sardinian, were much older than those first issued in Italy.

Sardinian was the first Romance language of all to gain official status, being used by the four Judicates, former Byzantine districts that became independent political entities after the Arab expansion in the Mediterranean had cut off any ties left between the island and Byzantium. The exceptionality of the Sardinian situation, which in this sense constitutes a unique case throughout the Latin-speaking Europe, consists in the fact that any official text was written solely in Sardinian from the very beginning and completely excluded Latin, unlike what was happening – and would continue to happen – in France, Italy and Iberia at the same time; Latin, although co-official, was in fact used only in documents concerning external relations in which the Sardinian kings (, ) engaged. Awareness of the dignity of Sardinian for official purposes was such that, in the words of Livio Petrucci, a Neo-Latin language had come to be used &quot;at a time when nothing similar can be observed in the Italian peninsula&quot; not only &quot;in the legal field&quot; but also &quot;in any other field of writing&quot;.

A diplomatic analysis of the earliest Sardinian documents shows that the Judicates provided themselves with chanceries, which employed an indigenous diplomatic model for writing public documents; one of them, dating to 1102, displays text in half-uncial, a script that had long fallen out of use on the European continent and F. Casula believes may have been adopted by the Sardinians of Latin culture as their own &quot;national script&quot; from the 8th until the 12th century, prior to their receiving outside influence from the arrival of mainly Italian notaries.

Old Sardinian had a greater number of archaisms and Latinisms than the present language does, with few Germanic words, mostly coming from Latin itself, and even fewer Arabisms, which had been imported by scribes from Iberia; in spite of their best efforts with a score of expeditions to the island, from which they would get considerable booty and a hefty number of Sardinian slaves, the Arab assailants were in fact each time forcefully driven back and would never manage to conquer and settle on the island.

Although the surviving texts come from such disparate areas as the north and the south of the island, Sardinian then presented itself in a rather homogeneous form: even though the orthographic differences between Logudorese and Campidanese Sardinian were beginning to appear, Wagner found in this period &quot;the original unity of the Sardinian language&quot;. In agreement with Wagner is Paolo Merci, who found a &quot;broad uniformity&quot; around this period, as were Antonio Sanna and Ignazio Delogu too, for whom it was the islanders&#x27; community life that prevented Sardinian from localism. According to Carlo Tagliavini, these earlier documents show the existence of a Sardinian Koine which pointed to a model based on Logudorese.

According to Eduardo Blasco Ferrer, it was in the wake of the fall of the Judicates of Cagliari and Gallura, in the second half of the 13th century, that Sardinian began to fragment into its modern dialects, undergoing some Tuscanization under the rule of the Republic of Pisa; it did not take long before the Genoese too started carving their own sphere of influence in northern Sardinia, both through the mixed Sardinian-Genoese nobility of Sassari and the members of the Doria family. A certain range of dialectal variation is then noted.

A special position was occupied by the Judicate of Arborea, the last Sardinian kingdom to fall to foreign powers, in which a transitional dialect was spoken, that of Middle Sardinian. The Carta de Logu of the Kingdom of Arborea, one of the first constitutions in history drawn up in 1355–1376 by Marianus IV and the Queen, the ( in Sardinian, in Catalan, in Italian) Eleanor, was written in this transitional variety of Sardinian, and would remain in force until 1827. The Arborean judges&#x27; effort to unify the Sardinian dialects were due to their desire to be legitimate rulers of the entire island under a single state ( ); such political goal, after all, was already manifest in 1164, when the Arborean Judge Barison ordered his great seal to be made with the writings () and ().

Dante Alighieri wrote in his 1302–05 essay &quot;De vulgari eloquentia&quot; that Sardinians were strictly speaking not Italians (), even though they appeared superficially similar to them, and they did not speak anything close to a Neo-Latin language of their own (), but resorted to aping straightforward Latin instead. Dante&#x27;s view on the Sardinians, however, is proof of how their language had been following its own course in a way which was already unintelligible to non-islanders, and had become, in Wagner&#x27;s words, an impenetrable &quot;sphinx&quot; to their judgment. Frequently mentioned is a previous 12th-century poem by the troubadour Raimbaut de Vaqueiras, (&quot;Lady, so much I have endeared you&quot;); Sardinian epitomizes outlandish speech therein, along with non-Romance languages such as German and Berber, with the troubadour having the lady say &quot;&quot; (&quot;I don&#x27;t understand you more than a German or Sardinian or Berber&quot;); the Tuscan poet Fazio degli Uberti refers to the Sardinians in his poem as &quot;&quot; (&quot;a people that no one is able to understand / nor do they come to a knowledge of what other peoples say about them&quot;).

The Muslim geographer Muhammad al-Idrisi, who lived in Palermo, Sicily at the court of King Roger II, wrote in his work ( or, simply, &#x27;The book of Roger&#x27;) that &quot;Sardinians are ethnically , like the Berbers; they shun contacts with all the other nations and are people of purpose and valiant that never leave the arms&quot;. According to Wagner, the close relationship in the development of Vulgar Latin between North Africa and Sardinia might not have only derived from ancient ethnic affinities between the two populations, but also from their common political past within the Exarchate of Africa.

What literature is left to us from this period primarily consists of legal and administrative documents, besides the aforementioned and . The first document containing Sardinian elements is a 1063 donation to the abbey of Montecassino signed by Barisone I of Torres. Another such document (the so-called &quot;Carta Volgare&quot;) comes from the Judicate of Cagliari and was issued by Torchitorio I de Lacon-Gunale in around 1070, written in Sardinian whilst still employing the Greek alphabet. Other documents are the 1080 &quot;Logudorese Privilege&quot;, the 1089 Torchitorius&#x27; Donation (in the Marseille archives), the 1190–1206 Marsellaise Chart (in Campidanese Sardinian) and an 1173 communication between the Bishop Bernardo of Civita and Benedetto, who oversaw the Opera del Duomo in Pisa. The Statutes of Sassari (1316) and Castelgenovese () are written in Logudorese Sardinian.

The first chronicle in , called , was published anonymously in the 13th century, relating the events of the Judicate of Torres.

===Iberian period – Catalan and Castilian influence===

The 1297 feoffment of Sardinia by Pope Boniface VIII led to the creation of the Kingdom of Sardinia: that is, of a state which, although lacking in , entered by right as a member in personal union within the broader Mediterranean structure of the Crown of Aragon, a composite state. Thus began a long war between the latter and, to the cry of , from 1353, the previously allied Judicate of Arborea, in which the Sardinian language was to play the role of an ethnic marker.

The war had, among its motives, a never dormant and ancient Arborean political design to establish &quot;a great island nation-state, wholly indigenous&quot; which was assisted by the massive participation of the rest of the Sardinians, i.e. those not residing within the jurisdiction of Arborea (), as well as a widespread impatience with the foreign importation of a feudal regime, specifically &quot; and &quot;, which threatened the survival of deep-rooted indigenous institutions and, far from ensuring the return of the island to a unitary regime, had only introduced there &quot; (), whereas instead &quot; ().

The conflict between the two sovereign and warring parties, during which the Aragonese possessions making up the Kingdom of Sardinia were first administratively split into two separate &quot;halves&quot; () by Peter IV the Ceremonious in 1355, ended after sixty-seven years with the Iberian victory at Sanluri in 1409 and the renunciation of any succession right signed by William II of Narbonne in 1420. This event marked the definitive end of Sardinian independence, whose historical relevance for the island, likened by Francesco C. Casula to &quot;the end of Aztec Mexico&quot;, should be considered &quot;neither triumph nor defeat, but the painful birth of today&#x27;s Sardinia&quot;.

Any outbreak of anti-Aragonese rebellion, such as the revolt of Alghero in 1353, that of Uras in 1470 and finally that of Macomer in 1478, celebrated in , were and would have been systematically neutralised. From that moment, &quot;&quot;.

Casula believes that the Aragonese winners from the brutal conflict would then move on to destroy the pre-existing documentary production of the still living Sardinian Judicate, which was predominantly written in Sardinian language along with other ones the chancery was engaged with, leaving behind their trail only &quot;a few stones&quot; and, overall, a &quot;small group of documents&quot;, many of which are in fact still preserved and/or refer to archives outside the island. Specifically, the Arborean documents and the palace in which they were kept would be completely set on fire on May 21, 1478, as the viceroy triumphantly entered Oristano after having tamed the aforementioned 1478 rebellion, which threatened the revival of an Arborean identity which had been &quot;de jure&quot; abolished in 1420 but was still very much alive in popular memory.

Thereafter, the ruling class in Sardinia proceeded to adopt Catalan as their primary language. The situation in Cagliari, a city subject to Aragonese repopulation and where, according to Giovanni Francesco Fara ( / ), for a time Catalan took over Sardinian as in Alghero, was emblematic, so much so as to later generate idioms such as () to indicate a person who could not express themselves &quot;correctly&quot;. Alghero is still a Catalan-speaking enclave on Sardinia to this day. Nevertheless, the Sardinian language did not disappear from official use: the Catalan juridical tradition in the cities coexisted with that of the Sardinians, marked in 1421 by the Parliamentary extension of the Arborean to the feudal areas during the Reign of King Alfonso the Magnanimous. Fara, in the same first modern monograph dedicated to Sardinia, reported the lively multilingualism in &quot;one and the same people&quot;, i.e. the Sardinians, because of immigration &quot;by Spaniards and Italians&quot; who came to the island to trade with the natives.

The long-lasting war and the so-called Black Death had a devastating effect on the island, depopulating large parts of it. People from the neighbouring island of Corsica, which had been already Tuscanised, began to settle en masse in the northern Sardinian coast, leading to the birth of Sassarese and then Gallurese, two Italo-Dalmatian lects.

Despite Catalan being widely spoken and written on the island at this time, leaving a lasting influence in Sardinia, Sardinian continued to be used in documents pertaining to the Kingdom&#x27;s administrative and ecclesiastical spheres until the late 17th century. Religious orders also made use of the language. The regulations of the seminary of Alghero, issued by the bishop Andreas Baccallar on July 12, 1586, were in Sardinian; since they were directed to the entire diocese of Alghero and Unions, the provisions intended for the direct knowledge of the people were written in Sardinian and Catalan. The earliest catechism to date found in from the post-Tridentine period is dated 1695, at the foot of the synodal constitutions of the archbishopric of Cagliari.

The sociolinguistic situation was characterised by the active and passive competence of the two Iberian languages in the cities and of Sardinian in the rest of the island, as reported in various contemporary testimonies: in 1561, the Portuguese Jesuit Francisco Antonio estimated Sardinian to be «the ordinary language of Sardinia, as Italian is of Italy; in the cities of Cagliari and Alghero the ordinary language is Catalan, although there are many people who also use Sardinian». Cristòfor Despuig, in , had previously claimed in 1557 that, although Catalan had carved out a place for itself as , in many parts of the island the &quot;ancient language of the Kingdom&quot; (&quot;&quot;) was still preserved; the ambassador and Martin Carillo (supposed author of the ironic judgment on the Sardinians&#x27; tribal and sectarian divisions: &quot;&quot; ) noted in 1611 that the main cities spoke Catalan and Spanish, but outside these cities no other language was understood than Sardinian, which in turn was understood by everyone in the entire Kingdom; Joan Gaspar Roig i Jalpí, author of , reported in the mid-seventeenth century that in Sardinia &quot;&quot; (); Anselm Adorno, originally from Genoa but living in Bruges, noted in his pilgrimages how, many foreigners notwithstanding, the natives still spoke their own language ();); another testimony is offered by the rector of the Jesuit college of Sassari Baldassarre Pinyes who, in Rome, wrote: &quot;As far as the Sardinian language is concerned, Your Paternity should know that it is not spoken in this city, nor in Alghero, nor in Cagliari: it is only spoken in the towns&quot;.

The 16th century is marked by a new literary revival of Sardinian, starting from the 15th-century , written by Antòni Canu (1400–1476) and published in 1557. , by Hieronimu Araolla, was aimed at &quot;glorifying and enriching Sardinian, our language&quot; () as the Spanish, French and Italian poets had already done for their own languages ( and ). This way, Araolla is one of the first Sardinian authors to bind the language to a Sardinian nation, the existence of which is not outright stated but naturally implied. Antonio Lo Frasso, a poet born in Alghero (a city he remembered fondly) who spent his life in Barcelona, wrote lyric poetry in Sardinian.

Agreeing with Fara&#x27;s aforementioned , the Sardinian attorney Sigismondo Arquer, author of in Sebastian Münster&#x27;s Cosmographia universalis (whose report would also be quoted in Conrad Gessner&#x27;s &quot;On the different languages used by the various nations across the globe&quot; with minor variations), stated that Sardinian prevailed in most of the Kingdom, with particular regard for the interior, while Catalan and Spanish were spoken in the cities, where the predominantly Iberian ruling class &quot;occupies most of the official positions&quot;; although the Sardinian language had become fragmented due to foreign domination (i.e. &quot;namely Latins, Pisans, Genoese, Spanish, and Africans&quot;), Arquer pointed to there being many Sardinian words with apparently no traceable origin and reported that Sardinians nevertheless &quot;understand each other perfectly&quot;.

Especially through the reorganization of the monarchy led by the Count-Duke of Olivares, Sardinia would gradually join a broad Spanish cultural sphere. Spanish was perceived as an elitist language, gaining solid ground among the ruling Sardinian class; Spanish had thus a profound influence on Sardinian, especially in those words, styles and cultural models owing to the prestigious international role of the Habsburg monarchy as well as the Court. Most Sardinian authors would write in both Spanish and Sardinian until the 19th century and were well-versed in the former, like Vicente Bacallar y Sanna that was one of the founders of the Real Academia Española; according to Bruno Anatra&#x27;s estimates, around 87% of the books printed in Cagliari were in Spanish. A notable exception was Pedro Delitala (1550–1590), who decided to write in Italian instead. Nonetheless, the Sardinian language retained much of its importance, earning respect from the Spaniards in light of it being the ethnic code the people from most of the Kingdom kept using, especially in the rural areas. Sardinian endured, moreover, in religious drama and the drafting of notarial deeds in the interior. New genres of popular poetry were established around this period, like the or (sacred hymns), the (lullabies), the (funeral laments), the (quatrains), the and (curses), and the improvised poetry of the and .

Sardinian was also one of the few official languages, along with Spanish, Catalan and Portuguese, whose knowledge was required to be an officer in the Spanish &quot;tercios&quot;, among which the Sardinians were fully considered and counted as &quot;spanyols&quot;, as requested by the Stamenti in 1553.

Ioan Matheu Garipa, a priest from Orgosolo who translated the Italian into Sardinian () in 1627, was the first author to claim that Sardinian was the closest living relative of classical Latin and, like Araolla before him, valued Sardinian as the language of a specific ethno-national community. In this regard, the philologist Paolo Maninchedda argues that by doing so, these authors did not write &quot;about Sardinia or in Sardinian to fit into an island system, but to inscribe Sardinia and its language – and with them, themselves – in a European system. Elevating Sardinia to a cultural dignity equal to that of other European countries also meant promoting the Sardinians, and in particular their educated countrymen, who felt that they had no roots and no place in the continental cultural system&quot;.

===Savoyard period – Italian influence===

The War of the Spanish Succession gave Sardinia to Austria, whose sovereignty was confirmed by the 1713–14 treaties of Utrecht and Rastatt. In 1717 a Spanish fleet reoccupied Cagliari, and the following year Sardinia was ceded to Victor Amadeus II of Savoy in exchange for Sicily. The Savoyard representative, the Count of Lucerna di Campiglione, received the definitive deed of cession from the Austrian delegate Don Giuseppe dei Medici, on condition that the &quot;rights, statutes, privileges of the nation&quot; that had been the subject of diplomatic negotiations were preserved. The island thus entered the Italian orbit after the Iberian one, although this transfer would not initially entail any social nor cultural and linguistic changes: Sardinia would still retain for a long time its Iberian character, so much so that only in 1767 were the Aragonese and Spanish dynastic symbols replaced by the Savoyard cross. Until 1848, the Kingdom of Sardinia would be a composite state, and the island of Sardinia would remain a separate country with its own traditions and institutions, albeit without &quot;summa potestas&quot; and in personal union as an overseas possession of the House of Savoy.

The Sardinian language, although practiced in a state of diglossia, continued to be spoken by all social classes, its linguistic alterity and independence being universally perceived; Spanish, on the other hand, was the prestige code known and used by the Sardinian social strata with at least some education, in so pervasive a manner that Joaquín Arce refers to it in terms of a paradox: Castilian had become the common language of the islanders by the time they officially ceased to be Spanish and, through their annexation by the House of Savoy, became Italian through Piedmont instead. Given the current situation, the Piedmontese ruling class which held the reins of the island, in this early phase, resolved to maintain its political and social institutions, while at the same time progressively hollowing them out as well as &quot;treating the [Sardinian] followers of one faction and of the other equally, but keeping them divided in such a way as to prevent them from uniting, and for us to put to good use such rivalry when the occasion presents itself&quot;.

According to Amos Cardia, this pragmatic stance was rooted in three political reasons: in the first place, the Savoyards did not want to rouse international suspicion and followed to the letter the rules dictated by the Treaty of London, signed on 2 August 1718, whereby they had committed themselves to respect the fundamental laws of the newly acquired Kingdom; in the second place, they did not want to antagonize the hispanophile locals, especially the elites; and finally, they lingered on hoping they could one day manage to dispose of Sardinia altogether, while still keeping the title of Kings by regaining Sicily. In fact, since imposing Italian would have violated one of the fundamental laws of the Kingdom, which the new rulers swore to observe upon taking on the mantle of King, Victor Amadeus II emphasised the need for the operation to be carried out through incremental steps, small enough to go relatively unnoticed (), as early as 1721. Such prudence was again noted, when the King claimed that he was nevertheless not intentioned to ban either Sardinian or Spanish on two separate occasions, in 1726 and 1728.

The fact that the new masters of Sardinia felt at loss as to how they could better deal with a cultural and linguistic environment they perceived as alien to the Mainland, where Italian had long been the prestige and even official language, can be deduced from the study (&quot;Account of the proposed ways to introduce the Italian language to this Kingdom&quot;) commissioned in 1726 by the Piedmontese administration, to which the Jesuit Antonio Falletti from Barolo responded suggesting the (&quot;to introduce an unknown language [Italian] through a known one [Spanish]&quot;) method as the best course of action for Italianisation. In the same year, Victor Amadeus II had already said he could no longer tolerate the lack of ability to speak Italian on the part of the islanders, in view of the inconveniences that such inability was putting through for the functionaries sent from the Mainland. Restrictions to mixed marriages between Sardinian women and the Piedmontese officers dispatched to the island, which had hitherto been prohibited by law, were at one point lifted and even encouraged so as to better introduce the language to the local population.

Eduardo Blasco Ferrer argues that, in contrast to the cultural dynamics long established in the Mainland between Italian and the various Romance dialects thereof, in Sardinia the relationship between the Italian language – recently introduced by Savoy – and the native one had been perceived from the start by the locals, educated and uneducated alike, as a relationship (albeit unequal in terms of political power and prestige) between two very different languages, and not between a language and one of its dialects. The plurisecular Iberian period had also contributed in making the Sardinians feel relatively detached from the Italian language and its cultural sphere; local sensibilities towards the language were further exacerbated by the fact that the Spanish ruling class had long considered Sardinian a distinct language, with respect to their own ones and Italian as well. The perception of the alterity of Sardinian was also widely shared among the Italians who happened to visit the island and recounted their experiences with the local population, whom they often likened to the Spanish and the ancient peoples of the Orient, an opinion illustrated by the Duke Francis IV and Antonio Bresciani; a popular assertion by the officer Giulio Bechi, who would participate in a military campaign against Sardinian banditry dubbed as (&quot;great hunt&quot;), was that the islanders spoke &quot;a horrible language, as intricate as Saracen, and sounding like Spanish&quot;.

However, the Savoyard government eventually decided to directly introduce Italian altogether to Sardinia on the conventional date of 25 July 1760, because of the Savoyards&#x27; geopolitical need to draw the island away from Spain&#x27;s gravitational pull and culturally integrate Sardinia into the orbit of the Italian peninsula, through the thorough assimilation of the island&#x27;s cultural models, which were deemed by the Savoyard functionaries as &quot;foreign&quot; and &quot;inferior&quot;, to Piedmont. In fact, the measure in question prohibited, among other things, &quot;the unreserved use of the Castilian idiom in writing and speaking, which, after forty years of Italian rule, was still so deeply rooted in the hearts of the Sardinian teachers&quot;. In 1764, the exclusive imposition of the Italian language was finally extended to all sectors of public life, including education, in parallel with the reorganisation of the Universities of Cagliari and Sassari, which saw the arrival of personnel from the Italian mainland, and the reorganisation of lower education, where it was decided likewise to send teachers from Piedmont to make up for the lack of Italian-speaking Sardinian teachers. In 1763, it had already been planned to &quot;send a number of skilled Italian professors&quot; to Sardinia to &quot;rid the Sardinian teachers of their errors&quot; and &quot;steer them along the right path&quot;. The purpose did not elude the attention of the Sardinian ruling class, who deplored the fact that &quot;the Piedmontese bishops have introduced preaching in Italian&quot; and, in an anonymous document attributed to the conservative Sardinian Parliament and eloquently called (&quot;Grievance of the Kingdom&quot;), denounced how &quot;the arms, the privileges, the laws, the language, University, and currency of Aragon have now been taken away, to the disgrace of Spain, and to the detriment of all particulars&quot;.

Spanish was replaced as the official language, even though Italian struggled to take roots for a long time: Milà i Fontanals wrote in 1863 that Catalan had been used in notarial instruments from Sardinia well into the 1780s, together with Sardinian, while parish registers and official deeds continued to be drawn up in Spanish until 1828. The most immediate effect of the order was thus the further marginalization of the Sardinians&#x27; native idiom, making way for a thorough Italianisation of the island. For the first time, in fact, even the wealthy and most powerful families of rural Sardinia, the , started to perceive Sardinian as a handicap. Girolamo Sotgiu asserts on the matter that &quot;the Sardinian ruling class, just as it had become Hispanicized, now became Italianised, without ever managing to become Sardinian, that is to say, to draw from the experience and culture of their people, from which it came, those elements of concreteness without which a culture and a ruling class always seem foreign even in their homeland. This was the objective that the Savoyard government had set itself and which, to a good measure, it managed to pursue&quot;.

Francesco Gemelli, in , depicts the island&#x27;s linguistic pluralism in 1776, and referring to Francesco Cetti&#x27;s for a more meticulous analysis of &quot;the character of the Sardinian language (&quot;&quot;) and the main differences between Sassarese and Tuscan&quot;: &quot;five languages are spoken in Sardinia, that is Spanish, Italian, Sardinian, Algherese, and Sassarese. The former two because of the past and today&#x27;s domination, and they are understood and spoken through schooling by all the educated people residing in the cities, as well as villages. Sardinian is common to all the Kingdom, and is divided into two main dialects, Campidanese Sardinian and Sardinian from the Upper Half (&quot;&quot;). Algherese is a Catalan dialect, for a Catalan colony is Alghero; and finally Sassarese, which is spoken in Sassari, Tempio and Castel sardo (&quot;sic&quot;), is a dialect of Tuscan, a relic of their Pisan overlords. Spanish is losing ground to Italian, which has taken over the former in the fields of education and jurisdiction&quot;.

The first systematic study on the Sardinian language was written in 1782 by the philologist Matteo Madau, with the title of . The intention that motivated Madau was to trace the ideal path through which Sardinian could be elevated to the island&#x27;s proper national language; nevertheless, according to Amos Cardia, the Savoyard climate of repression on Sardinian culture would induce Matteo Madau to veil its radical proposals with some literary devices, and the author was eventually unable to ever translate them into reality. The first volume of comparative Sardinian dialectology was produced in 1786 by the Catalan Jesuit Andres Febres, known in Italy and Sardinia by the pseudonym of , who returned from Lima where he had first published a book of Mapuche grammar in 1764. After he moved to Cagliari, he became fascinated with the Sardinian language as well and conducted some research on three specific dialects; the aim of his work, entitled , was to &quot;write down the rules of the Sardinian language&quot; and spur the Sardinians to &quot;cherish the language of their Homeland, as well as Italian&quot;. The government in Turin, which had been monitoring Febres&#x27; activity, decided that his work would not be allowed to be published: Victor Amadeus III had supposedly not appreciated the fact that the book had a bilingual dedication to him in Italian and Sardinian, a mistake that his successors, while still echoing back to a general concept of &quot;Sardinian ancestral homeland&quot;, would from then on avoid, and making exclusive use of Italian to produce their works.

At the end of the 18th century, following the trail of the French Revolution, a group of the Sardinian middle class planned to break away from Savoyard rule and institute an independent Sardinian Republic under French protection; all over the island, a number of political pamphlets printed in Sardinian were illegally distributed, calling for a mass revolt against the &quot;Piedmontese&quot; rule and the barons&#x27; abuse. The most famous literary product born out of such political unrest was the poem , noted as a testament of the French-inspired democratic and patriotic values, as well as Sardinia&#x27;s situation under feudalism. As for the reactions that the three-year Sardinian revolutionary period aroused in the island&#x27;s ruling class, who were now in the process of Italianisation, for Sotgiu &quot;its failure was complete: undecided between a breathless municipalism and a dead-end attachment to the Crown, it did not have the courage to lead the revolutionary wave coming from the countryside&quot;. In fact, although pamphlets such as &quot;the Achilles of Sardinian Liberation&quot; circulated, denouncing the backwardness of an oppressive feudal system and a Ministry that was said to have &quot;always been the enemy of the Sardinian Nation&quot;, and the &quot;social pact between the Sovereign and the Nation&quot; was declared to have been broken, there was no radical change in the form of government: therefore, it is not surprising, according to Sotgiu, that although &quot;the call for the Sardinian nation, its traditions and identity became stronger and stronger, even to the point of requesting the creation of a stable military force of &quot;Sardinian nationals only&quot;&quot;, the concrete hypothesis of abolishing the monarchical and feudal regimes did not &quot;make its way into the consciousness of many&quot;. The only result was therefore &quot;the defeat of the peasant class emerging from the very core of feudal society, urged on by the masses of peasants and led by the most advanced forces of the Sardinian bourgeoisie&quot; and, conversely, the victory of the feudal barons and &quot;of large strata of the town bourgeoisie that had developed within the framework of the feudal order and feared that the abolition of feudalism and the proclamation of the Republic might simultaneously destroy the very basis of their own wealth and prestige&quot;.

In the climate of monarchic restoration that followed Giovanni Maria Angioy&#x27;s rebellion, whose substantial failure marked therefrom a historic watershed in Sardinia&#x27;s future, other Sardinian intellectuals, all characterized by an attitude of general devotion to their island as well as proven loyalty to the House of Savoy, posed in fact the question of the Sardinian language, while being careful enough to use only Italian as a language to get their point across. During the 19th century in particular, the Sardinian intellectuality and ruling class found itself divided over the adherence to the Sardinian national values and the allegiance to the new Italian nationality, toward which they eventually leaned in the wake of the abortive Sardinian revolution. The identity crisis of the Sardinian ruling class, and their strive for acceptance into the new citizenship of the Italian identity, would manifest itself with the publication of the so-called by the unionist Pietro Martini in 1863.

A few years after the major anti-Piedmontese revolt, in 1811, the priest Vincenzo Raimondo Porru published a timid essay of Sardinian grammar, which, however, referred expressively to the Southern dialect (hence the title of ) and, out of prudence towards the king, was made with the declared intention of easing the acquisition of Italian among his fellow Sardinians, instead of protecting their language. The more ambitious work of the professor and senator Giovanni Spano, the &quot;Ortographia sarda nationale&quot; (&quot;Sardinian National Orthography&quot;), although it was officially meant for the same purpose as Porru&#x27;s, attempted in reality to establish a unified Sardinian orthography based on Logudorese, just like Florentine had become the basis for Italian.
The jurist Carlo Baudi di Vesme claimed that the suppression of Sardinian and the imposition of Italian was desirable to make the islanders into &quot;civilized Italians&quot;. Since Sardinia was, in the words of Di Vesme, &quot;not Spanish, but neither Italian: it is and has been for centuries just Sardinian&quot;, it was necessary, at the turn of the circumstances that &quot;inflamed it with ambition, desire and love of all things Italian&quot;, to promote these tendencies even more in order &quot;to profit from them in the common interest&quot;, for which it proved &quot;almost necessary&quot; to spread the Italian language in Sardinia &quot;presently so little known in the interior&quot; with a view to better enable the Perfect Fusion: &quot;Sardinia will be Piedmont, it will be Italy; it will receive and give us lustre, wealth and power!&quot;.

The primary and tertiary education was thus offered exclusively through Italian, and Piedmontese cartographers went on to replace many Sardinian place names with Italian ones. The Italian education, being imparted in a language the Sardinians were not familiar with, spread Italian for the first time in history to Sardinian villages, marking the troubled transition to the new dominant language; the school environment, which employed Italian as the sole means of communication, grew to become a microcosm around the then-monolingual Sardinian villages. In 1811, the canon Salvatore Carboni published in Bologna the polemic book (&quot;Holy Discourses in Sardinian language&quot;), wherein the author lamented the fact that Sardinia, &quot;&quot; (&quot;Being an Italian province nowadays, [Sardinia] cannot have laws and public acts made in its own language&quot;), and while claiming that &quot;&quot; (&quot;the Sardinian language, however unofficial, will last as long as Sardinia among the Sardinians&quot;), he also asked himself &quot;&quot; (&quot;Why should we show neglect and contempt for Sardinian, which is a language as ancient and noble as Italian, French and Spanish?&quot;).

In 1827, the historical legal code serving as the &quot;consuetud de la nació sardesca&quot; in the days of the Iberian rule, the &quot;Carta de Logu&quot;, was abolished and replaced by the more advanced Savoyard code of Charles Felix &quot;Leggi civili e criminali del Regno di Sardegna&quot;, written in Italian. The Perfect Fusion with the Mainland States, enacted under the auspices of a &quot;transplant, without any reserves and obstacles, [of] the culture and civilization of the Italian Mainland to Sardinia&quot;, would result in the loss of the island&#x27;s residual autonomy and marked the moment when &quot;the language of the &quot;Sardinian nation&quot; lost its value as an instrument with which to ethnically identify a particular people and its culture, to be codified and cherished, and became instead one of the many regional dialects subordinated to the national language&quot;.

Despite the long-term assimilation policy, the anthem of the Savoyard Kingdom of Sardinia would be &quot;S&#x27;hymnu sardu nationale&quot; (&quot;the Sardinian National Anthem&quot;), also known as &quot;Cunservet Deus su Re&quot; (&quot;God save the King&quot;), before it was &quot;de facto&quot; replaced by the Italian &quot;Marcia Reale&quot; as well, in 1861. However, even when the island became part of the Kingdom of Italy under Victor Emmanuel II in 1861, Sardinia&#x27;s distinct culture from the now unified Mainland made it an overall neglected province within the newly proclaimed unitary nation state. Between 1848 and 1861, the island was plunged into a social and economic crisis that was to last until the post-war period. Eventually, Sardinian came to be perceived as / , literally translating into English as &quot;the language of hunger&quot; (i.e. the language of the poor), and Sardinian parents strongly supported the teaching of the Italian tongue to their children, since they saw it as the portal to escaping from a poverty-stricken, rural, isolated and underprivileged life.

===Late modern period===

At the dawn of the 20th century, Sardinian had remained an object of research almost only among the island&#x27;s scholars, struggling to garner international interest and even more suffering from a certain marginalization in the strictly Italian sphere: one observes in fact &quot;the prevalence of foreign scholars over Italian ones and/or the existence of fundamental and still irreplaceable contributions by non-Italian linguists&quot;. Previously, Sardinian had been mentioned in a book by August Fuchs on irregular verbs in Romance languages (, Berlin, 1840) and, later, in the second edition of (1856–1860) written by Friedrich Christian Diez, credited as one of the founders of Romance philology. The pioneering research of German authors spurred a certain interest in the Sardinian language on the part of some Italian scholars, such as Graziadio Isaia Ascoli and, above all, his disciple Pier Enea Guarnerio, who was the first in Italy to classify Sardinian as a separate member of the Romance language family without subordinating it to the group of &quot;Italian dialects&quot;, as was previously the custom in Italy. Wilhelm Meyer-Lübke, an undisputed authority on Romance linguistics, published in 1902 an essay on Logudorese Sardinian from the survey of the condaghe of San Pietro di Silki (, in , Phil. Hist. Kl., 145), the study of which led to the initiation into Sardinian linguistics of the then university student Max Leopold Wagner: it is to the latter&#x27;s activity that much of the twentieth-century knowledge and research of Sardinian in the phonetic, morphological and, in part, syntactic fields was generated.

During the mobilization for World War I, the Italian Army compelled all people on the island that were &quot;of Sardinian stock&quot; () to enlist as Italian subjects and established the Sassari Infantry Brigade on 1 March 1915 at Tempio Pausania and Sinnai. Unlike the other infantry brigades of Italy, Sassari&#x27;s conscripts were only Sardinians (including many officers). It is currently the only unit in Italy with an anthem in a language other than Italian: &quot;Dimonios&quot; (&quot;Devils&quot;), which would be written in 1994 by Luciano Sechi; its title derives from the German-language &quot;Rote Teufel&quot; (&quot;red devils&quot;), by which they were popularly known among the troops of the Austro-Hungarian Army. Compulsory military service around this period played a role in language shift and is referred to by historian Manlio Brigaglia as &quot;the first great mass &quot;nationalization&quot;&quot; of the Sardinians. Nevertheless, similarly to Navajo-speaking service members in the United States during World War II, as well as Quechua speakers during the Falklands War, native Sardinians were offered the opportunity to be recruited as code talkers to transmit tactical information in Sardinian over radio communications which might have otherwise run the risk of being gained by Austrian troops, since some of them hailed from Italian-speaking areas to which, therefore, the Sardinian language was utterly alien: Alfredo Graziani writes in his war diary that &quot;having learned that many of our phonograms were being intercepted, we adopted the system of communicating on the phone only in Sardinian, certain that in this way they would never be able to understand what one was saying&quot;. To avoid infiltration attempts by said Italophone troops, positions were guarded by Sardinian recruits from the Sassari Brigade who required anyone who came to them that they identify themselves first by proving they spoke Sardinian: &quot;&quot;.

The Sardinian-born philosopher Antonio Gramsci commented on the Sardinian linguistic question while writing a letter to his sister Teresina; Gramsci was aware of the long-term ramifications of language shift, and suggested that Teresa let her son acquire Sardinian with no restriction, because doing otherwise would result in &quot;putting his imagination into a straitjacket&quot; as well as him ending up eventually &quot;learning two jargons, and no language at all&quot;.

Coinciding with the year of the Irish War of Independence, Sardinian autonomism re-emerged as an expression of the fighters&#x27; movement, coagulating into the Sardinian Action Party (PsdAz) which, before long, would become one of the most important players in the island&#x27;s political life. At the beginning, the party would not have had strictly ethnic claims though, being the Sardinian language and culture widely perceived, in the words of Fiorenzo Toso, as &quot;symbols of the region&#x27;s underdevelopment&quot;.

The policy of forced assimilation culminated in the twenty years of the Fascist regime, which launched a campaign of violent repression of autonomist demands and finally determined the island&#x27;s definitive entry into the &quot;national cultural system&quot; through the combined work of the educational system and the one-party system. Local cultural expressions were thus repressed, including Sardinia&#x27;s festivals and improvised poetry competitions, and a large number of Sardinian surnames were changed to sound more Italian. An argument broke out between the Sardinian poet Antioco Casula (popularly known as &quot;Montanaru&quot;) and the fascist journalist Gino Anchisi, who stated that &quot;once the region is moribund or dead&quot;, which the regime declared to be, &quot;so will the dialect &quot;(sic)&quot;&quot;, which was interpreted as &quot;the region&#x27;s revealing spiritual element&quot;; in the wake of this debate, Anchisi managed to have Sardinian banned from the printing press, as well. The significance of the Sardinian language as it was posed by Casula, in fact, lent itself to potentially subversive themes, being tied to the practices of cultural resistance of an indigenous ethnic group, whose linguistic repertoire had to be introduced in school to preserve a &quot;Sardinian personality&quot; and regain &quot;a dignity&quot; perceived to have been lost in the process. Another famed poet from the island, Salvatore (&quot;Bore&quot;) Poddighe, fell into a severe depression and took his own life a few years after his masterwork (&quot;Sa Mundana Cummedia&quot;) had been seized by Cagliari&#x27;s police commissioner. When the use of Sardinian in school was banned in 1934 as part of a nation-wide educational plan against the alloglot &quot;dialects&quot;, the then Sardinian-speaking children were confronted with another means of communication that was supposed to be their own from then onwards.

On a whole, this period saw the most aggressive cultural assimilation effort by the central government, which led to an even further sociolinguistic degradation of Sardinian. While the interior managed to at least partially resist this intrusion at first, everywhere else the regime had succeeded in thoroughly supplanting the local cultural models with new ones hitherto foreign to the community and compress the former into a &quot;pure matter of folklore&quot;, marking a severance from the island&#x27;s heritage that engendered, according to Guido Melis, &quot;an identity crisis with worrying social repercussions&quot;, as well as &quot;a rift that could no longer be healed through the generations&quot;. This period is identified by Manlio Brigaglia as the second mass &quot;nationalization&quot; of the Sardinians, which was characterized by &quot;a policy deliberately aiming at &quot;Italianisation&quot;&quot; by means of, in his words, &quot;a declared war&quot; against the usage of the Sardinian language by fascism and the Catholic Church alike.

In 1945, following the restoration of political freedoms, the Sardinian Action Party called for autonomy as a federal state within the &quot;new Italy&quot; that had emerged from the Resistance: it was in the context of the second post-war period that, as consensus for autonomy kept growing, the party began to distinguish itself by policies based on Sardinia&#x27;s linguistic and cultural specificity.

==Present situation==
After World War II, awareness around the Sardinian language and the danger of its slipping away did not seem to concern the Sardinian elites and entered the political spaces later than in other European peripheries marked by the presence of local ethno-linguistic minorities; Sardinian was in fact dismissed by the middle class, as both the Sardinian language and culture were still being held responsible for the island&#x27;s underdevelopment. The Sardinian ruling class, drawn to the Italian modernisation stance on how to steer the islanders to &quot;social development&quot;, believed in fact that the Sardinians had been held back by their own &quot;traditional practices&quot; vis-à-vis the mainlanders, and that, in order to catch up with the latter, social and cultural progress could only be brought about through the rejection of said practices. As the language bore an increasing amount of stigmatisation and came to be perceived as an undesirable identity marker, the Sardinians were consequently encouraged to part with it by way of linguistic and cultural assimilation.

At the time of drafting of the statute in 1948, the national legislator in Rome eventually decided to specify the &quot;Sardinian specialty&quot; as a criterion for political autonomy uniquely on the grounds of local socio-economic issues; further considerations were discarded which were centred on the ascertainment of a distinct cultural, historical and geographical identity, although they had been hitherto the primary local justifications arguing for home rule, as they were looked down upon as a potential prelude to more autonomist or even more radical separatist claims; this view would be exemplified by a report of the Italian Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry into Banditry, which warned against a looming threat posed by &quot;isolationist tendencies injurious to the development of Sardinian society and recently manifesting themselves in the proposal to regard Sardinian as the language of an ethnic minority&quot;. Eventually, the special statute of 1948 settled instead to concentrate on the arrangement of state-funded plans (baptised with the Italian name of ) for the heavy industrial development of the island.

Therefore, far from generating a Statute grounded on the acknowledgment of a particular cultural identity like, for example, in the Aosta Valley and South Tyrol, what ended up resulting in Sardinia was, in the words of Mariarosa Cardia, an outcome &quot;solely based on economic considerations, because there was not either the will or the ability to devise a strong and culturally motivated autonomy, a &quot;Sardinian specificity&quot; that was not defined in terms of social backwardness and economic deprivation&quot;. Emilio Lussu, who admitted that he had only voted in favour of the final draft &quot;to prevent the Statute from being rejected altogether by a single vote, even in such a reduced form&quot;, was the only member, at the session of 30 December 1946, to call in vain for the mandatory teaching of the Sardinian language, arguing that it was &quot;a millenary heritage that must be preserved&quot;.

In the meantime, the emphasis on Italian continued, with historical sites and ordinary objects being henceforth popularised in Italian for mass consumption (e.g. the various kinds of &quot;traditional&quot; cheese, instead of , instead of , instead of / , etc.). The Ministry of Public Education once requested that the teachers willing to teach Sardinian be put under surveillance. The rejection of the indigenous language and culture, along with a rigid model of Italian-language education which induced a denigration of Sardinian through corporal punishment and shaming, has led to poor schooling for the Sardinians. Roberto Bolognesi stated that in his school years in Sardinia, he had &quot;witnessed both physical and psychological abuse against monolingual Sardinian-speaking children. The psychological violence consisted usually in calling the children &quot;donkeys&quot; and in inviting the whole class to join the mockery&quot;. Early school leaving and high school failure rates in Sardinia prompted a debate in the early Nineties on the efficaciousness of strictly monolingual education, with proposals for a focus on a comparative approach.

Claims for an autonomous solution to the Sardinian economic, social and cultural problems, which the 1948 Statute proved unable to resolve, came to the fore once again in the Sixties, with campaigns, often expressed in the form of political demands by Sardinian nationalists, to give Sardinian equal status with Italian as a means to promote cultural identity. Antonio Simon Mossa had drawn from his past experiences across the world, including the newly independent country of Algeria, that Sardinians were one of the many ethnic and national minorities facing the danger of cultural assimilation, and his fervor reverberated across the Sardinian society, pushing even some non-nationalist groups to take an interest in matters relating to minorities. Although a law was passed as early as 1955 for the establishment of five professorships of Sardinian linguistics, one of the first demands for bilingualism was in fact formulated in a resolution adopted by the University of Cagliari in 1971, calling upon the national and regional authorities to recognize the Sardinians as an ethnic and linguistic minority and Sardinian as the islanders&#x27; co-official language. At a time when the Italian &quot;modernisation plans&quot; in Sardinia were in full swing, the Italian government was apprehensive about this deliberation by the University of Cagliari as providing the timber for further ethnic unrest in the state&#x27;s peripheries. Sergio Salvi&#x27;s description of the Sardinians as a &quot;forbidden nation&quot; in Italy further contributed to the linguistic question gaining more notoriety at the national level. A first legal draft concerning Sardinian as a language to be legally put on an equal position with Italian was developed by the Sardinian Action Party in 1975. Critical acclaim in Sardinian cultural circles followed the patriotic poem &quot;No sias isciau&quot; (&quot;Don&#x27;t be a slave&quot;) by Raimondo () Piras some months before his death in 1977, urging bilingual education to reverse the ongoing trend of cultural De-Sardization.

Indeed, during the late 70s reports were released that Sardinian was on course of being abandoned in favour of Italian in the towns and among the younger generation. By then, a significant shift to Italian had been noted in rural Sardinia not only in the Campidanese plain, but even in some inner areas that had been previously considered Sardinian-speaking bastions, manifesting a parallel shift of the values upon which the ethnic and cultural identity of the Sardinians was traditionally grounded. From then onwards, the use of Sardinian would continue to recede because of the strongly negative view the Sardinian community developed toward it, assuming a self-belittling attitude which has been described as the emergence of a &quot;minority complex&quot; fairly typical of linguistic minorities. However, by the Eighties the language had become a point of ethnic pride: it also became a tool through which long held grievances towards the central government&#x27;s failure at delivering better economic and social conditions could be channeled. A contradicting tendency has been noted by observing that, while Sardinian is held in a much more positive light than before, its actual use has notably decreased and keeps doing so.

A law by popular initiative for Sardinian-Italian bilingualism garnered considerable success as it kept gathering thousands of signatures, but was promptly blocked by the Italian Communist Party and thus never implemented. The same Italian Communist Party would later propose, however, another bill of its own initiative &quot;for the protection of the language and culture of the Sardinian people&quot; in 1980. In the end, following tensions and claims of the Sardinian nationalist movement for concrete cultural and political autonomy, including the recognition of the Sardinians as an ethnic and linguistic minority, three separate bills were eventually presented to the Regional Council in the Eighties. In 1981, the Regional Council debated and voted for the introduction of bilingualism in Sardinia for the first time. As pressure by a resolution of the Council of Europe continued to bear on Italian policy-makers for the protection of minorities, a Commission was appointed in 1982 to investigate the issue; the following year, a bill was presented to the Italian Parliament, but without success. One of the first laws approved by the Sardinian legislator with respect to the protection and promotion of the Sardinian language and culture was soon rejected by the Constitutional Court in 1994, which deemed it &quot;exorbitant in a multitude of ways with regard to the supplementary and implementing powers enjoyed by the Region in matters of education&quot;; it was not until 1997 that Sardinian was finally recognized by the regional law (n. 26 of 15 October 1997 &quot;Promotion and enhancement of the culture and language of Sardinia&quot;) without there being any recourse from the Italian central government; this law too, however, would prove to be more focused on the traditions and history of the Sardinian people than their language in itself.

A survey conducted by MAKNO in 1984 showed that three-quarters of the Sardinians had a positive attitude towards bilingual education (22% of the interviewees, especially in the Province of Nuoro and Oristano, wanted Sardinian to be compulsory in Sardinian schools, while 54.7% would prefer to see teaching in Sardinian as optional) and official bilingualism like in the Aosta Valley and South Tyrol (62.7% of the population were in favour, 25.9% said no and 11.4% were unsure). Such consensus remains relatively stable to this day; another survey, conducted in 2008, reported that more than half of the interviewees, 57.3%, were in favour of the introduction of Sardinian into schools alongside Italian. More research carried out in 2010 confirmed warm reception among the students&#x27; parents to introducing Sardinian at school, even though skepticism circulated around having it taught as the vehicular language of education.

In the 1990s, there had been a resurgence of Sardinian-language music, ranging from the more traditional genres (, , etc.) to rock (, , , etc.) and even hip hop and rap (&quot;Dr. Drer e CRC Posse&quot;, &quot;Quilo&quot;, , &quot;Malam&quot;, , &quot;Menhir&quot;, &quot;Stranos Elementos&quot;, &quot;Malos Cantores&quot;, &quot;Randagiu Sardu&quot;, &quot;Futta&quot; etc.), and with artists who used the language as a means to promote the island and address its long-standing issues and the new challenges. A few films (like &quot;Su Re&quot;, &quot;Bellas Mariposas&quot;, &quot;Treulababbu&quot;, &quot;Sonetaula&quot; etc.) have also been dubbed in Sardinian, and some others were provided with subtitles in the language. The first scientific work in Sardinian (), delving into the question of modern energy supplies, was written by Paolo Giuseppe Mura, Physics Professor at the University of Cagliari, in 1995.

Eventually, sustained activism made possible the ratification by Italy of the European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities in 1998, which would be followed in 1999 by the formal recognition of twelve minority languages (Sardinian, Albanian, Catalan, German, Greek, Slovenian, Croatian, French, Franco-Provençal, Friulian, Ladin and Occitan) through the framework law no. 482, in keeping with the spirit of Art. 6 of the Italian Constitution (&quot;The Republic safeguards linguistic minorities by means of appropriate measures&quot;). While the first section of said law states that Italian is the official language of the Republic, a number of provisions are included to normalize the use of such languages and let them become part of the national fabric. However, Italy (along with France and Malta) has never ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Nevertheless, the law proved to be a positive step towards the legalization of Sardinian as it put at least an end to the ban on the language which had been in effect since the Italian Unification, and was deemed as a starting point, albeit timid, to pursue a more decentralized school curriculum for the island.

Still, some national school books (education has never fallen under the region&#x27;s remits and is managed by the state at the central level) have not stopped to squeeze the language into the Italian acceptation of &quot;dialetto&quot; (&quot;Italian dialect&quot;) in spite of its actual recognition by the state. Sardinian is yet to be taught at school, with the exception of a few experimental occasions; Mauro Maxia noticed a lack of interest on the part of school managers, some request for Sardinian language classes notwithstanding. Furthermore, its use has not ceased to be disincentivized as antiquated or even indicative of a lack of education, leading many locals to associate it with negative feelings of shame, backwardness, and provincialism. Similar issues of identity have been observed in regard to the community&#x27;s attitude toward what they positively perceive to be part of &quot;modernity&quot;, generally associated with the Italian cultural sphere, as opposed to the Sardinian one, whose aspects have long been stigmatized as &quot;primitive&quot; and &quot;barbarous&quot; by the political and social institutions that ruled the island. Roberto Bolognesi believes that the enduring stigmatisation of Sardinian as the language of the &quot;socially and culturally disadvantaged&quot; classes leads to the nurturing of a vicious circle that further promotes the language&#x27;s regression, reinforcing its negative judgement among those who perceive themselves as &quot;most competitive&quot;: &quot;a perverse mechanism that has condemned and still condemns Sardinian speakers to social marginalisation, systematically excluding them from those linguistic and cultural interactions in which the prestigious registers and high style of language are developed, first and foremost in schools&quot;.
A number of other factors like a considerable immigration flow from mainland Italy, the interior rural exodus to urban areas, where Sardinian is spoken by a much lower percentage of the population, and the use of Italian as a prerequisite for jobs and social advancement actually hinder any policy set up to promote the language. Therefore, following the model proposed by a UNESCO panel of experts in 2003, Sardinian is classified by UNESCO as a &quot;definitely endangered&quot; language (&quot;children no longer learn the language as mother tongue in the home&quot;), on the way to become &quot;severely endangered&quot; (&quot;the language is used mostly by the grandparental generation and up&quot;).

Language use is far from stable; following the Expanded GIDS (&quot;Expanded Graded Intergenerational Disruption Scale&quot;) model, Sardinian would position between 7 (&quot;Shifting: the child-bearing generation knows the language well enough to use it among themselves but none are transmitting it to their children&quot;) and 8a (&quot;Moribund: the only remaining active speakers of the language are members of the grandparent generation&quot;). While an estimated 68 percent of the islanders had in fact a good oral command of Sardinian, language ability among the children has plummeted to less than 13 percent; some linguists, like Mauro Maxia, cite the low number of Sardinian-speaking children (with the notable case of a number of villages where Sardinian has ceased to be spoken altogether since 1993) as indicative of language decline, calling Sardinia a case of &quot;linguistic suicide&quot;. The depth of the Sardophone networks&#x27; increasing assimilation into Italian is illustrated by the latest ISTAT data published in 2017, which confirm Italian as the language that has largely taken root as the means of socialization within Sardinian families (52.1%), relegating the practice of code-switching to 31.5% and the actual use of languages other than Italian to only 15.6%; outside the social circle of family and friends, the numbers define Italian as by far the most prevalent language (87.2%), as opposed to the usage of Sardinian and other languages which has dropped to 2.8%. Today, most people who use Sardinian as part of day-to-day life reside mainly in the sparsely populated areas in the countryside, like the mountainous region of Barbagia.

A bill proposed by the cabinet of the former Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti would have further lowered the protection level of Sardinian, distinguishing between the so-called &quot;national minorities&quot;, speaking languages protected by international agreements (German, Slovenian, French) and the &quot;linguistic minorities&quot; whose language is not spoken in any state other than Italy (all the other ethno-linguistic groups, including Sardinian). This bill, which was eventually implemented but later deemed unconstitutional by the Court, triggered a reaction on the island. Students expressed an interest in taking all (or part) of their exit examinations in Sardinian. In response to a 2013 Italian initiative to remove bilingual signs on the island, a group of Sardinians began a virtual campaign on Google Maps to replace Italian place names with the original Sardinian names. After about one month, Google changed the place names back to Italian.
After a signature campaign, it has been made possible to change the language setting on Facebook from any language to Sardinian. It is also possible to switch to Sardinian even in Telegram and a number of other programs, like F-Droid, Diaspora, OsmAnd, Notepad++, QGIS, Swiftkey, Stellarium, Skype, VLC media player for Android and iOS, Linux Mint Debian Edition 2 &quot;Betsy&quot;, Firefox etc. The DuckDuckGo search engine is available in Sardinian as well. In 2016, the first automatic translation software from Italian to Sardinian was developed.

In 2015, all the political parties in the Sardinian regional council reached an agreement concerning a series of amendments to the old 1997 law to be able to introduce the optional teaching of the language in Sardinia&#x27;s schools. The Unified Text on the Discipline of the Regional linguistic policy was eventually approved on 27 June 2018, with the aim of setting in motion a path towards bilingual administration, contributions to bilingual mass media, publishing, IT schools and websites; it also allowed for the foundation of a Sardinian board (&quot;Consulta de su Sardu&quot;) with thirty experts that would propose a linguistic standard based on the main historical varieties, and would also have advisory duties towards the Regional body. However, said law has yet to be followed up by the respective implementing decrees, the lack of which prevents it from being legally applicable. Some Sardinian language activists and activist groups have also contested the law itself, considering it a political attack on Sardinian made to try to negate its uniformity and to relegate it to folklore, and also noted how its text contains a few parts that could bring the Italian government to challenge it.

In 2021 the Prosecutor of Oristano opened a Sardinian linguistic desk, both to support citizens and to provide advice and translations to magistrates and the police. It has been the first time in Italy in which such a service has been offered to a minority language.

Although there is still not an option to teach Sardinian on the island itself, let alone in Italy, some language courses are instead sometimes available in Germany (Universities of Stuttgart, Munich, Tübingen, Mannheim etc.), Spain (University of Girona), Iceland and Czech Republic (Brno university). Shigeaki Sugeta also taught Sardinian to his students of Romance languages at the Waseda University in Tokyo (Japan), and would even release a Sardinian–Japanese dictionary out of it.

At present, the Sardinian-speaking community is the least protected one in Italy, despite being the largest minority language group officially recognized by the state. In fact the language, which is receding in all domains of use, is still not given access to any field of public life, such as education (Italian–Sardinian bilingualism is still frowned upon, while the local public universities play little, if any, role whatsoever in supporting the language), politics (with the exception of some nationalist groups), justice, administrative authorities and public services, media, and cultural, ecclesiastical, economic and social activities, as well as facilities. In a case presented to the European Commission by the then MEP Renato Soru in 2017, in which he complained of national negligence with regard to the state&#x27;s own legislation in comparison to other linguistic minorities, the Commission&#x27;s response pointed out to the Honourable Member that matters of language policy pursued by individual member states do not fall within its competences.

According to a 2017 report on the digital language diversity in Europe, Sardinian appears to be particularly vital on social media as part of many people&#x27;s everyday life for private use, but such vitality does not still translate into a strong and wide availability of Internet media for the language. In 2017, a 60-hour Sardinian language course was introduced for the first time in Sardinia and Italy at the University of Cagliari, although such a course had been already available in other universities abroad.

In 2015, the Council of Europe commented on the status of national minorities in Italy, noting the approach of the Italian government towards them with the exception of the German, French and Slovenian languages, where Italy has applied full bilingualism due to international agreements; despite the formal recognition from the Italian state, Italy does not in fact collect any information on the ethnic and linguistic composition of the population, apart from South Tyrol. There is also virtually no print and broadcasting media exposure in politically or numerically weaker minorities like Sardinian. Moreover, the resources allocated to cultural projects like bilingual education, which lacks a consistent approach and offers no guarantee of continuity throughout the years, are largely insufficient to meet &quot;even the most basic expectations&quot;.

A solution to the Sardinian question being unlikely to be found anytime soon, the language has become highly endangered: even though the endogamy rate among group members seems to be very high, less than 15 per cent of the Sardinian children use the language to communicate with each other. it appears that the late recognition of Sardinian as a minority language on the part of the state, as well as the gradual but pervasive Italianisation promoted by the latter&#x27;s education system, the administration system and the media, followed by the intergenerational language replacement, made it so that the vitality of Sardinian has been heavily compromised. The 1995 Euromosaic project, which conducted a research study on the current situation of the ethno-linguistic minorities across Europe under the auspices of the European Commission, concludes their report on Sardinian as follows:
As Matteo Valdes explains, &quot;the island&#x27;s population sees, day after day, the decline of their original languages. They are complicit in this decline, passing on to their children the language of prestige and power, but at the same time they feel that the loss of local languages is also a loss of themselves, of their history, of their own specific identity or distinctiveness&quot;.

With cultural assimilation having already occurred, most of the younger generation of islanders, although they do understand some basic Sardinian, is now in fact Italian monolingual and monocultural as they are not able to speak Sardinian anymore, but simply regional Italian (known amongst Italian linguists as or &quot;IrS&quot;) which in its lowest diastratic forms is, oftentimes derisively, nicknamed &quot;italiànu porcheddìnu&quot; (literally &quot;swinish Italian&quot;) by native Sardinian speakers. Roberto Bolognesi argues that, in the face of the persistent denial and rejection of the Sardinian language, it is as if the latter &quot;had taken revenge&quot; on its original community of speakers &quot;and continues to do so by &quot;polluting&quot; the hegemonic linguistic system&quot;, recalling Gramsci&#x27;s prophetic warning uttered at the dawn of the previous century. In fact, compared to a now prevalent regional Italian that, according to Bolognesi, &quot;is in fact a hybrid language that has arisen from the contact between two different linguistic systems&quot;, &quot;the (little) Sardinian which is used by young people often constitutes an ungrammatical jargon filled with obscenities and constructions belonging to Italian&quot;: in other words, the population would therefore only master &quot;two crippled languages&quot; () whose manifestations do not arise from a recognisable norm, nor do they constitute a clear source of linguistic security. Bolognesi believes therefore that the Sardinians&#x27; utter &quot;rejection of their original linguistic identity has not entailed the hoped-for and automatic homologation to a more socially prestigious identity, but the acquisition of a second-class identity (neither truly Sardinian nor truly Italian), no longer self-centred but rather peripheral with respect to the sources of linguistic and cultural norms, which still remain beyond their reach: on the other side of the Tyrrhenian Sea&quot;.

By contrast, Eduardo Blasco Ferrer has been noted how the Sardinian-speaking community engages only in code-switching and usually takes care in refraining from code-mixing between the two different languages.

Negative attitudes among native speakers have been observed towards second-language learners for speaking &quot;poor Sardinian&quot;, an attitude considered to be ethnically grounded on the interaction of in-group and out-group dynamics.

In conclusion, the Sardinian language, while still being described as &quot;viable&quot; in 2003, continues to be adversely affected by pervasive and all-encompassing Italianisation through language shift, and is thus nowadays moribund, albeit its replacement continues at a slower pace than before thanks to the commitment of those who, in various contexts, promote its revaluation in a process that has been defined by some scholars as &quot;linguistic re-Sardization&quot;. Still, arrangements for bilingualism exist only on paper and factors such as the intergenerational transmission, which remain essential in the reproduction of the ethnolinguistic group, are severely compromised because of Italianisation; many young speakers, who have been raised in Italian rather than Sardinian, have a command of their ethnic language which does not extend beyond a few stereotyped formulas.

==Phonology==

† Not present in Nuorese.

‡ Mainly in Nuorese.

† Allophonic except in Campidanese.

==Grammar==
Some distinctive features typical of Sardinian include:

===Nouns===
* The plural marker is &quot;-s&quot; (ie, sigmatic plural (from the Latin accusative plural)), as in Western Romance languages like French, Occitan, Catalan, Spanish, Portuguese and Galician: &quot;sardu&quot;, &quot;sardus&quot; &quot;Sardinian&quot;; &quot;pudda&quot;, &quot;puddas&quot; &quot;hen&quot;; &quot;margiane&quot;, &quot;margianes&quot; &quot;fox&quot;. In Italo-Dalmatian languages like Italian, or Eastern Romance languages like Romanian, the plural ends with &quot;-i&quot;, &quot;-e&quot; or &quot;-a&quot; (ie, vocalic non-sigmatic plural). However, Sardinian may also change the final vowel.
* The definite article derives from the Latin &quot;ipse&quot;: &quot;su, sa&quot;, plural &quot;sos, sas&quot; (Logudorese &amp; Nuorese) and &quot;is&quot; (Campidanese). At present, such articles are only common in Balearic Catalan and were once used in Gascon as well, whilst all the other Romance languages make use of forms derived from &quot;ille&quot;.

==== Noun Table ====
Exceptions:
* The Nuorese dialect only has 2 genderless nouns (sostantivi promiscui): su cane, sa cane and su gatu, sa gatu.
* Of the first class only three nouns are masculine: su boja, su poeta, su pantarma.
* Although belonging to the second class, the following nouns which in Latin were part of the 4th declension are feminine: acu, domo, ficu, manu.
* The masculine plural form of tottu is tottus.

===Verbs===

Sardinian verbs are divided into three main classes, each distinguished by a different infinitive ending (&quot;-are&quot;, &quot;-ere&quot;, or &quot;-ire&quot;). The conjugations of regular verbs in the 3 main dialects (Nuorese, Logudorese, and Campidanese) are as follows:
===Syntax===
Distinctive syntax features include:
* A common occurrence of a left-dislocated construction: (&quot;That song I have sung&quot;: that is, &quot;I&#x27;ve sung that song&quot;).
** In yes/no questions, fronting of a constituent (especially a predicative element) is required, though it is not specifically a question-formation process: (&quot;Understood me you have&quot;, that is, &quot;Have you understood me?&quot;), (&quot;Eaten he/she has&quot;, that is &quot;Has he/she eaten?&quot;), (&quot;Done he/she has&quot;, that is &quot;He/She&#x27;s done it&quot;), etc.
*Interrogative phrases might be constructed like echo questions, with the interrogative marker remaining in underlying position: (&quot;They arrived when?&quot;, that is, &quot;when did they arrive?&quot;), (&quot;John has picked olives with whom?&quot;), etc.
* Impersonal sentence constructions are commonly used to replace the passive voice, which is limited to the formal register: rather than .
* The use of + noun: (&quot;not of water brandy it+is&quot;: that is, &quot;It is not water, but brandy.&quot;); (&quot;Not of brothers, they seem enemies&quot;: that is, &quot;Far from being brothers, they are like enemies&quot;).
* The use of (from ) or as subordinate conjunctions: (&quot;Already told I have you that is she the boss&quot;, that is &quot;I&#x27;ve already told you that it&#x27;s her the boss&quot;).
* Existential uses of / (&quot;to have&quot;) and / (&quot;to be&quot;): (&quot;There is over a hundred people in here!&quot;), (&quot;There are the plates on the table&quot;).
* (&quot;What&quot;) + adjective + : (&quot;What beautiful that (you) are!&quot;, that is &quot;How beautiful you are!&quot;).
* Nominal syntagmas without having a head: (&quot;That Greek dictionary is bigger than Efisio&#x27;s&quot;), (&quot;That car is bigger than John&#x27;s&quot;).
* Extraposition of the lexical head: (&quot;Please lend me your dictionary&quot;).
* + subjunctive as a way to express a (malevolent) wish on someone: (&quot;May you be struck by lightning!&quot;).
* Prepositional accusative: (&quot;I&#x27;ve seen Mary&quot;).
* Insertion of the affirmative particle / : (&quot;I did go to bed&quot;).
** Use of the same particle to express antiphrastic formulas: (&quot;You&#x27;re so well educated!&quot;, that is, &quot;You are so ignorant and full of yourself!&quot;).
* Reflexive use of intransitive verbs: (&quot;Uncle Pascal passed away yesterday&quot;), (&quot;I&#x27;ve slept for a couple of hours&quot;).
* Use of in reflexive sentences: (&quot;He/She injured himself/herself while working&quot;).
* Combination of the perfective and progressive verb aspect: (&quot;He/She has been working all day&quot;).
* Continuous and progressive aspect of the verb, which is meant to indicate an effective situation rather than typical or habitual: (&quot;I don&#x27;t understand you&quot;).
* Relative lack of adverbs: with the exception of some localized words like the Nuorese (&quot;especially&quot;), as well as some recent loanwords from Italian, all the Sardinian dialects have a number of ways with which to express the meaning conferred to the adverbs by the other Romance languages (e.g. , &quot;Lucy runs faster than Mary&quot;).
* The expression of the deontic modality through a periphrastic form, characterized by the verb &quot;to want&quot; in auxiliary position, a feature also common to Southern Corsican, Sicilian, Moroccan Arabic and Moroccan Berber, in addition to some non-standard varieties of English. (e.g. &quot;money has to be paid back&quot;).
* The seem to demonstrate that unlike other Romance languages, Old Sardinian may have had verb-initial word order, with optional topicalization into the beginning of the sentence. While verb-initial word order is also attested in other old Romance languages, such as Old Venetian, Old French, Old Neapolitan, Old Spanish, Old Sicilian and others, it has been argued that Old Sardinian was alone in licensing verb-initial word order (V1) as the generalized word order, while the others had V1 only as a marked alternative.

===Vocabulary comparison with other Romance languages===
==Varieties==
Historically, the Sardinians have always been a small-numbered population scattered across isolated cantons, sharing demographic patterns similar to the neighbouring Corsica; as a result, Sardinian developed a broad spectrum of dialects over the time. Starting from Francesco Cetti&#x27;s description in the 18th century, Sardinian has been presented as a pluricentric language, being traditionally subdivided into two standardized varieties spoken by roughly half of the entire community: the dialects spoken in North-Central Sardinia, centered on the orthography known as Logudorese (&quot;su sardu logudoresu&quot;), and the dialects spoken in South-Central Sardinia, centered on another orthography called Campidanese (&quot;su sardu campidanesu&quot;).

All the Sardinian dialects differ primarily in phonetics, which does not considerably hamper intelligibility; the view of there being a dialectal boundary rigidly separating the two varieties of High Sardinian has been in fact subjected to more recent research, which shows a fluid dialect continuum from the northern to the southern ends of the island. The dualist perception of the Sardinian dialects, rather than pointing to an actual isogloss, is in fact the result of a psychological adherence to the way Sardinia was administratively subvidided into a &quot;Caput Logudori&quot; (&quot;Cabu de Susu&quot;) and a &quot;Caput Calaris&quot; (&quot;Cabu de Jossu&quot;) by the Spanish.

The dialects centered on the &quot;Logudorese Sardinian model&quot; are generally considered more conservative, with the Nuorese dialect of Sardinian (&quot;su sardu nugoresu&quot;) being deemed the most conservative of all. They have all retained the classical Latin pronunciation of the stop velars (&quot;chena&quot; versus &quot;cena&quot;, &quot;supper&quot;), the front middle vowels (compare Campidanese iotacism, probably from Byzantine Greek) and assimilation of close-mid vowels (&quot;cane&quot; versus &quot;cani&quot;, &quot;dog&quot; and &quot;gatos&quot; versus &quot;gatus&quot;, &quot;cats&quot;). Labio-velars become plain labials (&quot;limba&quot; versus &quot;lìngua&quot;, &quot;language&quot; and &quot;abba&quot; versus &quot;acua&quot;, &quot;water&quot;). &quot;I&quot; is prosthesized before consonant clusters beginning in &quot;s&quot; (&quot;iscala&quot; versus Campidanese Sardinian &quot;scala&quot;, &quot;stairway&quot; and &quot;iscola&quot; versus &quot;scola&quot;, &quot;school&quot;). An east-west strip of villages in central Sardinia, mainly in the central part of the Province of Oristano, and central part of the Province of Nuoro, speaks a transitional group of dialects (&quot;su sardu de mesania&quot;). Examples include &quot;is limbas&quot; (the languages) and &quot;is abbas&quot; (the waters). The dialects centered on the Campidanese model, spreading from Cagliari (once the metropolis of the Roman province), show relatively more influences from Carthage, Rome, Constantinople and Late Latin. Examples include &quot;is frùminis&quot; (the rivers) and &quot;is domus&quot; (the houses).

Some dialects of Sardinian from the extreme ends of the aforementioned continuum have been estimated in another research to have 88% of matches in 110-item wordlist, similarly to the 85–88% number of matches between Provençal Occitan and some Catalan dialects which by some standards is usually (even though arbitrarily) considered characteristic for two different, albeit very closely related, languages. ISO 639 counts four Sardinian languages (Campidanese, Gallurese, Logudorese and Sassarese), each with its own language code.
;Non-Sardinian language varieties spoken in Sardinia

Sardinian is the indigenous and historical language of most Sardinian communities. However, Sardinian is not spoken as the native and primary language in a significant number of other ones, roughly amounting to 20% of the Sardinian population; Sassari, the second-largest city on Sardinia and the main center of the northern half of the island, is amongst the latter. The aforementioned Gallurese and Sassarese, despite being often colloquially considered part of Sardinian, are two Corso-Sardinian transitional languages; they are spoken in the northernmost part of Sardinia, although some Sardinian is also understood by the majority of people living therein (73.6% in Gallura and 67.8% in the Sassarese-speaking subregion).

Francesco Cetti, responsible for the dialectal partition of the Sardinian language in his early dissertation, went on to deem these Corso-Sardinian varieties spoken in the island &quot;foreign&quot; (i.e. not indigenous to Sardinia) and therefore &quot;not national&quot; (i.e. non-Sardinian) in that he averred they would be &quot;an Italian dialect, much more Tuscan in fact than the vast majority of Italy&#x27;s dialects themselves&quot;.

There are also two language islands, the Catalan Algherese-speaking community from the inner city of Alghero (northwest Sardinia) and the Ligurian-speaking towns of Carloforte, in San Pietro Island, and Calasetta in Sant&#x27;Antioco island (south-west Sardinia).

=== Sample of text ===
==Standardization==

Until 2001, there was not a unifying orthographic standard available for all the dialects of Sardinian, neither in the literary nor in the oral domain (one designed for the latter does not exist to this day).

After the Middle Ages, where a certain orthographic uniformity can be observed, the only steps to provide the language with a single standard, called &quot;illustrious Sardinian&quot;, were undertaken by such writers as Hieronimu Araolla, Ioan Mattheu Garipa and Matteo Madau, who had based their works on the model of medieval Sardinian. However, attempts to formalise and spread this orthography would be hindered by the Iberian and later Savoyard authorities.

The dialectally fragmented nature of the language is such that it is popularly contended that Sardinian is divided into two or more groups, which have provided themselves with a series of traditional orthographies already, albeit with many changes over the time. While this belief is not grounded on linguistic considerations, it is however motivated by political and social reasons.

In addition to the orthographies commonly referred to as &quot;Logudorese&quot; and &quot;Campidanese&quot;, the Nuorese orthography, the Arborense one and even those restricted to individual towns were also developed, sometimes finding common ground with some general rules, such as those required by the Ozieri Award. It is often the case, however, that speakers who are not commonly taught the Sardinian language and are thus literate only in Italian, for lack of a bilingual education, transcribe their local spelling following rules pertaining to the latter rather than the former.

However, some attempts have been made to introduce a single orthographic form for administrative purposes over the recent decades; said form does not aim to refer to morphology and syntax, which is already fairly homogeneous, but concerns itself primarily with spelling.

To allow for an effective implementation of the provisions on the language, as per the regional law no. 26/1997 and the national law no. 482/1999, the Sardinian Autonomous Region arranged for a commission of experts to elaborate a standard capable of overcoming the hurdle posed by the dialectal differences and thereby providing a unified writing system. A first proposal (the LSU: &quot;Limba Sarda Unificada&quot;, published on 28 February 2001) was tabled, which identified a model language of reference (based on the analysis of local varieties of Sardinian and on the selection of the most representative and compatible models) so as to guarantee the necessary characteristics of certainty, coherence, univocity, and supra-local diffusion. The people appointed for the task were Eduardo Blasco Ferrer, Roberto Bolognesi, Diego Salvatore Corraine, Ignazio Delogu, Antonietta Dettori, Giulio Paulis, Massimo Pittau, Tonino Rubattu, Leonardo Sole, Heinz Jürgen Wolf, and Matteo Porru acting as the Committee&#x27;s secretary. This study, although scientifically valid, has never been adopted at an institutional level: critics argued that it was an &quot;artificial&quot; system &quot;imposed&quot; on Sardinian speakers.

Nevertheless, the LSU would act as a springboard for a subsequent drafting proposal, this time drawn by a new Committee composed of Giulio Angioni, Roberto Bolognesi, Manlio Brigaglia, Michel Contini, Diego Corraine, Giovanni Lupinu, Anna Oppo, Giulio Paulis, Maria Teresa Pinna Catte and Mario Puddu. The new project continued to be worked on, going by the name of LSC (&quot;Limba Sarda Comuna&quot;). The new experimental standard proposal, published in 2006, was characterised by taking the &quot;mesania&quot; (transitional) varieties as reference, and welcoming elements of the spoken language so as to be perceived as a more &quot;natural&quot; mediation; it also ensured that the common orthography would be provided with the characteristics of over-dialectality and supra-municipality, while being open to integrating the phonetic peculiarities of the local variants. Despite this, there was some criticism for this norm as well, both by those who proposed amendments to improve it, and by those who preferred to insist with the idea of dividing Sardinian into two macro-variants with their own separate orthographies.

The Sardinian Regional Government, with the resolution of the Regional Council n. 16/14 of 18 April 2006 &quot;Limba Sarda Comuna. Adoption of the reference standards of an experimental nature for the written language output of the Regional Administration&quot;, has experimentally adopted the LSC as the official orthography for the acts and documents issued by the Region of Sardinia (even if, as per Article 8 of the national Law no. 482/99, only the text written in Italian has legal value), giving citizens the right to write to the Public Administration in their own variety and establishing the regional language desk &quot;Ufitziu de sa Limba Sarda&quot;. The resolution does not aim to impose the guide and further notes that it is &quot;open to integrations&quot; and that &quot;all solutions are of equal linguistic value&quot;.

In the following years, the Region has abided by the LSC standard in the translation of many documents and resolutions and in many other areas. In addition, the LSC standard has been adopted on a voluntary basis by many other institutions, schools and media, often in a complementary manner with orthographic norms closer to the local spelling. Regarding these uses, a percentage estimate was made, considering only the projects financed or co-financed by the Region for the diffusion of the Sardinian language in the municipal and supra-municipal language offices, for the teaching in schools and the media from 2007 to 2013.

The monitoring, by the Sardinian Language and Culture Service of the Department of Public Education, was published on the website of the Sardinian Autonomous Region in April 2014. Regarding the school projects financed in 2013, for example, it appears that there was a clear preference, in schools, for the use of the LSC orthographic standard together with a local spelling (51%), compared to the exclusive use of the LSC (11%) or the exclusive use of a local spelling (33%).

On the other hand, regarding the editorial projects in Sardinian language in the regional media, financed by the Region in 2012, we find a greater presence of the LSC (which could derive from a reward of 2 points in the formation of the rankings to take funding, a reward that was not present in the notice for schools). According to those data, it appears that 35% of textual production in media projects was in LSC, 35% in LSC and in local spellings and 25% in local spellings only.

The local language offices, co-financed by the Regional Government, in 2012 used LSC in 50% of their writing, LSC together with local spelling for 9% and local spellings for 41%.

A recent research on the use of the LSC orthography in schools, carried out in the municipality of Orosei, showed that the students of the local middle school had no problem using that standard despite the fact that the Sardinian they spoke was partly different. No pupil rejected it or considered it &quot;artificial&quot;, a thing that proved its validity as a didactic tool. The results were first presented in 2016 and published in an article in 2021.

==Surnames, given names, and toponyms==

From the Sardinian language stem both the historical Sardinian given names, which the natives used to confer on each other until contemporary times, as well as most of the traditional surnames still common on the island. Sardinian place names have a very ancient history and, in some cases, have originated a significant debate about their origins.

==See also==
* Paleo-Sardinian language
* Southern Romance
* Traditional writing forms of Sardinian: Logudorese, Campidanese
* Non-Sardinian languages spoken on Sardinia: Sassarese, Gallurese, Algherese, Tabarchino
* Sardinian surnames

==References==
===Notes===

===Citations===
==Bibliography==
* Argiolas, Mario; Serra, Roberto. 2001. &quot;Limba lingua language: lingue locali, standardizzazione e identità in Sardegna nell&#x27;era della globalizzazione&quot;. Cagliari: CUEC.
* Baroncelli, Stefania; Caretti, Paolo; Rosini, Monica; Louvin, Roberto. 2017. &quot;Regioni a statuto speciale e tutela della lingua: Quale apporto per l&#x27;integrazione sociale e politica?&quot;. Turin: Giappichelli.
* Blasco Ferrer, Eduardo. 2002. Linguistica sarda: Storia, metodi, problemi. Cagliari: Condaghes.
* Blasco Ferrer, Eduardo. 2010. &quot;Paleosardo: Le radici linguistiche della Sardegna neolitica&quot;. Berlin: De Gruyter.
* Blasco Ferrer, Eduardo; Koch, Peter; Marzo, Daniela. 2017. &quot;Manuale di linguistica sarda&quot;. Berlin: De Gruyter.
* Bolognesi, Roberto. 1998. &quot;The phonology of Campidanian Sardinian: A unitary account of a self-organizing structure&quot;. Amsterdam: HIL.
* Bolognesi, Roberto; Heeringa, Wilbert. 2005. &quot;Sardegna tra tante lingue: Il contatto linguistico in Sardegna dal Medioevo a oggi&quot;. Cagliari: Condaghes.
* Bolognesi, Roberto. 2013. &quot;Le identità linguistiche dei sardi&quot;. Cagliari: Condaghes, 2013.
* Brigaglia, Manlio. 1982. &quot;La Sardegna&quot;. 1. &quot;La geografia, la storia, l&#x27;arte e la letteratura&quot;. Cagliari: Edizioni Della Torre.
* Brigaglia, Manlio. 1982. &quot;La Sardegna&quot;. 2. &quot;La cultura popolare, l&#x27;economia, l&#x27;autonomia&quot;. Cagliari: Edizioni Della Torre.
* Cardia, Amos. 2004. &quot;Apedala dimòniu!&quot;. Cagliari: I Sardi.
* Cardia, Amos. 2006. &quot;S&#x27;italianu in Sardìnnia&quot;. Ghilarza: Iskra.
* Casula, Francesco. 2010. &quot;La Lingua sarda e l&#x27;insegnamento a scuola&quot;. Quartu Sant&#x27;Elena: Alfa.
* Casula, Francesco. 2011–2013. &quot;Letterature e civiltà della Sardegna&quot;. 2 vols. Dolianova: Grafia del Parteolla. ISBN 978-88-96778-61-6.
* Contarini, Silvia; Marras, Margherita; Pias, Giuliana. 2012. &quot;L&#x27;identità sarda del XXI secolo: Tra globale, locale e postcoloniale&quot;. Nuoro: Il Maestrale.
* Contini, Michele. 1987. &quot;Etude de géographie phonétique et de phonétique instrumentale du sarde&quot;. Alessandria: Edizioni dell&#x27;Orso.
* Corongiu, Giuseppe. 2013. &quot;Il sardo: Una lingua &quot;normale&quot;: Manuale per chi non ne sa nulla, non conosce la linguistica e vuole saperne di più o cambiare idea&quot;. Cagliari: Condaghes. ISBN 978-88-7356-214-6. OCLC 856863696.
* Corongiu, Giuseppe. 2020. &quot;A dies de oe. Annotos pro una limba sarda tzìvica e cuntemporànea&quot;. Cagliari: Condaghes.
* Farina, Luigi. 1987. &quot;Bocabolariu Sardu Nugoresu-Italianu&quot;. Sassari: Gallizzi.
* Hubschmid, Johannes. 1953. &quot;Sardische Studien: Das mediterrane Substrat des Sardischen, seine Beziehungen zum Berberischen und Baskischen sowie zum eurafrikanischen und hispano-kaukasischen Substrat der romanischen Sprachen.&quot; Bern: Francke.
* Ingrassia, Giorgia; Blasco Ferrer, Eduardo. 2009. &quot;Storia della lingua sarda&quot;. Cagliari: CUEC.
* Jones, Michael Allen. 1988. Sardinian. In Harris, Martin; Vincent, Nigel (eds.), &quot;The Romance languages&quot;, 314–350. London: Routledge.
* Jones, Michael Allen. 1993. &quot;Sardinian syntax&quot;. London: Routledge.
* Kamps, Bernd Sebastian; Lepori, Antoni. &quot;Sardisch für Mollis &amp; Müslis&quot;. 1985. Wuppertal: Steinhäuser.
* Loporcaro, Michele. 2015. Vowel length from Latin to Romance. Oxford University Press.
* Lepori, Antonio. 1980. &quot;Vocabolario moderno sardo-italiano: 8400 vocaboli&quot;. Cagliari: CUEC.
* Lepori, Antonio. 1983. &quot;Zibaldone campidanese&quot;. Cagliari: Castello.
* Lepori, Antonio. 1987. &quot;Fueddàriu campidanesu de sinònimus e contràrius&quot;. Cagliari: Castello.
* Lepori, Antonio. 1988. &quot;Dizionario Italiano-Sardo (Campidanese)&quot;. Cagliari: Castello.
* Lepori, Antonio. 2001. &quot;Gramàtiga sarda po is campidanesus&quot;. Quart Sant&#x27;Elena: C.R.
* Lepori, Antonio. 2005. &quot;Stòria lestra de sa literadura sarda&quot;. Quartu Sant&#x27;Elena: C.R.
* Mameli, Francesco. 1998. &quot;Il logudorese e il gallurese&quot;. Vilanova Monteleone: Soter.
* Marci, Giuseppe. 2005. &quot;In presenza di tutte le lingue del mondo: Letterature sarda&quot;. Cagliari: CUEC.
* Marongiu, Maria Antonietta. 2019. Situazione sociolinguistica in Sardegna. In Corsale, Andrea; Sistu, Giovanni (eds.), &quot;Sardegna: Geografie di un&#x27;isola&quot;, 195–214. Milan: Franco Angeli.
* Maxia, Mauro. 2006. &quot;Lingua limba linga: Indagine sull&#x27;uso dei codici linguistici in tre comuni della Sardegna settentrionale&quot;. Cagliari: Condaghes.
* Maxia, Mauro. 2010. La situazione sociolinguistica nella Sardegna settentrionale. In &quot;Sa Diversidade de sas Limbas in europa, Itàlia, e Sardigna&quot;, Atos de sa cunferèntzia regionale de sa limba sarda, Macumere, 28–30 Santandria 2008. Casteddu: Regione Autònoma de Sardigna.
* Mensching, Guido. 1992. &quot;Einführung in die sardische Sprache&quot;. Bonn: Romanistischer Verlag.
* Mensching, Guido; Remberger, Eva-Maria. 2016. Sardinian. In Ledgeway, Adam &amp; Maiden, Martin (eds.), &quot;The Oxford guide to the Romance languages&quot;, 270–291. Oxford University Press.
* Mercurio, Giuseppe. 1997. S&#x27;Allega Baroniesa. La parlata Sardo-Baroniese: Fonetica, morfologia, sintassi. Milan: Ghedini.
* Mongili, Alessandro. 2015. &quot;Topologie postcoloniali: Innovazione e modernizzazione in Sardegna&quot;. Cagliari: Condaghes.
* Mura, Riccardo; Virdis, Maurizio. 2015. &quot;Caratteri e strutture fonetiche, fonologiche e prosodiche della lingua sarda&quot;. Cagliari: Condaghes.
* Ong, Brenda Man Qing; Perono Cacciafoco, Francesco. 2022. Unveiling the Enigmatic Origins of Sardinian Toponyms. &quot;Languages&quot;, 7, 2, 131: 1–19, Paper, DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/languages7020131.
* Paulis, Giulio. 1987. &quot;I nomi di luogo della Sardegna&quot;. Sassari: Carlo Delfino.
* Paulis, Giulio. 1992. &quot;I nomi popolari delle piante in Sardegna: Etimologia, storia, tradizioni&quot;. Sassari: Delfino.
* Pili, Marcello. 2004. &quot;Novelle lanuseine: poesie, storia, lingua, economia della Sardegna&quot;. Ariccia: Legatoria del Sud.
* Pira, Michelangelo. 1984. &quot;Sardegna tra due lingue&quot;. Cagliari: Della Torre.
* Pittau, Massimo. 1972. &quot;Grammatica del sardo-nuorese: Il più conservativo dei parlari neolatini&quot;. Bologna: Pàtron.
* Pittau, Massimo. 1991. &quot;Grammatica della lingua sarda: Varietà logudorese&quot;. Sassari: Delfino.
* Pittau, Massimo. 1997. &quot;I nomi di paesi città regioni monti fiumi della Sardegna&quot;. Cagliari: Gasperini.
* Pittau, Massimo. 2001. &quot;La lingua sardiana o dei protosardi&quot;. Cagliari: Gasperini.
* Pittau, Massimo. 2000–2003. &quot;Dizionario della lingua sarda: fraseologico ed etimologico&quot;. 2 vols. Cagliari: Gasperini.
* Porru, Vincenzo Raimondo. 1811. &quot;Saggio di grammatica sul dialetto sardo meridionale&quot;. Cagliari: Reale Stamperia.
* Porru, Vincenzo Raimondo. 1832. &quot;Nou dizionariu universali sardu-italianu&quot;. Casteddu: Tipografia Arciobispali. 
* Rindler Schjerve, Rosita. 2007. Code-switching nel sardo: Un segno di disintegrazioni o ristrutturazione socio-linguistica?. In Iliesci, Maria; Siller, Heidi; Danler, Paul (eds.), &quot;Actes du XXVe Congrès International de Philologie et de Linguistique Romanes&quot; 7, 207–215. Berlin: De Gruyter.
* Rohlfs, Gerhard. 1970. &quot;Le gascon: Études de philologie pyrénéenne&quot;. 2nd ed. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer.
* Rubattu, Antonino. 2001–2004. &quot;Dizionario universale della lingua di Sardegna&quot;. Sassari: Edes.
* Spano, Giovanni. 1840. &quot;Ortografia sarda nazionale ossia grammatica della lingua logudorese paragonata all&#x27;italiana dal sacerd. professore Giovanni Spano&quot;. Cagliari: Reale Stamperia.
* Spano, Giovanni. 1851–1852. &quot;Vocabolario sardo-italiano e italiano-sardo coll&#x27;aggiunta dei proverbi sardi&quot;. 2 vols. Cagliari: Tipografia Nazionale.
* Sugeta, Shigeaki. 2000. &quot;Su bocabolariu sinotticu nugoresu-giapponesu-italianu: Sas 1500 paragulas fundamentales de sa limba sarda&quot;. Cagliari: Della Torre.
* Sugeta, Shigeaki. 2010. Cento tratti distintivi del sardo tra le lingue romanze: Una proposta. In Iliescu, Maria; Siller, Heidi; Danler, Paul (eds.), &quot;Actes du XXVe Congrès International de Philologie et de Linguistique Romanes&quot; 7, 217–227. Berlin: De Gruyter.
* Tola, Salvatore. 2006. &quot;La letteratura in lingua sarda: Testi, autori, vicende&quot;. Cagliari: CUEC.
* Tola, Salvatore. 2006. &quot;50 anni di premi letterari in lingua sarda&quot;. Selargius: Domus de Janas. ISBN 88-88569-61-8. OCLC 77504100.
* Virdis, Maurizio. 2019. &quot;La Sardegna e la sua lingua: Studi e saggi&quot;. Milano: Franco Angeli.
* Wagner, Max Leopold. 1941. &quot;Historische Lautlehre des Sardinischen&quot;. Halle (Saale): Niemayer.
* Wagner, Max Leopold. 1951. &quot;La lingua sarda: Storia, spirito e forma&quot;. Berne: Francke.
* Wagner, Max Leopold. 1960–1964. &quot;Dizionario etimologico sardo&quot;. 3 vols. Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
* Wolf, Heinz Jürgen. 1998. &quot;Toponomastica barbaricina: I nomi di luogo dei comuni di Fonni, Gavoi, Lodine, Mamoiada, Oliena, Ollolai, Olzai, Orgòsolo, Ovodda&quot;. Nuoro: Insula.

==External links==
* Ditzionàriu in línia de sa limba e de sa cultura sarda – Online Sardinian Dictionary (in Sardinian, Italian and English)
* &quot;CROS&quot; – Curretore regionale ortogràficu sardu in lìnia (Sardinian spell checker)
* &quot;Apertium&quot;. Automatic translation software from Italian and Catalan to Sardinian.
* Grammar of Limba Sarda Comuna (standardized form adopted at institutional level)
* The Sardinian language: Basic phrases &amp; pronunciation, Nativlang
* An extract in Sardinian from &quot;The Little Prince&quot; (archived 15 March 2018)
* List of Sardinian forenames (from it.wiki)
* Antoninu Rubattu&#x27;s site. In addition to vocabularies of each Sardinian variety of the language and non-Sardinian languages, the site provides the reader also with some basic grammar guides and etymology dictionaries as well.
* The World Atlas of Language Structures Online, Sardinian
* Lessico etimologico sardo
* SardegnaCultura in sardu – Sardinian version of the official cultural site from the Regional Sardinia administration.
* &quot;Apertium&quot;. Automatic translation software from Italian to Sardinian.
* University of Berlin – Contains many links and other information about the language.
* Grammar of Nuorese Sardinian – Sardinian Wikipedia (Sardinian-incomplete)
* Grammar of Nuorese Sardinian – Wikibooks (Italian-complete)
* Arrègulas: Grammar of Campidanese Sardinian
* A mailing list for Sardinian-speakers 
* Acadèmia campidanesa de sa lìngua sarda (in Campidanese Sardinian)
* &quot;Memorie in lingua sarda&quot;, Sardegna Digital Library 
* Interactive Atlas of Romance Intonation, Sardinian from Ittiri and Sinnai</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="0" end="9" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="13" end="17" title="Sardinian language" label="Sard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="47" end="63" title="Romance languages" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="78" end="88" title="Sardinians" label="Sardinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="96" end="117" title="Western Mediterranean" label="Western Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="128" end="136" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="300" end="307" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="348" end="353" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110149" start="454" end="469" title="Paleo-Sardinian language" label="Paleo-Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q535958" start="500" end="505" title="Punic language" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="507" end="517" title="Stratum (linguistics)#substratum" label="substratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36387" start="532" end="547" title="Byzantine Greek" label="Byzantine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="549" end="556" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="558" end="567" title="Castilian language" label="Castilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="573" end="580" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730913" start="581" end="593" title="superstratum" label="superstratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516605" start="637" end="656" title="history of Sardinia" label="history of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="902" end="909" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="911" end="921" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q742313" start="929" end="938" title="Judicates" label="Judicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="944" end="961" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591895" start="967" end="981" title="Savoyard state" label="Savoyard state"/>
<link wikidata="Q59203" start="1366" end="1375" title="diglossia" label="diglossia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61566" start="1815" end="1832" title="minority language" label="minority language"/>
<link wikidata="Q387080" start="2214" end="2227" title="language loss" label="language loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q175156" start="3278" end="3288" title="onomastics" label="onomastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3491" end="3497" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="3518" end="3528" title="Endangered language" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q253756" start="4093" end="4107" title="language death" label="language death"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4314" end="4350" title="Regional Italian#Sardinia" label="its own Sardinian-influenced variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163017" start="4520" end="4532" title="conservative (language)" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="4533" end="4549" title="Romance languages" label="Romance language"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730913" start="4619" end="4629" title="Substrata (linguistics)" label="substratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110149" start="4631" end="4646" title="Paleo-Sardinian language" label="Paleo-Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="4849" end="4865" title="Italian Americans" label="Italian-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q282523" start="4875" end="4884" title="Mario Pei" label="Mario Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="4922" end="4939" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="4954" end="4966" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="5197" end="5205" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="5213" end="5220" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="5226" end="5236" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301027" start="5801" end="5818" title="Maurice Le Lannou" label="Maurice Le Lannou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110149" start="6092" end="6107" title="Paleo-Sardinian language" label="Paleo-Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="6133" end="6143" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q535958" start="6144" end="6149" title="Punic language" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="6247" end="6253" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q76731" start="6320" end="6338" title="Max Leopold Wagner" label="Max Leopold Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="6435" end="6443" title="languoid" label="languoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730438" start="6478" end="6484" title="Maghrebi Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="6485" end="6492" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q162064" start="6519" end="6534" title="African Romance" label="African Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="6670" end="6682" title="vulgar Latin" label="vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152357" start="6848" end="6861" title="red hair" label="reddish-brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="7052" end="7056" title="List of names for the Milky Way" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="7065" end="7074" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="7099" end="7115" title="Berber languages" label="Berber languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110149" start="8105" end="8120" title="Paleo-Sardinian language" label="Paleo-Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="8157" end="8163" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="8168" end="8176" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="8220" end="8236" title="Berber languages" label="Berber languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="8325" end="8337" title="Romanization" label="Romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730913" start="8350" end="8359" title="Adstratum" label="adstratal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="8379" end="8386" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="8516" end="8523" title="Italian fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="8775" end="8780" title="Root (linguistics)" label="roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="8854" end="8874" title="Sardinians" label="island&amp;#x27;s people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894673" start="8937" end="8944" title="Sherden" label="Sherden"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="8957" end="8968" title="Sea Peoples" label="Sea Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="9060" end="9068" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="9070" end="9086" title="Lydia" label="Kingdom of Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370577" start="9100" end="9106" title="Ancient Libya" label="Libyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276974" start="9134" end="9164" title="Sardus" label="Sardus Pater &amp;quot;Babai&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="9325" end="9342" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110149" start="9372" end="9388" title="Nuragic language" label="Nuragic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36095" start="9620" end="9626" title="Lydian language" label="Lydian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="9642" end="9655" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355160" start="9710" end="9721" title="Tyrrhenians" label="Tyrrhenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q232615" start="9727" end="9733" title="Sardis" label="Sardis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="9750" end="9759" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="9858" end="9865" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q855215" start="9996" end="10011" title="Iberic language" label="Iberic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q959419" start="10017" end="10023" title="Siculi" label="Siculi"/>
<link wikidata="Q742995" start="10071" end="10084" title="proparoxytone" label="proparoxytone"/>
<link wikidata="Q680992" start="10200" end="10209" title="paragogic" label="paragogic"/>
<link wikidata="Q283144" start="10243" end="10253" title="Bonnanaro" label="Bunnànnaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q287398" start="10340" end="10348" title="Barumini" label="Barùmini"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="10543" end="10549" title="Iberian peninsula" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="10592" end="10599" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q500522" start="10703" end="10719" title="Aquitanian language" label="Basque precursor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="10876" end="10902" title="Berber languages" label="northern African languages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11113" end="11119" title=":wikt:desinence" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11841" end="11853" title="Sardinian people#Genetics" label="Genetic data"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="11869" end="11876" title="Basque people" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="11896" end="11906" title="Sardinian people" label="Sardinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007186" start="12015" end="12032" title="Arzachena culture" label="Arzachena culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q962651" start="12107" end="12114" title="Gallura" label="Gallura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336" start="12120" end="12136" title="southern Corsica" label="southern Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="12176" end="12191" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="12195" end="12210" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408002" start="12362" end="12369" title="Balares" label="Balares"/>
<link wikidata="Q636131" start="12374" end="12382" title="Ilienses" label="Ilienses"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="12635" end="12644" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="12762" end="12769" title="Iberian peninsula" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="12778" end="12795" title="Italian peninsula" label="Italian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="12914" end="12924" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="13040" end="13052" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="13545" end="13551" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q158271" start="13586" end="13596" title="Tropaeolum" label="nasturtium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714490" start="13624" end="13635" title="Ruta chalepensis" label="fringed rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q94857" start="13660" end="13670" title="Peganum harmala" label="Syrian rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q21122" start="13753" end="13768" title="Equisetum palustre" label="marsh horsetail"/>
<link wikidata="Q242573" start="13793" end="13809" title="Polygonum aviculare" label="common knotgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q26686" start="13890" end="13894" title="dill" label="dill"/>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="13953" end="13961" title="rosemary" label="rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q954942" start="14053" end="14070" title="Campidano" label="Campidanese plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q386295" start="14166" end="14175" title="Magomadas" label="Magomadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649" start="14180" end="14185" title="Nuoro" label="Nuoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q283985" start="14192" end="14198" title="Gesico" label="Gesico"/>
<link wikidata="Q387019" start="14203" end="14209" title="Nureci" label="Nureci"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14255" end="14260" title="History of Sardinia#Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q535958" start="14495" end="14500" title="Punic language" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617880" start="14580" end="14586" title="Italic peoples" label="Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747008" start="14676" end="14688" title="Romanization (cultural)" label="Romanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q535958" start="14826" end="14831" title="Punic language" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402199" start="15014" end="15021" title="Hospito" label="Hospito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="15144" end="15150" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661436" start="15595" end="15600" title="Norax" label="Norax"/>
<link wikidata="Q688292" start="15644" end="15651" title="nuraghe" label="nuraghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q599939" start="15665" end="15670" title="Nurra" label="Nurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q284433" start="15684" end="15689" title="Nurri" label="Nurri"/>
<link wikidata="Q807310" start="15722" end="15730" title="Barbagia" label="Barbagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="15879" end="15886" title="Barbary" label="Barbary"/>
<link wikidata="Q295351" start="16046" end="16051" title="Olzai" label="Olzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289" start="16748" end="16757" title="Old Latin" label="Old Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16759" end="16773" title="Classification of Romance languages#The standard proposal" label="Some linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="17392" end="17404" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="17537" end="17545" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q181489" start="17706" end="17714" title="Eusebius of Vercelli" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q715214" start="17719" end="17732" title="Lucifer of Cagliari" label="Saint Lucifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="17940" end="17947" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="17985" end="18001" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q246737" start="18012" end="18031" title="Exarchate of Africa" label="Exarchate of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686378" start="19243" end="19251" title="condaghe" label="condaghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q339993" start="19592" end="19597" title="Jerzu" label="Jerzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="19809" end="19816" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="19817" end="19849" title="Islamic conquest of the Maghreb" label="made their way into North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q246737" start="19900" end="19919" title="Exarchate of Africa" label="Exarchate of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="19933" end="19949" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="19954" end="19962" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q703569" start="20514" end="20527" title="Michele Amari" label="Michele Amari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154897" start="20918" end="20939" title="History of Islam in southern Italy" label="fallen to the Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="20960" end="20968" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="21018" end="21032" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q838988" start="21148" end="21156" title="oecumene" label="oecumene"/>
<link wikidata="Q156585" start="21515" end="21525" title="Marc Bloch" label="Marc Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q742313" start="21864" end="21873" title="sardinian medieval kingdoms" label="Judicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="21955" end="21969" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Arab expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="21977" end="21990" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="22040" end="22049" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q378426" start="22882" end="22892" title="Diplomatics" label="diplomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750585" start="22988" end="22998" title="Chancery (diplomacy)" label="chanceries"/>
<link wikidata="Q784235" start="23122" end="23133" title="half-uncial" label="half-uncial"/>
<link wikidata="Q181970" start="23487" end="23495" title="archaism" label="archaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474382" start="23501" end="23509" title="Latinism" label="Latinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340539" start="24716" end="24737" title="Eduardo Blasco Ferrer" label="Eduardo Blasco Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297073" start="24790" end="24798" title="Judicate of Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723760" start="24803" end="24810" title="Judicate of Gallura" label="Gallura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365493" start="24963" end="24979" title="Republic of Pisa" label="Republic of Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="25013" end="25020" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241847" start="25285" end="25304" title="Judicate of Arborea" label="Judicate of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256243" start="25434" end="25447" title="Carta de Logu" label="Carta de Logu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112851" start="25542" end="25553" title="Marianus IV of Arborea" label="Marianus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q155244" start="25613" end="25620" title="Eleanor of Arborea" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406329" start="25962" end="25969" title="Barison II of Arborea" label="Barison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="26034" end="26049" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q18081" start="26083" end="26104" title="De vulgari eloquentia" label="De vulgari eloquentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="26116" end="26126" title="Sardinians" label="Sardinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q186370" start="26681" end="26691" title="troubadour" label="troubadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q356509" start="26692" end="26713" title="Raimbaut de Vaqueiras" label="Raimbaut de Vaqueiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="26864" end="26870" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="26982" end="26991" title="Sardinians" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="26995" end="27001" title="Berbers" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142012" start="27232" end="27249" title="Geography and cartography in medieval Islam" label="Muslim geographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q173441" start="27250" end="27268" title="Muhammad al-Idrisi" label="Muhammad al-Idrisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="27283" end="27290" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193901" start="27320" end="27328" title="Roger II of Sicily" label="Roger II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089336" start="27368" end="27385" title="The book of Roger" label="The book of Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="27441" end="27448" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q246737" start="27821" end="27840" title="Exarchate of Africa" label="Exarchate of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q154372" start="28056" end="28077" title="abbey of Montecassino" label="abbey of Montecassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297073" start="28189" end="28209" title="Judicate of Cagliari" label="Judicate of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777452" start="28228" end="28257" title="Torchitorio I of Cagliari" label="Torchitorio I de Lacon-Gunale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="28322" end="28336" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="28446" end="28455" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="28583" end="28589" title="Olbia" label="Civita"/>
<link wikidata="Q233797" start="28681" end="28695" title="Castelsardo" label="Castelgenovese"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="28747" end="28756" title="chronicle" label="chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761381" start="28845" end="28863" title="Judicate of Torres" label="Judicate of Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197216" start="28931" end="28940" title="feoffment" label="feoffment"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="28956" end="28974" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q165154" start="29002" end="29021" title="Kingdom of Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="29104" end="29118" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="29169" end="29184" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156764" start="29188" end="29203" title="composite state" label="composite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241847" start="29300" end="29319" title="Judicate of Arborea" label="Judicate of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q336823" start="30225" end="30249" title="Peter IV the Ceremonious" label="Peter IV the Ceremonious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762486" start="30306" end="30324" title="Battle of Sanluri" label="victory at Sanluri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710426" start="30388" end="30410" title="William II of Narbonne" label="William II of Narbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="30571" end="30590" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="end of Aztec Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="30772" end="30779" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q389339" start="30797" end="30801" title="Uras, Sardinia" label="Uras"/>
<link wikidata="Q295248" start="30830" end="30837" title="Macomer" label="Macomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="31872" end="31879" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="31924" end="31932" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898009" start="31999" end="32022" title="Giovanni Francesco Fara" label="Giovanni Francesco Fara"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="32075" end="32082" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q184511" start="32132" end="32138" title="idioms" label="idioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="32227" end="32234" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q585704" start="32246" end="32270" title="Algherese dialect" label="Catalan-speaking enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q312304" start="32562" end="32585" title="Alfonso the Magnanimous" label="Alfonso the Magnanimous"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="32671" end="32686" title="multilingualism" label="multilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="32899" end="32910" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q845441" start="33148" end="33157" title="Sassarese language" label="Sassarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q612220" start="33167" end="33176" title="Gallurese language" label="Gallurese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313381" start="33182" end="33197" title="Italo-Dalmatian languages" label="Italo-Dalmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q841847" start="33678" end="33696" title="diocese of Alghero" label="diocese of Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364267" start="33946" end="33971" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cagliari" label="archbishopric of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="34219" end="34225" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="35175" end="35180" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="35195" end="35201" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611295" start="35782" end="35799" title="Gerolamo Araolla" label="Hieronimu Araolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="36172" end="36179" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="36232" end="36241" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="36249" end="36261" title="lyric poetry" label="lyric poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q61073" start="36375" end="36392" title="Sebastian Münster" label="Sebastian Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136161" start="36400" end="36424" title="Cosmographia (Sebastian Münster)" label="Cosmographia universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60116" start="36463" end="36477" title="Conrad Gessner" label="Conrad Gessner"/>
<link wikidata="Q371833" start="37235" end="37257" title="Gaspar de Guzmán, Count-Duke of Olivares" label="Count-Duke of Olivares"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="37580" end="37597" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134237" start="37613" end="37618" title="Court (royal)" label="Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q9093236" start="37749" end="37773" title="Vicente Bacallar y Sanna" label="Vicente Bacallar y Sanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11993457" start="37810" end="37832" title="Real Academia Española" label="Real Academia Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q570948" start="38491" end="38499" title="quatrain" label="quatrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q749150" start="38712" end="38739" title="Tercio" label="Spanish &amp;quot;tercios&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496450" start="38847" end="38855" title="Stamenti" label="Stamenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q295423" start="38900" end="38908" title="Orgosolo" label="Orgosolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="39043" end="39058" title="classical Latin" label="classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="39726" end="39755" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="39841" end="39848" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q163236" start="39853" end="39860" title="Treaty of Rastatt" label="Rastatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349925" start="39886" end="39896" title="Spanish conquest of Sardinia" label="reoccupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="39897" end="39905" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q209579" start="39952" end="39978" title="Victor Amadeus II of Savoy" label="Victor Amadeus II of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156764" start="40693" end="40708" title="composite state" label="composite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868409" start="40832" end="40846" title="summa potestas" label="summa potestas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="40860" end="40874" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q200229" start="40908" end="40922" title="House of Savoy" label="House of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59203" start="40982" end="40991" title="diglossia" label="diglossia"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="41145" end="41158" title="Prestige (sociolinguistics)" label="prestige code"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356" start="43588" end="43594" title="Barolo, Piedmont" label="Barolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675071" start="43747" end="43761" title="Italianisation" label="Italianisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26221387" start="44043" end="44058" title="interethnic marriage" label="mixed marriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340539" start="44291" end="44312" title="Eduardo Blasco Ferrer" label="Eduardo Blasco Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q502919" start="45466" end="45476" title="Francis IV, Duke of Modena" label="Francis IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3619306" start="45481" end="45498" title="Antonio Bresciani (writer)" label="Antonio Bresciani"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207519" start="45602" end="45620" title="Sardinian banditry" label="Sardinian banditry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067315" start="46714" end="46738" title="University of Cagliari" label="Universities of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q532822" start="46743" end="46750" title="University of Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798540" start="48117" end="48132" title="Minoritized language" label="marginalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q560889" start="48984" end="48999" title="Francesco Cetti" label="Francesco Cetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="49718" end="49725" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645" start="49727" end="49733" title="Tempio Pausania" label="Tempio"/>
<link wikidata="Q233797" start="49738" end="49750" title="Castelsardo" label="Castel sardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="50662" end="50666" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q33730" start="50706" end="50713" title="Mapuche language" label="Mapuche"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="51087" end="51092" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q312681" start="51203" end="51221" title="Victor Amadeus III of Savoy" label="Victor Amadeus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="51604" end="51621" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944151" start="52017" end="52038" title="Sa die de sa Sardigna" label="such political unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256232" start="54002" end="54023" title="Giovanni Maria Angioy" label="Giovanni Maria Angioy"/>
<link wikidata="Q943326" start="54920" end="54928" title="Perfect Fusion" label="unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261894" start="55414" end="55428" title="Giovanni Spano" label="Giovanni Spano"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="55645" end="55656" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460907" start="55688" end="55698" title="Florentine dialect" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q943326" start="56467" end="56481" title="Perfect Fusion" label="Perfect Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="57201" end="57208" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256243" start="57926" end="57939" title="Carta de Logu" label="Carta de Logu"/>
<link wikidata="Q312683" start="58012" end="58025" title="Charles Felix of Sardinia" label="Charles Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q943326" start="58110" end="58124" title="Perfect Fusion" label="Perfect Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="58762" end="58781" title="Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943286" start="58797" end="58825" title="S&amp;#x27;hymnu sardu nationale" label="S&amp;#x27;hymnu sardu nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q599517" start="59022" end="59034" title="Marcia Reale" label="Marcia Reale"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="59108" end="59124" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="59131" end="59149" title="Victor Emmanuel II of Savoy" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="59296" end="59308" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201472" start="59417" end="59432" title="post-war period" label="post-war period"/>
<link wikidata="Q55955536" start="60334" end="60349" title="irregular verbs" label="irregular verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q64356" start="60448" end="60472" title="Friedrich Christian Diez" label="Friedrich Christian Diez"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="60517" end="60526" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q472212" start="60669" end="60691" title="Graziadio Isaia Ascoli" label="Graziadio Isaia Ascoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q124090" start="60953" end="60972" title="Wilhelm Meyer-Lübke" label="Wilhelm Meyer-Lübke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686378" start="61096" end="61104" title="condaghe" label="condaghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76731" start="61258" end="61276" title="Max Leopold Wagner" label="Max Leopold Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="61491" end="61502" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="61508" end="61520" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662312" start="61650" end="61674" title="Brigata Sassari" label="Sassari Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q13645" start="61694" end="61709" title="Tempio Pausania" label="Tempio Pausania"/>
<link wikidata="Q285172" start="61714" end="61720" title="Sinnai" label="Sinnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="62173" end="62194" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="62196" end="62223" title="Compulsory military service" label="Compulsory military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q13310" start="62434" end="62440" title="Navajo language" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="62494" end="62506" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="62519" end="62526" title="Quechua language" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="62547" end="62560" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="Q912310" start="62628" end="62640" title="code talkers" label="code talkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788866" start="62937" end="62946" title="war diary" label="war diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q83003" start="63467" end="63482" title="Antonio Gramsci" label="Antonio Gramsci"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="63945" end="63970" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299105" start="64074" end="64096" title="Sardinian Action Party" label="Sardinian Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476047" start="64415" end="64431" title="underdevelopment" label="underdevelopment"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="64512" end="64526" title="Italian fascism" label="Fascist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q28671042" start="64922" end="64940" title="Sardinian surnames" label="Sardinian surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q706633" start="67632" end="67642" title="Italian resistance movement" label="Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="67883" end="67895" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q856122" start="68372" end="68385" title="modernization theory" label="modernisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053185" start="69015" end="69042" title="Constituent Assembly of Italy" label="national legislator in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="70053" end="70069" title="heavy industry" label="heavy industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="70230" end="70242" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="70247" end="70258" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q694799" start="70621" end="70633" title="Emilio Lussu" label="Emilio Lussu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858490" start="71285" end="71313" title="Ministry of Public Education (Italy)" label="Ministry of Public Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q645304" start="71422" end="71441" title="indigenous language" label="indigenous language"/>
<link wikidata="Q547509" start="72427" end="72449" title="Sardinian nationalism" label="Sardinian nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="72653" end="72660" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067315" start="73138" end="73160" title="University of Cagliari" label="University of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q954942" start="74496" end="74507" title="Campidano" label="Campidanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="75647" end="75670" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="76337" end="76354" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q981005" start="76749" end="76769" title="Constitutional Court of Italy" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16220" start="77517" end="77534" title="Province of Nuoro" label="Province of Nuoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225" start="77539" end="77547" title="Province of Oristano" label="Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1222" start="77710" end="77722" title="Aosta Valley" label="Aosta Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="77727" end="77738" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942263" start="78364" end="78382" title="Music of Sardinia" label="traditional genres"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="78424" end="78431" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q506020" start="79278" end="79340" title="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities" label="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="79449" end="79457" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="79476" end="79481" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="79483" end="79492" title="Slovene language" label="Slovenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="79494" end="79502" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087" start="79512" end="79528" title="Franco-Provençal language" label="Franco-Provençal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33441" start="79530" end="79538" title="Friulian language" label="Friulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36202" start="79540" end="79545" title="Ladin language" label="Ladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="79550" end="79557" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193170" start="80030" end="80038" title="Ratification" label="ratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="80043" end="80094" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q83790" start="80431" end="80442" title="school book" label="school book"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80603" end="80622" title="Dialect#Italy" label="Italian acceptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="81448" end="81459" title="Stigma (sociological theory)" label="stigmatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="82330" end="82342" title="Urbanization" label="rural exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="82668" end="82674" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="82697" end="82707" title="Endangered language" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q214195" start="83958" end="83963" title="National Institute of Statistics (Italy)" label="ISTAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q255615" start="84146" end="84160" title="code-switching" label="code-switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q807310" start="84604" end="84612" title="Barbagia" label="Barbagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q686822" start="84617" end="84621" title="Bill (proposed law)" label="bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q715614" start="84638" end="84645" title="Monti Cabinet" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47904" start="84683" end="84694" title="Mario Monti" label="Mario Monti"/>
<link wikidata="Q12013" start="85431" end="85442" title="Google Maps" label="Google Maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q15616276" start="85760" end="85768" title="Telegram (software)" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386210" start="85806" end="85813" title="F-Droid" label="F-Droid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973097" start="85815" end="85823" title="Diaspora (social network)" label="Diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087512" start="85825" end="85831" title="OsmAnd" label="OsmAnd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033" start="85833" end="85842" title="Notepad++" label="Notepad++"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329181" start="85844" end="85848" title="QGIS" label="QGIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655988" start="85850" end="85858" title="Swiftkey" label="Swiftkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q119931" start="85860" end="85870" title="Stellarium (software)" label="Stellarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="85872" end="85877" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q171477" start="85879" end="85895" title="VLC media player" label="VLC media player"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027" start="85917" end="85927" title="Linux Mint" label="Linux Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="85964" end="85971" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q12805" start="85981" end="85991" title="DuckDuckGo" label="DuckDuckGo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652" start="87367" end="87375" title="Oristano" label="Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q122453" start="87790" end="87799" title="University of Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="87801" end="87807" title="Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q153978" start="87809" end="87817" title="University of Tübingen" label="Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q317070" start="87819" end="87827" title="University of Mannheim" label="Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814503" start="87842" end="87862" title="University of Girona" label="University of Girona"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="87865" end="87872" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="87877" end="87891" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="87893" end="87897" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q96157651" start="87911" end="87926" title="Shigeaki Sugeta" label="Shigeaki Sugeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q274486" start="87993" end="88010" title="Waseda University" label="Waseda University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="88791" end="88810" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="88823" end="88826" title="European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q167404" start="88827" end="88838" title="Renato Soru" label="Renato Soru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067315" start="89576" end="89598" title="University of Cagliari" label="University of Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="89694" end="89711" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="90142" end="90153" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q212926" start="90676" end="90684" title="endogamy" label="endogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="91360" end="91379" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="91829" end="91850" title="cultural assimilation" label="cultural assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287002" start="91994" end="92005" title="Monolingualism" label="monolingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238114" start="92010" end="92022" title="Monoculturalism" label="monocultural"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92083" end="92099" title="Regional Italian#Sardinia" label="regional Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201279" start="93964" end="93975" title="code-mixing" label="code-mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455178" start="94082" end="94106" title="Second-language acquisition" label="second-language learners"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="94219" end="94241" title="in-group and out-group" label="in-group and out-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q631256" start="95337" end="95343" title="marker (linguistics)" label="marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q146078" start="95399" end="95409" title="accusative" label="accusative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714388" start="95426" end="95451" title="Western Romance languages" label="Western Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="95465" end="95472" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="95492" end="95502" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="95507" end="95515" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313381" start="95697" end="95722" title="Italo-Dalmatian languages" label="Italo-Dalmatian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q147576" start="95740" end="95765" title="Eastern Romance languages" label="Eastern Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="95771" end="95779" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q804899" start="96156" end="96172" title="Balearic dialect" label="Balearic Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35735" start="96195" end="96201" title="Gascon language" label="Gascon"/>
<link wikidata="Q657495" start="97092" end="97120" title="Dislocation (syntax)" label="left-dislocated construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q106645804" start="97647" end="97661" title="echo questions" label="echo questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q253147" start="99258" end="99270" title="Antiphrasis" label="antiphrastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q113627710" start="99735" end="99768" title="Progressive aspect" label="Continuous and progressive aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q56426" start="100450" end="100465" title="Moroccan Arabic" label="Moroccan Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311958" start="101282" end="101289" title="Canton (country subdivision)" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q560889" start="101448" end="101463" title="Francesco Cetti" label="Francesco Cetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q250858" start="101538" end="101559" title="pluricentric language" label="pluricentric language"/>
<link wikidata="Q777974" start="101756" end="101766" title="Logudorese dialect" label="Logudorese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35348" start="101892" end="101903" title="Campidanese dialect" label="Campidanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="102223" end="102240" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q201884" start="102379" end="102387" title="isogloss" label="isogloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640" start="102505" end="102510" title="Caput" label="Caput"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="102882" end="102897" title="classical Latin" label="classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q613265" start="103041" end="103049" title="iotacism" label="iotacism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759170" start="103102" end="103117" title="close-mid vowel" label="close-mid vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225" start="103740" end="103760" title="Province of Oristano" label="Province of Oristano"/>
<link wikidata="Q16220" start="103786" end="103803" title="Province of Nuoro" label="Province of Nuoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897" start="104037" end="104045" title="Cagliari" label="Cagliari"/>
<link wikidata="Q281345" start="104074" end="104088" title="Sardinia and Corsica" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="104128" end="104136" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="104163" end="104173" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152392" start="104425" end="104433" title="Swadesh list" label="wordlist"/>
<link wikidata="Q241243" start="104485" end="104494" title="Provençal dialect" label="Provençal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="104495" end="104502" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="104512" end="104519" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="104577" end="104588" title="Language or dialect" label="arbitrarily"/>
<link wikidata="Q33547" start="104675" end="104682" title="ISO 639" label="ISO 639"/>
<link wikidata="Q612220" start="104729" end="104738" title="Gallurese language" label="Gallurese"/>
<link wikidata="Q845441" start="104755" end="104764" title="Sassarese language" label="Sassarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629" start="105098" end="105105" title="Sassari" label="Sassari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33111" start="105337" end="105342" title="Corsican language" label="Corso"/>
<link wikidata="Q962651" start="105525" end="105532" title="Gallura" label="Gallura"/>
<link wikidata="Q957314" start="106045" end="106060" title="language island" label="language island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="106067" end="106074" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q585704" start="106075" end="106084" title="Algherese dialect" label="Algherese"/>
<link wikidata="Q166282" start="106127" end="106134" title="Alghero" label="Alghero"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="106164" end="106172" title="Ligurian language (Romance)" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q120399" start="106191" end="106201" title="Carloforte" label="Carloforte"/>
<link wikidata="Q912934" start="106206" end="106223" title="San Pietro Island" label="San Pietro Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q286187" start="106229" end="106238" title="Calasetta" label="Calasetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q286709" start="106242" end="106259" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Antioco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="106555" end="106566" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340539" start="109039" end="109060" title="Eduardo Blasco Ferrer" label="Eduardo Blasco Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q354755" start="109612" end="109626" title="Giulio Angioni" label="Giulio Angioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q35029137" start="109665" end="109679" title="Michel Contini" label="Michel Contini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827436" start="109857" end="109875" title="Limba Sarda Comuna" label="Limba Sarda Comuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q295538" start="113321" end="113327" title="Orosei" label="Orosei"/>
<link wikidata="" start="113773" end="113794" title=":it:Prenomi sardi" label="Sardinian given names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110149" start="114085" end="114109" title="Paleo-Sardinian language" label="Paleo-Sardinian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q145345" start="114112" end="114128" title="Southern Romance languages" label="Southern Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q777974" start="114171" end="114181" title="Logudorese dialect" label="Logudorese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35348" start="114183" end="114194" title="Campidanese dialect" label="Campidanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q845441" start="114241" end="114250" title="Sassarese language" label="Sassarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q612220" start="114252" end="114261" title="Gallurese dialect" label="Gallurese"/>
<link wikidata="Q585704" start="114263" end="114272" title="Algherese dialect" label="Algherese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="114274" end="114284" title="Ligurian language (Romance)" label="Tabarchino"/>
<link wikidata="Q28671042" start="114287" end="114305" title="Sardinian surnames" label="Sardinian surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q35029137" start="116431" end="116447" title="Michel Contini" label="Contini, Michele"/>
<link wikidata="Q96157651" start="122363" end="122379" title="Shigeaki Sugeta" label="Sugeta, Shigeaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q96157651" start="122531" end="122547" title="Shigeaki Sugeta" label="Sugeta, Shigeaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q76731" start="123161" end="123180" title="Max Leopold Wagner" label="Wagner, Max Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q76731" start="123267" end="123286" title="Max Leopold Wagner" label="Wagner, Max Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q76731" start="123366" end="123385" title="Max Leopold Wagner" label="Wagner, Max Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338" start="124181" end="124198" title="The Little Prince" label="The Little Prince"/>
<link wikidata="" start="124232" end="124259" title=":it:Prenomi sardi" label="List of Sardinian forenames"/>
<link wikidata="" start="124885" end="124958" title=":sc:Grammatica de su sardu" label="Grammar of Nuorese Sardinian – Sardinian Wikipedia (Sardinian-incomplete)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27035" wikidata="Q1637956" url="?curid=27035" title="Shot/reverse shot">
<text>Shot/reverse shot (or shot/countershot) is a film technique where one character is shown looking at another character (often off-screen), and then the other character is shown looking back at the first character (a or ). Since the characters are shown facing in opposite directions, the viewer assumes that they are looking at each other.

==Context==
Shot/reverse shot is a feature of the &quot;classical&quot; Hollywood style of continuity editing, which deemphasizes transitions between shots such that the spectator perceives one continuous action that develops linearly, chronologically, and logically. It is an example of an eyeline match.

==References==
== Sources ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1637956" start="0" end="17" title="Shot/reverse shot" label="Shot/reverse shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637956" start="22" end="38" title="Shot/reverse shot" label="shot/countershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001378" start="45" end="59" title="film technique" label="film technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q355399" start="431" end="449" title="continuity editing" label="continuity editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895476" start="631" end="644" title="eyeline match" label="eyeline match"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27036" wikidata="Q308876" url="?curid=27036" title="Stop motion">
<text>Stop motion (also known as stop frame animation) is an animated filmmaking and special effects technique in which objects are physically manipulated in small increments between individually photographed frames so that they will appear to exhibit independent motion or change when the series of frames is played back. Any kind of object can thus be animated, but puppets with movable joints (puppet animation) or plasticine figures (clay animation or claymation) are most commonly used. Puppets, models or clay figures built around an armature are used in model animation. Stop motion with live actors is often referred to as pixilation. Stop motion of flat materials such as paper, fabrics or photographs is usually called cutout animation.

==Terminology==
The term &quot;stop motion&quot;, relating to the animation technique, is often spelled with a hyphen as &quot;stop-motion&quot;—either standalone or as a compound modifier. Both orthographic variants, with and without the hyphen, are correct, but the hyphenated one has a second meaning that is unrelated to animation or cinema: &quot;a device for automatically stopping a machine or engine when something has gone wrong&quot;.

== History ==
===1849 to 1895: Before film===

Before the advent of chronophotography in 1878, a small number of picture sequences were photographed with subjects in separate poses. These can now be regarded as a form of stop motion or pixilation, but very few results were meant to be animated. Until celluloid film base was established in 1888 and set the standard for the moving image, animation could only be presented via mechanisms such as the zoetrope.

In 1849, Joseph Plateau published a note about improvements for his Fantascope (a.k.a. phénakisticope). A new translucent variation had improved picture quality and could be viewed with both eyes, by several people at the same time. Plateau stated that the illusion could be advanced even further with an idea communicated to him by Charles Wheatstone: a combination of the fantascope and Wheatstone&#x27;s stereoscope. Plateau thought the construction of a sequential set of stereoscopic image pairs would be the more difficult part of the plan than adapting two copies of his improved fantascope to be fitted with a stereoscope. Wheatstone had suggested using photographs on paper of a solid object, for instance a statuette. Plateau concluded that for this purpose 16 plaster models could be made with 16 regular modifications. He believed such a project would take much time and careful effort, but would be quite worth it because of the expected marvelous results. The plan was never executed, possibly because Plateau was almost completely blind by this time.

In 1852, Jules Duboscq patented a &quot;Stéréoscope-fantascope ou Bïoscope&quot; (or abbreviated as stéréofantascope) stroboscopic disc. The only known extant disc contains stereoscopic photograph pairs of different phases of the motion of a machine. Due to the long exposure times necessary to capture an image with the photographic emulsions of the period, the sequence could not be recorded live and must have been assembled from separate photographs of the various positions of the machinery.

In 1855, Johann Nepomuk Czermak published an article about his Stereophoroskop and other experiments aimed at stereoscopic moving images. He mentioned a method of sticking needles in a stroboscopic disc so that it looked like one needle was being pushed in and out of the cardboard when animated. He realized that this method provided basically endless possibilities to make different 3D animations. He then introduced two methods to animate stereoscopic pairs of images, one was basically a stereo viewer using two stroboscopic discs and the other was more or less similar to the later zoetrope. Czermak explained how suitable stereoscopic photographs could be made by recording a series of models, for instance to animate a growing pyramid.

On 27 February 1860, Peter Hubert Desvignes received British patent no. 537 for 28 monocular and stereoscopic variations of cylindrical stroboscopic devices (much like the later zoetrope). Desvignes&#x27; &quot;Mimoscope&quot;, received an Honourable Mention &quot;for ingenuity of construction&quot; at the 1862 International Exhibition in London. Desvignes &quot;employed models, insects and other objects, instead of pictures, with perfect success&quot;.

In 1874, Jules Janssen made several practice discs for the recording of the passage of Venus with his series &quot;Passage de Vénus&quot; with his photographic revolver. He used a model of the planet and a light source standing in for the sun. While actual recordings of the passage of Venus have not been located, some practice discs survived and the images of one were turned into a short animated film decades after the development of cinematography.

In 1887, Étienne-Jules Marey created a large zoetrope with a series of plaster models based on his chronophotographs of birds in flight.

===1895–1928: The silent film era===
It is estimated that 80 to 90 percent of all silent films are lost. Extant contemporary movie catalogs, reviews and other documentation can provide some details on lost films, but this kind of written documentation is also incomplete and often insufficient to properly date all extant films or even identify them if original titles are missing. Possible stop motion in lost films is even harder to trace. The principles of animation and other special effects were mostly kept a secret, not only to prevent use of such techniques by competitors, but also to keep audiences interested in the mystery of the magic tricks.

Stop motion is closely related to the stop trick, in which the camera is temporarily stopped during the recording of a scene to create a change before filming is continued (or for which the cause of the change is edited out of the film). In the resulting film, the change will be sudden and a logical cause of the change will be mysteriously absent or replaced with a fake cause that is suggested in the scene. The oldest known example is used for the beheading in Edison Manufacturing Company&#x27;s 1895 film &quot;The Execution of Mary Stuart&quot;. The technique of stop motion can be interpreted as repeatedly applying the stop trick. In 1917, clay animation pioneer Helena Smith-Dayton referred to the principle behind her work as &quot;stop action&quot;, a synonym of &quot;stop motion&quot;.

French trick film pioneer Georges Méliès claimed to have invented the stop-trick and popularized it by using it in many of his short films. He reportedly used stop-motion animation in 1899 to produce moving letterforms.

====Segundo de Chomón====

Spanish filmmaker Segundo de Chomón (1871–1929) made many trick films in France for Pathé. He has often been compared to Georges Méliès as he also made many fantasy films with stop tricks and other illusions (helped by his wife, Julienne Mathieu). 

&quot;Le théâtre de Bob&quot; (April 1906) features stop motion with dolls and objects to represent a fictional automated theatre owned by Bob, played by a live-action child actor. The film used to be credited to Chomón, but he didn&#x27;t come to Paris (to work for Pathé) until later. Direction and special effects have been attributed to Gaston Velle.
De Chomón&#x27;s &quot;La maison ensorcelée&quot; (December 1907, or 1906) features stop-motion-animated cuttlery and food, among other special effects that depict paranormal acitivity.
De Chomón&#x27;s &quot;Sculpteur moderne&quot; was released on 31 January 1908 and features heaps of clay molding itself into detailed sculptures that are capable of minor movements. The final sculpture depicts an old woman and walks around before it&#x27;s picked up, squashed and molded back into a sitting old lady.

====Edwin S. Porter and Wallace McCutcheon Sr.====
American film pioneer Edwin S. Porter filmed a single-shot &quot;lightning sculpting&quot; film with a baker molding faces from a patch of dough in &quot;Fun in a Bakery Shop&quot; (1902), considered as foreshadowing of clay animation.

In 1905, Porter showed animated letters and very simple cutout animation of two hands in the intertitles in &quot;How Jones Lost His Roll&quot;.

Porter experimented with a small bit of crude stop-motion animation in his trick film &quot;Dream of a Rarebit Fiend&quot; (1906).

&quot;The &quot;Teddy&quot; Bears&quot; (2 March 1907), made in collaboration with Wallace McCutcheon Sr., mainly shows people in bear costumes, but the short film also features a short stop-motion segment with small teddy bears.

On 15 February 1908, Porter released the trick film &quot;A Sculptor&#x27;s Welsh Rabbit Dream&quot; that featured clay molding itself into three complete busts. No copy of the film has yet been located. It was soon followed by the similar extant film &quot;The Sculptor&#x27;s Nightmare&quot; (6 May 1908) by Wallace McCutcheon Sr.

====J. Stuart Blackton====
J. Stuart Blackton&#x27;s &quot;The Haunted Hotel&quot; (23 February 1907) featured a combination of live-action with practical special effects and stop motion animation of several objects, a puppet and a model of the haunted hotel. It was the first stop motion film to receive wide scale appreciation. Especially a large close-up view of a table being set by itself baffled viewers; there were no visible wires or other noticeable well-known tricks. This inspired other filmmakers, including French animator Émile Cohl and Segundo de Chomón. De Chomón would release the similar &quot;The House of Ghosts&quot; (&quot;La maison ensorcelée&quot;) and &quot;Hôtel électrique&quot; in 1908, with the latter also containing some very early pixelation.

&quot;The Humpty Dumpty Circus&quot; (1908, considered lost) by Blackton and his British-American Vitagraph partner Albert E. Smith showed an animated performance of figures from a popular wooden toy set. Smith would later claim that this was &quot;the first stop-motion picture in America&quot;. The inspiration would have come from seeing how puffs of smoke behaved in the interrupted recordings for a stop trick film they were making. Smith would have suggested to get a patent for the technique, but Blackton thought it wasn&#x27;t that important. Smith&#x27;s recollections are not considered to be very reliable.

====Émile Cohl====

Blackton&#x27;s &quot;The Haunted Hotel&quot; made a big impression in Paris, where it was released as &quot;L&#x27;hôtel hanté: fantasmagorie épouvantable&quot;. When Gaumont bought a copy to further distribute the film, it was carefully studied by some of their filmmakers to find out how it was made. Reportedly it was newcomer Émile Cohl who unraveled the mystery. Not long after, Cohl released his first film, &quot;Japon de fantaisie&quot; (June 1907), featuring his own imaginative use of the stop-motion technique.
It was followed by the revolutionary hand-drawn &quot;Fantasmagorie&quot; (17 August 1908) and many more animated films by Cohl.

Other notable stop-motion films by Cohl include &quot;Les allumettes animées (Animated Matches)&quot; (1908), and &quot;Mobilier fidèle&quot; (1910, in collaboration with Romeo Bosetti). &quot;Mobilier fidèle&quot; is often confused with Bosetti&#x27;s object animation tour de force &quot;Le garde-meubles automatique (The Automatic Moving Company)&quot; (1912). Both films feature furniture moving by itself.

====Arthur Melbourne-Cooper====
Of the more than 300 short films produced between 1896 and 1915 by British film pioneer Arthur Melbourne-Cooper, an estimated 36 contained forms of animation. Based on later reports by Melbourne-Cooper and by his daughter Audrey Wadowska, some believe that Cooper&#x27;s &quot;Matches: an Appeal&quot; was produced in 1899 and therefore the first stop-motion animation. The extant black-and-white film shows a matchstick figure writing an appeal to donate a Guinea for which Bryant &amp; May would supply soldiers with sufficient matches. No archival records are known that could proof that the film was indeed created in 1899 during the beginning of the Second Boer War. Others place it at 1914, during the beginning of World War I. Cooper created more &quot;Animated Matches&quot; scenes in the same setting. These are believed to also have been produced in 1899, while a release date of 1908 has also been given. The 1908 &quot;Animated Matches&quot; film by Émile Cohl may have caused more confusion about the release dates of Cooper&#x27;s matchstick animations. It also raises the question whether Cohl may have been inspired by Melbourne-Cooper or vice versa.

Melbourne-Cooper&#x27;s lost films &quot;Dolly’s Toys&quot; (1901) and &quot;The Enchanted Toymaker&quot; (1904) may have included stop-motion animation. &quot;Dreams of Toyland&quot; (1908) features a scene with many animated toys that lasts approximately three and a half minutes.

====Alexander Shiryaev====
As a means to plan his performances, ballet dancer and choreographer Alexander Shiryaev started making approximately 20- to 25-centimeter-tall puppets out of papier-mâché on poseable wire frames. He then sketched all the sequential movements on paper. When he arranged these vertically on a long strip, it was possible to give a presentation of the complete dance with a home cinema projector. Later on, he bought a movie camera and between 1906 and 1909 he made many short films, including puppet animations. As a dancer and choreographer, Shiryaev had a special talent to create motion in his animated films. According to animator Peter Lord his work was decades ahead of its time. Part of Shiryaev&#x27;s animation work is featured in Viktor Bocharov&#x27;s documentary &quot;Alexander Shiryaev: A Belated Premiere&quot; (2003).

====Ladislas Starevich (Russian period)====
Polish-Russian Ladislas Starevich (1882–1965), started his film career around 1909 in Kaunas filming live insects. He wanted to document rutting stag beetles, but the creatures wouldn&#x27;t cooperate or would even die under the bright lamps needed for filming. He solved the problem by using wire for the limbs of dried beetles and then animating them in stop motion. The resulting short film, presumably 1 minute long, was probably titled by the Latin name for the species: &quot;Lucanus Cervus&quot; (Жук-олень, 1910, considered lost). 

After moving to Moscow, Starevich continued animating dead insects, but now as characters in imaginative stories with much dramatic complexity. He garnered much attention and international acclaim with these short films, including the 10-minute &quot;The Beautiful Leukanida&quot; (Прекрасная Люканида, или Война усачей с рогачами) (March 1912), the two-minute &quot;Happy Scenes from Animal Life&quot; (Веселые сценки из жизни животных), the 12-minute &quot;The Cameraman&#x27;s Revenge&quot; (Прекрасная Люканида, или Война усачей с рогачами, October 1912) and the 5-minute &quot;The Grasshopper and the Ant&quot; (Стрекоза и муравей, 1913). Reportedly many viewers were impressed with how much could be achieved with trained insects, or at least wondered what tricks could have been used, since few people were familiar with the secrets of stop motion animation. &quot;The Insects&#x27; Christmas&quot; (Рождество обитателей леса, 1913) featured other animated puppets, including Father Christmas and a frog. Starevich made several other stop motion films in the next two years, but mainly went on to direct live-action short and feature films before he fled from Russia in 1918.

====Willis O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s early films====

Willis O&#x27; Brien&#x27;s first stop motion film was &quot;The Dinosaur and the Missing Link: A Prehistoric Tragedy&quot; (1915). Apart from the titular dinosaur and &quot;missing link&quot; ape, it featured several cavemen and an ostrich-like &quot;desert quail&quot;, all relatively lifelike models made with clay. This led to a series of short animated comedies with a prehistoric theme for Edison Company, including &quot;Prehistoric Poultry&quot; (1916), &quot;R.F.D. 10,000 B.C.&quot; (1917), &quot;The Birth of a Flivver&quot; (1917) and &quot;Curious Pets of Our Ancestors&quot; (1917). O&#x27;Brien was then hired by producer Herbert M. Dawley to direct, create effects, co-write and co-star with him for &quot;The Ghost of Slumber Mountain&quot; (1918). The collaborative film combined live-action with animated dinosaur models in a 45-minute film, but after the premiere it was cut down to approximately 12 minutes. Dawley did not give O&#x27;Brien credits for the visual effects, and instead claimed the animation process as his own invention and even applied for patents. O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s stop motion work was recognized as a technique to create lifelike creatures for adventure films. O&#x27; Brien further pioneered the technique with animated dinosaur sequences for the live-action feature &quot;The Lost World&quot; (1925).

====Helena Smith Dayton====

New York artist Helena Smith Dayton, possibly the first female animator, had much success with her &quot;Caricatypes&quot; clay statuettes before she began experimenting with clay animation. Some of her first resulting short films were screened on 25 March 1917. She released an adaptation of William Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot; approximately half a year later. Although the films and her technique received much attention of the press, it seems she did not continue making films after she returned to New York from managing a YMCA in Paris around 1918. None of her films have yet surfaced, but the extant magazine articles have provided several stills and approximately 20 poorly printed frames from two film strips.

====Starewicz in Paris====
By 1920 Starewicz had settled in Paris, and started making new stop motion films. &quot;Dans les Griffes de L&#x27;araignée&quot; (finished 1920, released 1924) featured detailed hand-made insect puppets that could convey facial expressions with moving lips and eyelids.

====Other silent stop motion====

One of the earliest clay animation films was &quot;Modelling Extraordinary&quot;, which impressed audiences in 1912.

The early Italian feature film &quot;Cabiria&quot; (1914) featured some stop motion techniques.

===1930s and 1940s===
Starewicz finished the first feature stop motion film &quot;Le Roman de Renard (The Tale of the Fox)&quot; in 1930, but problems with its soundtrack delayed its release. In 1937 it was released with a German soundtrack and in 1941 with its French soundtrack.

Hungarian-American filmmaker George Pal developed his own stop motion technique of replacing wooden dolls (or parts of them) with similar figures displaying changed poses and/or expressions. He called it Pal-Doll and used it for his Puppetoons films since 1932. The particular replacement animation method itself also became better known as puppetoon. In Europe he mainly worked on promotional films for companies such as Philips. Later Pal gained much success in Hollywood with a string of Academy Award for Best Animated Short Films, including &quot;Rhythm in the Ranks&quot; (1941), &quot;Tulips Shall Grow&quot; (1942), &quot;Jasper and the Haunted House&quot; (1942), the Dr. Seuss penned &quot;The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins&quot; (1943) and &quot;And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street&quot; (1944), &quot;Jasper and the Beanstalk&quot; (1945), &quot;John Henry and the Inky-Poo&quot; (1946), &quot;Jasper in a Jam&quot; (1946), and &quot;Tubby the Tuba&quot; (1947). Many of his puppetoon films were selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.

Willis O&#x27; Brien&#x27;s expressive and emotionally convincing animation of the big ape in &quot;King Kong&quot; (1933) is widely regarded as a milestone in stop-motion animation and a highlight of Hollywood cinema in general.

A 1940 promotional film for Autolite, an automotive parts supplier, featured stop-motion animation of its products marching past Autolite factories to the tune of Franz Schubert&#x27;s &quot;Military March&quot;. An abbreviated version of this sequence was later used in television ads for Autolite, especially those on the 1950s CBS program &quot;Suspense&quot;, which Autolite sponsored.

The first British animated feature was the stop motion instruction film &quot;Handling Ships&quot; (1945) by Halas and Batchelor for the British Admiralty. It was not meant for general cinemas, but did become part of the official selection of the 1946 Cannes Film Festival.

The first Belgian animated feature was an adaptation of the Tintin comic &quot;The Crab with the Golden Claws&quot; (1947) with animated puppets.

The first Czech animated feature was the package film &quot;The Czech Year&quot; (1947) with animated puppets by Jiří Trnka. The film won several awards at the Venice Film Festival and other international festivals. Trnka would make several more award-winning stop motion features including &quot;The Emperor&#x27;s Nightingale&quot; (1949), &quot;Prince Bayaya&quot; (1950), &quot;Old Czech Legends&quot; (1953), or &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; (1959). He also directed many short films and experimented with other forms of animation.

===1950s===

Ray Harryhausen learned under O&#x27;Brien on the film &quot;Mighty Joe Young&quot; (1949). Harryhausen would go on to create many memorable stop motion effects for a string of successful fantasy films over the next three decades. These included &quot;The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms&quot; (1953), &quot;It Came from Beneath the Sea&quot; (1955), &quot;Jason and the Argonauts&quot; (1963), &quot;The Golden Voyage of Sinbad&quot; (1973), and &quot;Clash of the Titans&quot; (1981).

It wasn&#x27;t until 1954 before a feature animated film with a technique other than cel animation was produced in the US. The first was the stop motion adaptation of 19th century composer Engelbert Humperdinck&#x27;s opera &quot;Hänsel und Gretel&quot; as &quot;Hansel and Gretel: An Opera Fantasy&quot;.

In 1955, Karel Zeman made his first feature film &quot;Journey to the Beginning of Time&quot; inspired by Jules Verne, featuring stop motion animation of dinosaurs and other prehistoric creatures.

Art Clokey started his adventures in clay with a freeform clay short film called &quot;Gumbasia&quot; (1955), which shortly thereafter propelled him into the production of his more structured TV series &quot;Gumby&quot; (1955–1989), with the iconic titular character. In partnership with the United Lutheran Church in America, he also produced &quot;Davey and Goliath&quot; (1960–2004). The theatrical feature &quot;&quot; (1992, released in 1995) was a box-office bomb.

On 22 November 1959, the first episode of &quot;Unser Sandmänchen (Our Little Sandman)&quot; was broadcast on DFF (East German television). The 10-minute daily bedtime show for young children features the title character as an animated puppet, and other puppets in different segments. A very similar &quot;Sandmänchen&quot; series, possibly conceived earlier, ran on West German television from 1 December 1959 until the German reunification in 1989. The East German show was continued on other German networks when DFF ended in 1991, and is one of the longest running animated series in the world. The theatrical feature &quot;Das Sandmännchen – Abenteuer im Traumland&quot; (2010) was fully animated with stop motion puppets.

===1960s and 1970s===

Japanese puppet animator Tadahito Mochinaga started out as assistant animator in short anime (propaganda) films &quot;Arichan&quot; (1941) and &quot;Momotarō no Umiwashi&quot; (1943). He fled to Manchukuo during the war and stayed in China afterwards. Due to the scarcity of paint and film stock shortly after the war, Mochinaga decided to work with puppets and stop motion. His work helped popularize puppet animation in China, before he returned to Japan around 1953 where he continued working as animation director. In the 1960s, Mochinaga supervised the &quot;Animagic&quot; puppet animation for productions by Arthur Rankin Jr. and Jules Bass&#x27; Videocraft International, Ltd. (later called Rankin/Bass Productions, Inc.) and Dentsu, starting with the syndicated television series &quot;The New Adventures of Pinocchio&quot; (1960-1961). The Christmas TV special &quot;Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer&quot; has been telecasted annually since 1964 and has become one of the most beloved holiday specials in the United States. They made three theatrical feature films &quot;Willy McBean and His Magic Machine&quot; (1965), &quot;The Daydreamer&quot; (1966, stop motion / live-action) and &quot;Mad Monster Party?&quot; (1966, released in 1967), and the television special &quot;Ballad of Smokey the Bear&quot; (1966) before the collaboration ended. Rankin/Bass worked with other animators for more TV specials, with titles such as &quot;The Little Drummer Boy&quot; (1968), &quot;Santa Claus is Comin&#x27; to Town&quot; (1970) and &quot;Here Comes Peter Cottontail&quot; (1971).

British television has shown many stop motion series for young children since the 1960s. An early example is &quot;Snip and Snap&quot; (1960-1961) by John Halas in collaboration with Danish paper sculptor Thok Søndergaard (Thoki Yenn), featuring dog Snap, cut from a sheet of paper by pair of scissors Snip.

Apart from their cutout animation series, British studio Smallfilms (Peter Firmin and Oliver Postgate) produced several stop motion series with puppets, beginning with &quot;Pingwings&quot; (1961-1965) featuring penguin-like birds knitted by Peter&#x27;s wife Joan and filmed on their farm (where most of their productions were filmed in an unused barn). It was followed by &quot;Pogles&#x27; Wood&quot; (1965-1967), &quot;Clangers&quot; (1969-1972, 1974, revived in 2015), &quot;Bagpuss&quot; (1974) and &quot;&quot; (1984).

Czech surrealist filmmaker Jan Švankmajer&#x27;s released his short artistic films since 1964, which usually contain much experimental stop motion. He started to gain much international recognition in the 1980s. Since 1988 he has mostly been directing feature films which feature much more live action than stop motion. These include &quot;Alice&quot;, an adaptation of Lewis Carroll&#x27;s &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;, and &quot;Faust&quot;, a rendition of the legend of the German scholar. Švankmajer&#x27;s work has been highly influential on other artists, such as Terry Gilliam and the Quay brothers (although the latter claim to have only discovered Švankmajer&#x27;s films after having developed their own similar style).

French animator Serge Danot created &quot;The Magic Roundabout&quot; (1965) which played for many years on the BBC.

Polish studio Se-ma-for produced popular TV series with animated puppets in adaptations of &quot;Colargol&quot; (&quot;Barnaby the Bear&quot; in the UK, &quot;Jeremy&quot; in Canada) (1967-1974) and &quot;The Moomins&quot; (1977-1982).

In the 1960s and 1970s, independent clay animator Eliot Noyes Jr. refined the technique of &quot;free-form&quot; clay animation with his Oscar-nominated 1965 film &quot;Clay (or the Origin of Species)&quot;. Noyes also used stop motion to animate sand lying on glass for his musical animated film &quot;Sandman&quot; (1975).

Italian director Francesco Misseri created the clay animation TV series &quot;Mio Mao&quot; (1970-1976, 2002–2007), &quot;The Red and the Blue&quot; (&quot;Il Rosso e il Blu&quot;, 1976), and a TV series with an animated origami duck &quot;Quaq Quao&quot; (1978-1979).

The British artists Brian Cosgrove and Mark Hall (Cosgrove Hall Films) produced two stop-motion animated adaptions of Enid Blyton&#x27;s &quot;Noddy&quot; book series, including the original series of the same name (1975–1982) and &quot;Noddy&#x27;s Toyland Adventures&quot; (1992–2001), a full-length film &quot;The Wind in the Willows&quot; (1983) and later a multi-season TV series, both based on Kenneth Grahame&#x27;s classic children&#x27;s book of the same title. They also produced a documentary of their production techniques, &quot;Making Frog and Toad&quot;.

In 1975, filmmaker and clay animation experimenter Will Vinton joined with sculptor Bob Gardiner to create an experimental film called &quot;Closed Mondays&quot; which became the first stop-motion film to win an Oscar. Will Vinton followed with several other successful short film experiments including &quot;The Great Cognito&quot;, &quot;The Creation&quot;, and &quot;Rip Van Winkle&quot; which were each nominated for Academy Awards. In 1977, Vinton made a documentary about this process and his style of animation which he dubbed &quot;claymation&quot;; he titled the documentary &quot;Claymation&quot;. Soon after this documentary, the term was trademarked by Vinton to differentiate his team&#x27;s work from others who had been, or were beginning to do, &quot;clay animation&quot;. While the word has stuck and is often used to describe clay animation and stop motion, it remains a trademark owned currently by Laika Entertainment, Inc. Twenty clay-animation episodes featuring the clown Mr. Bill were a feature of &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, starting from a first appearance in February 1976.

At very much the same time in the UK, Peter Lord and David Sproxton formed Aardman Animations that would produce many commercials, TV series, short films and eventually also feature films. In 1976 they created the character Morph who appeared as an animated side-kick to the TV presenter Tony Hart on his BBC TV programme Take Hart. The five-inch-high presenter was made from a traditional British modelling clay called Plasticine. In 1977 they started on a series of animated films, again using modelling clay, but this time made for a more adult audience. The soundtrack for &quot;Down and Out&quot; was recorded in a Salvation Army Hostel and Plasticine puppets were animated to dramatise the dialogue. A second film, also for the BBC followed in 1978. A TV series The Amazing Adventures of Morph was aired in 1980.

Sand-coated puppet animation was used in the Oscar-winning 1977 film &quot;The Sand Castle&quot;, produced by Dutch-Canadian animator Co Hoedeman. Hoedeman was one of dozens of animators sheltered by the National Film Board of Canada, a Canadian government film arts agency that had supported animators for decades. A pioneer of refined multiple stop-motion films under the NFB banner was Norman McLaren, who brought in many other animators to create their own creatively controlled films. Notable among these are the pinscreen animation films of Jacques Drouin, made with the original pinscreen donated by Alexandre Alexeieff and Claire Parker.

Czech filmmakers Lubomír Beneš and Vladimír Jiránek debuted their animated puppet characters &quot;Pat &amp; Mat&quot;, two inventive but clumsy neighbors, in the 7-minute short &quot;Kuťáci&quot; in 1976. Since 1979, over 100 episodes have been broadcast irregularly. Since 2014, new episodes were presented in theatrically released package films. The series became very popular in several countries, especially in The Netherlands, the only country where the characters are voiced.

One of the main British animation teams, John Hardwick and Bob Bura, were the main animators in many early British TV shows, and are famous for their work on the &quot;Trumptonshire&quot; trilogy (&quot;Camberwick Green&quot;, &quot;Trumpton&quot; and &quot;Chigley&quot;). Their company was named Stop Motion Limited, the term having been their trademark until it became generic.

Disney experimented with several stop-motion techniques by hiring independent animator-director Mike Jittlov to make the first stop-motion animation of Mickey Mouse toys ever produced, in a short sequence called &quot;Mouse Mania&quot;, part of a TV special, &quot;Mickey&#x27;s 50&quot;, which commemorated Mickey&#x27;s 50th anniversary in 1978. Jittlov again produced some impressive multi-technique stop-motion animation a year later for a 1979 Disney special promoting their release of the feature film &quot;The Black Hole&quot;. Titled &quot;Major Effects&quot;, Jittlov&#x27;s work stood out as the best part of the special. Jittlov released his footage the following year to 16mm film collectors as a short film titled &quot;The Wizard of Speed and Time&quot;, along with four of his other short multi-technique animated films, most of which eventually evolved into his own feature-length film of the same title. Effectively demonstrating almost all animation techniques, as well as how he produced them, the film was released to theaters in 1987 and to video in 1989.

===1980s===

In the 1970s and 1980s, Industrial Light &amp; Magic often used stop-motion model animation in such films as the original &quot;Star Wars&quot; trilogy: the holochess sequence in &quot;Star Wars&quot;, the Tauntauns and AT-AT walkers in &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot;, and the AT-ST walkers in &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; were all filmed using stop-motion animation, with the latter two films utilising go motion: an invention from renowned visual effects veteran Phil Tippett. The many shots including the ghosts in &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot; , the Dragon in &quot;Dragonslayer&quot;, and the first two feature films in the &quot;RoboCop&quot; series use Tippett&#x27;s go motion.

In the UK, Aardman Animations continued to grow. Channel 4 funded a new series of clay animated films, &quot;Conversation Pieces&quot;, using recorded soundtracks of real people talking. A further series in 1986, called &quot;Lip Sync&quot;, premiered the work of Richard Goleszowski (&quot;Ident&quot;), Barry Purves (&quot;Next&quot;), and Nick Park (&quot;Creature Comforts&quot;), as well as further films by Sproxton and Lord. &quot;Creature Comforts&quot; won the Oscar for Best Animated Short in 1990. In 1986, they also produced a notable music video for &quot;Sledgehammer&quot;, a song by Peter Gabriel.

In 1980, Marc Paul Chinoy directed the 1st feature-length clay animated film, based on the famous &quot;Pogo&quot; comic strip. Titled &quot;I go Pogo&quot;. It was aired a few times on American cable channels but has yet to be commercially released. Primarily clay, some characters required armatures, and walk cycles used pre-sculpted hard bases legs.

Stop motion was also used for some shots of the final sequence of the first &quot;Terminator&quot; movie, also for the scenes of the small alien ships in Spielberg&#x27;s &quot;Batteries Not Included&quot; in 1987, animated by David W. Allen. Allen&#x27;s stop-motion work can also be seen in such feature films as &quot;The Crater Lake Monster&quot; (1977), &quot;Q - The Winged Serpent&quot; (1982), &quot;The Gate&quot; (1987) and &quot;Freaked&quot; (1993). Allen&#x27;s King Kong Volkswagen commercial from the 1970s is now legendary among model animation enthusiasts.

In 1985, Will Vinton and his team released an ambitious feature film in stop motion called &quot;The Adventures Of Mark Twain&quot; based on the life and works of the famous American author. While the film may have been a little sophisticated for young audiences at the time, it got rave reviews from critics and adults in general. Vinton&#x27;s team also created the Nomes and the Nome King for Disney&#x27;s &quot;Return to Oz&quot; feature, for which they received an Academy Award Nomination for Special Visual Effects. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Will Vinton became very well known for his commercial work as well with stop-motion campaigns including The California Raisins and The Noid.

Jiří Barta released his award-winning fantasy film The Pied Piper (1986).

From 1986 to 1991, Churchill Films produced &quot;The Mouse and the Motorcycle&quot;, &quot;Runaway Ralph&quot;, and &quot;Ralph S. Mouse&quot; for ABC television. The shows featured stop-motion characters combined with live action, based on the books of Beverly Cleary. John Clark Matthews was the animation director, with Justin Kohn, Joel Fletcher, and Gail Van Der Merwe providing character animation. The company also produced other films based on children&#x27;s books.

From 1986 to 2000, over 150 five-minute episodes of &quot;Pingu&quot;, a Swiss children&#x27;s comedy, were produced by Trickfilmstudio.

Aardman Animations&#x27; Nick Park became very successful with his short claymation &quot;Creature Comforts&quot; in 1989, which had talking animals voicing vox pop interviews. Park then used the same format to produce a series of commercials between 1990 and 1992. The commercials have been credited as having introduced a more &quot;caring&quot; way of advertising in the UK. Richard Goleszowski later directed two 13-episode &quot;Creature Comforts&quot; TV series (2003, 2005–2006) and a Christmas special (2005). 
Also in 1989, Park introduced his very popular clay characters Wallace and Gromit in &quot;A Grand Day Out&quot;. Three more short films and one feature film and many TV adaptions and spin-offs would follow. Among many other awards, Park won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature for the feature-length outing &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot;. Park also worked on the &quot;Chicken Run&quot; movie, which was another film from Aardman Animations.

===1990s===
In 1992, Trey Parker and Matt Stone made &quot;The Spirit of Christmas&quot;, a short cutout animated student film made with construction paper. In 1995 they made a second short with the same titled, commissioned as a Christmas greeting by Fox Broadcasting Company executive Brian Graden. The concepts and characters were further developed into the TV hit series &quot;South Park&quot; (since 1997). Except for the pilot, all animation has been created on computers in the same style.

&quot;The Nightmare Before Christmas&quot; (1993), directed by Henry Selick and produced by Tim Burton, was one of the more widely released stop-motion features and became the highest grossing stop-motion animated movie of its time, grossing over $50 million domestic. Henry Selick also went on to direct &quot;James and the Giant Peach&quot; and &quot;Coraline&quot;, and Tim Burton went on to direct &quot;Corpse Bride&quot; and &quot;Frankenweenie&quot;.

The stop-motion feature &quot;The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb&quot; was released in 1993.

In November 1998, the first episode of Bob the Builder released on BBC. Bob the Builder was a popular British stop-motion television series created by Keith Chapman &amp; produced and owned by HIT Entertainment.

In 1999, Will Vinton launched the first US prime-time stop-motion television series called &quot;The PJs&quot;, co-created by actor-comedian Eddie Murphy. The Emmy-winning sitcom aired on Fox for two seasons, then moved to the WB for an additional season. Vinton launched another series, &quot;Gary &amp; Mike&quot;, for UPN in 2001.

In 1999, Tsuneo Gōda directed 30-second sketches of the character Domo. The shorts, animated by stop-motion studio Dwarf, are currently still produced in Japan and have received universal critical acclaim from fans and critics. Gōda also directed the stop-motion movie series &quot;Komaneko&quot; in 2004.

===21st century===

The BBC commissioned thirteen episodes of stop frame animated &quot;Summerton Mill&quot; in 2004 as inserts into their flagship pre-school program, &quot;Tikkabilla&quot;. Created and produced by Pete Bryden and Ed Cookson, the series was then given its own slot on BBC1 and BBC2 and has been broadcast extensively around the world.

Other notable stop-motion feature films released since 2000 include &quot;Fantastic Mr. Fox&quot; (2009), &quot;$9.99&quot; (2009), &quot;Anomalisa&quot; (2015), Henry Selick&#x27;s Wendell and Wild (2022) and &quot;Guillermo del Toro&#x27;s Pinocchio&quot; (2022).

In 2003, the pilot film for the series &quot;Curucuru and Friends&quot;, produced by Korean studio Ffango Entertoyment is greenlighted into a children&#x27;s animated series in 2004 after an approval with the Gyeonggi Digital Contents Agency. It was aired in KBS1 on November 24, 2006, and won the 13th Korean Animation Awards in 2007 for Best Animation. Ffango Entertoyment also worked with Frontier Works in Japan to produce the 2010 film remake of &quot;Cheburashka&quot;.

Since 2005, &quot;Robot Chicken&quot; has mostly utilized stop-motion animation, using custom made action figures and other toys as principal characters.

Since 2009, Laika, the stop-motion successor to Will Vinton Studios, has released five feature films, which have collectively grossed over $400 million: &quot;Coraline&quot; (2009), &quot;ParaNorman&quot; (2012), &quot;The Boxtrolls&quot; (2014), &quot;Kubo and the Two Strings&quot; (2016) and &quot;Missing Link&quot; (2019).

Directors like Tim Burton and Wes Anderson are still using stop-motion animation in some of their live action films.

In November 2024, Disney released &quot;Mickey &amp; Minnie&#x27;s Christmas Carols&quot;, a series of five stop-motion shorts featuring Mickey, Minnie, Donald, Daisy, Goofy and Pluto.

==Variations of stop motion==
===Stereoscopic stop motion===
Stop motion has very rarely been shot in stereoscopic 3D throughout film history. The first 3D stop-motion short was &quot;In Tune With Tomorrow&quot; (also known as &quot;Motor Rhythm&quot;), made in 1939 by John Norling. The second stereoscopic stop-motion release was &quot;The Adventures of Sam Space&quot; in 1955 by Paul Sprunck. The third and latest stop motion short in stereo 3D was &quot;The Incredible Invasion of the 20,000 Giant Robots from Outer Space&quot; in 2000 by Elmer Kaan and Alexander Lentjes. This is also the first ever 3D stereoscopic stop motion and CGI short in the history of film. The first all stop-motion 3D feature is &quot;Coraline&quot; (2009), based on Neil Gaiman&#x27;s best-selling novel and directed by Henry Selick.
Another recent example is the Nintendo 3DS video software which comes with the option for Stop Motion videos. This has been released December 8, 2011 as a 3DS system update. Also, the film &quot;ParaNorman&quot; is in 3D stop motion.

===Go motion===
Another more complicated variation on stop motion is go motion, co-developed by Phil Tippett and first used on the films &quot;The Empire Strikes Back&quot; (1980), &quot;Dragonslayer&quot; (1981), and the &quot;RoboCop&quot; films. Go motion involved programming a computer to move parts of a model slightly during each exposure of each frame of film, combined with traditional hand manipulation of the model in between frames, to produce a more realistic motion blurring effect. Tippett also used the process extensively in his 1984 short film &quot;Prehistoric Beast&quot;, a 10 minutes long sequence depicting a herbivorous dinosaur (&quot;Monoclonius&quot;), being chased by a carnivorous one (&quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot;). With new footage &quot;Prehistoric Beast&quot; became &quot;Dinosaur!&quot; in 1985, a full-length dinosaurs documentary hosted by Christopher Reeve. Those Phil Tippett&#x27;s go motion tests acted as motion models for his first photo-realistic use of computers to depict dinosaurs in &quot;Jurassic Park&quot; in 1993. A low-tech, manual version of this blurring technique was originally pioneered by Władysław Starewicz in the silent era, and was used in his feature film &quot;The Tale of the Fox&quot; (1931).

==Comparison to computer-generated imagery==
The reasons for using stop motion instead of the more advanced computer-generated imagery (CGI) include the appeal of its distinct look and the notion that it accurately displays real-life textures, while CGI texturing can look more artificial and isn&#x27;t always quite as close to realism. This is appreciated by a number of animation directors, such as Guillermo del Toro, Henry Selick, Tim Burton and Travis Knight.

Guillermo del Toro aimed to praise the benefits of stop motion in his movie Pinocchio, saying that he wanted &quot;the expressiveness and the material nature of a handmade piece of animation — an artisanal, beautiful exercise in carving, painting, sculpting&quot;.

==Stop motion in other media==
Many young people begin their experiments in movie making with stop motion, thanks to the ease of modern stop-motion software and online video publishing. Many new stop-motion shorts use clay animation into a new form.

Singer-songwriter Oren Lavie&#x27;s music video for the song Her Morning Elegance was posted on YouTube on January 19, 2009. The video, directed by Lavie and Yuval and Merav Nathan, uses stop motion and has achieved great success with over 25.4 million views, also earning a 2010 Grammy Award nomination for &quot;Best Short Form Music Video&quot;.

Stop motion has occasionally been used to create the characters for computer games, as an alternative to CGI. The Virgin Interactive Entertainment Mythos game Magic and Mayhem (1998) featured creatures built by stop-motion specialist Alan Friswell, who made the miniature figures from modelling clay and latex rubber, over armatures of wire and ball-and-socket joints. The models were then animated one frame at a time, and incorporated into the CGI elements of the game through digital photography. &quot;ClayFighter&quot; for the Super NES and The Neverhood and &quot;Hylics 2&quot; for the PC are other examples.

Scientists at IBM used a scanning tunneling microscope to single out and move individual atoms which were used to make characters in &quot;A Boy and His Atom&quot;. This was the tiniest scale stop-motion video made at that time.

Replicating the distinct tactile look of traditional stop motion has gained popularity in contemporary media through the use of CGI. This approach can often provide a more cost-effective and accessible means of achieving the stop motion aesthetic. Noteworthy among such endeavors is the work of Blender animator Ian Worthington, exemplified by his 2021 short film &quot;Captain Yajima&quot;. Another prominent example of this trend includes &quot;The LEGO Movie&quot;, which uses CGI to replicate the visual style and imperfections of stop motion.

==See also==

* Brickfilm
* List of stop motion artists
* List of stop motion films
* Still motion
* Time-lapse photography

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 


==External links==
* &quot;Hänschens Soldaten&quot;, early stop-motion film (1908), European Film Gateway</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="0" end="11" title="Stop motion" label="Stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="27" end="47" title="Stop motion" label="stop frame animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="55" end="63" title="animation" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="64" end="74" title="filmmaking" label="filmmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="79" end="94" title="Special effect" label="special effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913135" start="362" end="368" title="puppet" label="puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="391" end="407" title="Stop motion" label="puppet animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q840688" start="412" end="422" title="plasticine" label="plasticine"/>
<link wikidata="Q870889" start="450" end="460" title="claymation" label="claymation"/>
<link wikidata="Q679529" start="534" end="542" title="Armature (sculpture)" label="armature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888309" start="555" end="570" title="model animation" label="model animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200751" start="625" end="635" title="pixilation" label="pixilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291325" start="723" end="739" title="cutout animation" label="cutout animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180309" start="853" end="859" title="hyphen" label="hyphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156843" start="913" end="930" title="compound modifier" label="compound modifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q972417" start="1256" end="1273" title="chronophotography" label="chronophotography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449002" start="1500" end="1509" title="film base" label="film base"/>
<link wikidata="Q218273" start="1638" end="1646" title="zoetrope" label="zoetrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q379993" start="1658" end="1672" title="Joseph Plateau" label="Joseph Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q490049" start="1736" end="1750" title="Phenakistiscope" label="phénakisticope"/>
<link wikidata="Q156942" start="1982" end="2000" title="Charles Wheatstone" label="Charles Wheatstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723296" start="2056" end="2067" title="stereoscope" label="stereoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q165282" start="2725" end="2738" title="Jules Duboscq" label="Jules Duboscq"/>
<link wikidata="Q490049" start="2834" end="2851" title="phenakistiscope" label="stroboscopic disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q661018" start="3223" end="3245" title="Johann Nepomuk Czermak" label="Johann Nepomuk Czermak"/>
<link wikidata="Q490049" start="3399" end="3416" title="phenakistiscope" label="stroboscopic disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q218273" start="3801" end="3809" title="zoetrope" label="zoetrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440696" start="3979" end="4001" title="Peter Hubert Desvignes" label="Peter Hubert Desvignes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372700" start="4266" end="4295" title="1862 International Exhibition" label="1862 International Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q298581" start="4426" end="4439" title="Jules Janssen" label="Jules Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20992221" start="4532" end="4548" title="Passage de Vénus" label="Passage de Vénus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27868004" start="4564" end="4585" title="Janssen revolver" label="photographic revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="4855" end="4869" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q289217" start="4881" end="4900" title="Étienne-Jules Marey" label="Étienne-Jules Marey"/>
<link wikidata="Q972417" start="4971" end="4988" title="chronophotography" label="chronophotographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="5092" end="5103" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412249" start="5705" end="5715" title="stop trick" label="stop trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q21022090" start="6132" end="6160" title="Edison Manufacturing Company" label="Edison Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789171" start="6184" end="6212" title="The Execution of Mary Stuart" label="The Execution of Mary Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999431" start="6339" end="6358" title="Helena Smith-Dayton" label="Helena Smith-Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20002651" start="6475" end="6485" title="trick film" label="trick film"/>
<link wikidata="Q152272" start="6494" end="6508" title="Georges Méliès" label="Georges Méliès"/>
<link wikidata="Q965654" start="6734" end="6751" title="Segundo de Chomón" label="Segundo de Chomón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="6800" end="6805" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294016" start="6945" end="6961" title="Julienne Mathieu" label="Julienne Mathieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="7233" end="7238" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966079" start="7344" end="7364" title="The House of Ghosts" label="La maison ensorcelée"/>
<link wikidata="Q347864" start="7900" end="7915" title="Edwin S. Porter" label="Edwin S. Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17628732" start="8032" end="8052" title="Fun in a Bakery Shop" label="Fun in a Bakery Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q245069" start="8208" end="8218" title="intertitle" label="intertitle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642438" start="8229" end="8252" title="How Jones Lost His Roll" label="How Jones Lost His Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865881" start="8353" end="8377" title="Dream of a Rarebit Fiend (film)" label="Dream of a Rarebit Fiend"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577489" start="8399" end="8426" title="The &amp;#x27;Teddy&amp;#x27; Bears (1907 film)" label="The &amp;quot;Teddy&amp;quot; Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017832" start="8476" end="8498" title="Wallace McCutcheon Sr." label="Wallace McCutcheon Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q724276" start="8985" end="9003" title="J. Stuart Blackton" label="J. Stuart Blackton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987473" start="9017" end="9034" title="The Haunted Hotel" label="The Haunted Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="9113" end="9127" title="special effect" label="special effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q275011" start="9494" end="9504" title="Émile Cohl" label="Émile Cohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966079" start="9570" end="9589" title="The House of Ghosts" label="The House of Ghosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248410" start="9641" end="9657" title="Hôtel électrique" label="Hôtel électrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358034" start="9740" end="9764" title="The Humpty Dumpty Circus" label="The Humpty Dumpty Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831143" start="9850" end="9865" title="Albert E. Smith (producer)" label="Albert E. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987473" start="10396" end="10413" title="The Haunted Hotel" label="The Haunted Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q913462" start="10542" end="10549" title="Gaumont Film Company" label="Gaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q275011" start="10705" end="10715" title="Émile Cohl" label="Émile Cohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q94748" start="10951" end="10964" title="Fantasmagorie (film)" label="Fantasmagorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008943" start="11198" end="11211" title="Romeo Bosetti" label="Romeo Bosetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q710601" start="11559" end="11582" title="Arthur Melbourne-Cooper" label="Arthur Melbourne-Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="11881" end="11891" title="matchstick" label="matchstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="11929" end="11935" title="Guinea (coin)" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980627" start="11946" end="11962" title="Bryant &amp;amp; May" label="Bryant &amp;amp; May"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="12126" end="12141" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="12192" end="12203" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q125463747" start="12680" end="12692" title="Dolly’s Toys" label="Dolly’s Toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988108" start="12716" end="12738" title="The Enchanted Toymaker" label="The Enchanted Toymaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524496" start="13019" end="13037" title="Alexander Shiryaev" label="Alexander Shiryaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q899363" start="13108" end="13120" title="papier-mâché" label="papier-mâché"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975096" start="13583" end="13593" title="Peter Lord" label="Peter Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q710013" start="13842" end="13860" title="Ladislas Starevich" label="Ladislas Starevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115712" start="13913" end="13919" title="Kaunas" label="Kaunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q596937" start="13964" end="13967" title="rut (mammalian reproduction)" label="rut"/>
<link wikidata="Q208786" start="13972" end="13983" title="stag beetle" label="stag beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043238" start="14309" end="14323" title="Lucanus Cervus (film)" label="Lucanus Cervus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14545073" start="14619" end="14642" title="The Beautiful Leukanida" label="The Beautiful Leukanida"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291433" start="14827" end="14855" title="The Cameraman&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="The Cameraman&amp;#x27;s Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443593" start="14950" end="14977" title="The Grasshopper and the Ant (1913 film)" label="The Grasshopper and the Ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386416" start="15600" end="15620" title="Willis O&amp;#x27; Brien" label="Willis O&amp;#x27; Brien"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15661" end="15717" title="The Dinosaur and the Missing Link: A Prehistoric Tragedy" label="The Dinosaur and the Missing Link: A Prehistoric Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23450149" start="15774" end="15786" title="missing link (human evolution)" label="missing link"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736329" start="16322" end="16351" title="The Ghost of Slumber Mountain" label="The Ghost of Slumber Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219785" start="16917" end="16931" title="The Lost World (1925 film)" label="The Lost World"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999431" start="16992" end="17011" title="Helena Smith Dayton" label="Helena Smith Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="17269" end="17288" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="17302" end="17318" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024861" start="18203" end="18210" title="Cabiria" label="Cabiria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151164" start="18345" end="18385" title="The Tale of the Fox" label="Le Roman de Renard (The Tale of the Fox)"/>
<link wikidata="Q731331" start="18574" end="18584" title="George Pal" label="George Pal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260728" start="18778" end="18788" title="Puppetoons" label="Puppetoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260728" start="18886" end="18895" title="puppetoon" label="puppetoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="18967" end="18974" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q917808" start="19036" end="19078" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film" label="Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q691048" start="19137" end="19154" title="Tulips Shall Grow" label="Tulips Shall Grow"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125213" start="19175" end="19203" title="Jasper and the Haunted House" label="Jasper and the Haunted House"/>
<link wikidata="Q298685" start="19222" end="19231" title="Dr. Seuss" label="Dr. Seuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276203" start="19245" end="19280" title="The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins" label="The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q864476" start="19304" end="19349" title="And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street" label="And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700440" start="19415" end="19442" title="John Henry and the Inky-Poo" label="John Henry and the Inky-Poo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6164097" start="19463" end="19478" title="Jasper in a Jam" label="Jasper in a Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458864" start="19503" end="19517" title="Tubby the Tuba (1947 film)" label="Tubby the Tuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="19612" end="19634" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="19737" end="19746" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826360" start="19896" end="19904" title="Autolite" label="Autolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="20031" end="20045" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131406" start="20059" end="20073" title="Three Marches Militaires (Schubert)" label="Military March"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649201" start="20216" end="20224" title="Suspense (U.S. TV series)" label="Suspense"/>
<link wikidata="Q670816" start="20337" end="20351" title="Handling Ships" label="Handling Ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782532" start="20368" end="20387" title="Halas and Batchelor" label="Halas and Batchelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="20396" end="20413" title="British Admiralty" label="British Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="20511" end="20531" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225716" start="20576" end="20649" title="The Crab with the Golden Claws (film)" label="adaptation of the Tintin comic &amp;quot;The Crab with the Golden Claws&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202116" start="20741" end="20755" title="The Czech Year" label="The Czech Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q362319" start="20794" end="20804" title="Jiří Trnka" label="Jiří Trnka"/>
<link wikidata="Q49024" start="20841" end="20861" title="Venice Film Festival" label="Venice Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479315" start="20978" end="21008" title="The Emperor&amp;#x27;s Nightingale" label="The Emperor&amp;#x27;s Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403311" start="21029" end="21042" title="Prince Bayaya" label="Prince Bayaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236064" start="21063" end="21080" title="Old Czech Legends" label="Old Czech Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227301" start="21104" end="21134" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (1959 film)" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q313341" start="21245" end="21260" title="Ray Harryhausen" label="Ray Harryhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640553" start="21306" end="21322" title="Mighty Joe Young (1949 film)" label="Mighty Joe Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888170" start="21497" end="21526" title="The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms" label="The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q50937" start="21547" end="21575" title="It Came from Beneath the Sea" label="It Came from Beneath the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q785555" start="21596" end="21619" title="Jason and the Argonauts (1963 film)" label="Jason and the Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537542" start="21640" end="21667" title="The Golden Voyage of Sinbad" label="The Golden Voyage of Sinbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049545" start="21692" end="21711" title="Clash of the Titans (1981 film)" label="Clash of the Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q55010" start="21916" end="21937" title="Engelbert Humperdinck (composer)" label="Engelbert Humperdinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099668" start="21957" end="21974" title="Hansel and Gretel (opera)" label="Hänsel und Gretel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21990" end="22025" title="Hansel and Gretel: An Opera Fantasy" label="Hansel and Gretel: An Opera Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q282000" start="22043" end="22054" title="Karel Zeman" label="Karel Zeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767168" start="22089" end="22121" title="Journey to the Beginning of Time" label="Journey to the Beginning of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q33977" start="22140" end="22151" title="Jules Verne" label="Jules Verne"/>
<link wikidata="Q298537" start="22232" end="22242" title="Art Clokey" label="Art Clokey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43998029" start="22440" end="22445" title="Gumby" label="Gumby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888239" start="22524" end="22557" title="United Lutheran Church in America" label="United Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230356" start="22582" end="22599" title="Davey and Goliath" label="Davey and Goliath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="22686" end="22701" title="box-office bomb" label="box-office bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q615195" start="22752" end="22790" title="Sandmännchen" label="Unser Sandmänchen (Our Little Sandman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115076" start="22814" end="22842" title="Deutscher Fernsehfunk" label="DFF (East German television)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="23125" end="23145" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5964666" start="23481" end="23499" title="Tadahito Mochinaga" label="Tadahito Mochinaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967083" start="23605" end="23625" title="Momotarō no Umiwashi" label="Momotarō no Umiwashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="23651" end="23660" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983712" start="24071" end="24088" title="Arthur Rankin Jr." label="Arthur Rankin Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1442364" start="24093" end="24103" title="Jules Bass" label="Jules Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q724622" start="24155" end="24178" title="Rankin/Bass Productions" label="Rankin/Bass Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189945" start="24190" end="24196" title="Dentsu" label="Dentsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753485" start="24251" end="24282" title="The New Adventures of Pinocchio (TV series)" label="The New Adventures of Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q726898" start="24333" end="24363" title="Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer (TV special)" label="Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022583" start="24535" end="24569" title="Willy McBean and His Magic Machine" label="Willy McBean and His Magic Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729238" start="24590" end="24604" title="The Daydreamer (film)" label="The Daydreamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q724774" start="24655" end="24673" title="Mad Monster Party?" label="Mad Monster Party?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747589" start="24898" end="24920" title="The Little Drummer Boy (TV special)" label="The Little Drummer Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419362" start="24941" end="24975" title="Santa Claus Is Comin&amp;#x27; to Town (film)" label="Santa Claus is Comin&amp;#x27; to Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q10295038" start="24999" end="25026" title="Here Comes Peter Cottontail" label="Here Comes Peter Cottontail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547780" start="25157" end="25170" title="Snip and Snap" label="Snip and Snap"/>
<link wikidata="Q472545" start="25192" end="25202" title="John Halas" label="John Halas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543667" start="25408" end="25418" title="Smallfilms" label="Smallfilms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173987" start="25420" end="25432" title="Peter Firmin" label="Peter Firmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309512" start="25437" end="25452" title="Oliver Postgate" label="Oliver Postgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195848" start="25525" end="25534" title="Pingwings" label="Pingwings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207594" start="25731" end="25748" title="Pogles&amp;#x27; Wood" label="Pogles&amp;#x27; Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234333" start="25774" end="25782" title="Clangers" label="Clangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879179" start="25831" end="25838" title="Bagpuss" label="Bagpuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q316165" start="25905" end="25919" title="Jan Švankmajer" label="Jan Švankmajer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283391" start="26218" end="26223" title="Alice (1988 film)" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="26248" end="26261" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="26275" end="26312" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593047" start="26330" end="26335" title="Faust (1994 film)" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q332885" start="26358" end="26390" title="Faust" label="the legend of the German scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25078" start="26469" end="26482" title="Terry Gilliam" label="Terry Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479266" start="26646" end="26657" title="Serge Danot" label="Serge Danot"/>
<link wikidata="Q28381902" start="26672" end="26692" title="The Magic Roundabout" label="The Magic Roundabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="26741" end="26744" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856977" start="26761" end="26770" title="Se-ma-for" label="Se-ma-for"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178759" start="26844" end="26852" title="Colargol" label="Colargol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405481" start="26952" end="26963" title="The Moomins (TV series)" label="The Moomins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654847" start="27034" end="27049" title="Eli Noyes" label="Eliot Noyes Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2294504" start="27388" end="27395" title="Mio Mao" label="Mio Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759971" start="27432" end="27452" title="The Red and the Blue (TV series)" label="The Red and the Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q83357" start="27531" end="27538" title="origami" label="origami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762819" start="27550" end="27559" title="Quaq Quao" label="Quaq Quao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173901" start="27630" end="27649" title="Cosgrove Hall Films" label="Cosgrove Hall Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q192069" start="27698" end="27709" title="Enid Blyton" label="Enid Blyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11792691" start="27817" end="27848" title="Noddy&amp;#x27;s Toyland Adventures" label="Noddy&amp;#x27;s Toyland Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228040" start="27893" end="27916" title="The Wind in the Willows (1983 film)" label="The Wind in the Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775078" start="27942" end="27964" title="The Wind in the Willows (TV series)" label="multi-season TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q314897" start="27980" end="27995" title="Kenneth Grahame" label="Kenneth Grahame"/>
<link wikidata="Q936276" start="28003" end="28031" title="The Wind in the Willows" label="classic children&amp;#x27;s book"/>
<link wikidata="Q973687" start="28202" end="28213" title="Will Vinton" label="Will Vinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q887936" start="28235" end="28247" title="Bob Gardiner (animator)" label="Bob Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q474678" start="28292" end="28306" title="Closed Mondays" label="Closed Mondays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269507" start="28460" end="28477" title="The Great Cognito" label="The Great Cognito"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928441" start="29146" end="29154" title="Mr. Bill" label="Mr. Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="29179" end="29198" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975096" start="29296" end="29306" title="Peter Lord" label="Peter Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240003" start="29311" end="29325" title="David Sproxton" label="David Sproxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q301092" start="29333" end="29351" title="Aardman Animations" label="Aardman Animations"/>
<link wikidata="Q113115033" start="29482" end="29487" title="Morph (animation)" label="Morph"/>
<link wikidata="Q436659" start="29546" end="29555" title="Tony Hart" label="Tony Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="29563" end="29569" title="BBC TV" label="BBC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021968" start="29580" end="29589" title="Take Hart" label="Take Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q840688" start="29678" end="29688" title="Plasticine" label="Plasticine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962581" start="29841" end="29853" title="Down and Out (film)" label="Down and Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022879" start="30026" end="30057" title="The Amazing Adventures of Morph" label="The Amazing Adventures of Morph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810322" start="30153" end="30168" title="The Sand Castle (film)" label="The Sand Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104084" start="30212" end="30223" title="Co Hoedeman" label="Co Hoedeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530721" start="30282" end="30311" title="National Film Board of Canada" label="National Film Board of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q716552" start="30467" end="30481" title="Norman McLaren" label="Norman McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381394" start="30596" end="30615" title="pinscreen animation" label="pinscreen animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q568102" start="30685" end="30722" title="Alexandre Alexeieff and Claire Parker" label="Alexandre Alexeieff and Claire Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322897" start="30742" end="30755" title="Lubomír Beneš" label="Lubomír Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490055" start="30760" end="30776" title="Vladimír Jiránek" label="Vladimír Jiránek"/>
<link wikidata="Q590132" start="30824" end="30837" title="Pat &amp;amp; Mat" label="Pat &amp;amp; Mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131538787" start="31250" end="31276" title="Bura and Hardwick" label="John Hardwick and Bob Bura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847836" start="31377" end="31390" title="Trumptonshire" label="Trumptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025069" start="31412" end="31428" title="Camberwick Green" label="Camberwick Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847835" start="31442" end="31450" title="Trumpton" label="Trumpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097214" start="31467" end="31474" title="Chigley" label="Chigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q765270" start="31581" end="31588" title="Generic trademark" label="generic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847402" start="31687" end="31699" title="Mike Jittlov" label="Mike Jittlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="31743" end="31755" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q304029" start="32105" end="32119" title="The Black Hole" label="The Black Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q121515150" start="32325" end="32353" title="The Wizard of Speed and Time" label="The Wizard of Speed and Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="32707" end="32735" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25540859" start="32796" end="32834" title="Star Wars original trilogy" label="original &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="32868" end="32877" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q181795" start="32926" end="32949" title="The Empire Strikes Back" label="The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="32988" end="33006" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533348" start="33094" end="33103" title="go motion" label="go motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935109" start="33155" end="33167" title="Phil Tippett" label="Phil Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="33214" end="33237" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193005" start="33266" end="33278" title="Dragonslayer (1981 film)" label="Dragonslayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="33331" end="33338" title="RoboCop" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="33432" end="33441" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16944459" start="33492" end="33511" title="Conversation Pieces" label="Conversation Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325977" start="33647" end="33666" title="Richard Goleszowski" label="Richard Goleszowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885788" start="33688" end="33700" title="Barry Purves" label="Barry Purves"/>
<link wikidata="Q336206" start="33725" end="33734" title="Nick Park" label="Nick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q257839" start="33742" end="33759" title="Creature Comforts" label="Creature Comforts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33930" end="33970" title="Sledgehammer (Peter Gabriel song)#Music video" label="music video for &amp;quot;Sledgehammer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="33982" end="33995" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100584" start="34102" end="34106" title="Pogo (comics)" label="Pogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q162255" start="34435" end="34445" title="The Terminator" label="Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="34507" end="34516" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170818" start="34530" end="34552" title="Batteries Not Included" label="Batteries Not Included"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116430" start="34580" end="34594" title="David W. Allen" label="David W. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727964" start="34674" end="34697" title="The Crater Lake Monster" label="The Crater Lake Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q465732" start="34718" end="34740" title="Q (1982 film)" label="Q - The Winged Serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735120" start="34761" end="34769" title="The Gate (1987 film)" label="The Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="34838" end="34848" title="Volkswagen" label="Volkswagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q973687" start="34937" end="34948" title="Will Vinton" label="Will Vinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712587" start="35025" end="35053" title="The Adventures of Mark Twain (1985 film)" label="The Adventures Of Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q514701" start="35344" end="35356" title="Return to Oz" label="Return to Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q393686" start="35428" end="35450" title="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects" label="Special Visual Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720980" start="35591" end="35613" title="The California Raisins" label="The California Raisins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327089" start="35618" end="35626" title="The Noid" label="The Noid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744682" start="35629" end="35639" title="Jiří Barta" label="Jiří Barta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757074" start="35680" end="35694" title="The Pied Piper (1986 film)" label="The Pied Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118178" start="35723" end="35738" title="Churchill Films" label="Churchill Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752511" start="35754" end="35782" title="The Mouse and the Motorcycle" label="The Mouse and the Motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q56216467" start="35796" end="35809" title="Runaway Ralph" label="Runaway Ralph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288052" start="35827" end="35841" title="Ralph S. Mouse" label="Ralph S. Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594134" start="36200" end="36229" title="List of Pingu episodes" label="over 150 five-minute episodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q685225" start="36239" end="36244" title="Pingu" label="Pingu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273568" start="36260" end="36275" title="children&amp;#x27;s television series" label="children&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765080" start="36276" end="36282" title="animated comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336206" start="36344" end="36353" title="Nick Park" label="Nick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q257839" start="36409" end="36426" title="Creature Comforts" label="Creature Comforts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679853" start="36452" end="36467" title="talking animals in fiction" label="talking animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q310834" start="36476" end="36483" title="vox pop" label="vox pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325977" start="36697" end="36716" title="Richard Goleszowski" label="Richard Goleszowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q691528" start="36901" end="36919" title="Wallace and Gromit" label="Wallace and Gromit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783701" start="36929" end="36944" title="A Grand Day Out" label="A Grand Day Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q106800" start="37084" end="37123" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Feature" label="Academy Award for Best Animated Feature"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37160" end="37210" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q156401" start="37248" end="37259" title="Chicken Run" label="Chicken Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q44414" start="37343" end="37354" title="Trey Parker" label="Trey Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q44410" start="37359" end="37369" title="Matt Stone" label="Matt Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q278560" start="37381" end="37404" title="The Spirit of Christmas (short films)" label="The Spirit of Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442243" start="37459" end="37477" title="construction paper" label="construction paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="37574" end="37598" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox Broadcasting Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q912251" start="37609" end="37621" title="Brian Graden" label="Brian Graden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="37703" end="37713" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q322328" start="37826" end="37856" title="The Nightmare Before Christmas" label="The Nightmare Before Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q514859" start="37883" end="37895" title="Henry Selick" label="Henry Selick"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="37912" end="37922" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131380" start="38131" end="38156" title="James and the Giant Peach (film)" label="James and the Giant Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q632668" start="38173" end="38181" title="Coraline (film)" label="Coraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q164417" start="38228" end="38240" title="Corpse Bride" label="Corpse Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051023" start="38257" end="38270" title="Frankenweenie (2012 film)" label="Frankenweenie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450020" start="38309" end="38343" title="The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb" label="The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q888360" start="38412" end="38427" title="Bob the Builder" label="Bob the Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243165" start="38566" end="38583" title="HIT Entertainment" label="HIT Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083436" start="38683" end="38690" title="The PJs" label="The PJs"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="38727" end="38739" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524561" start="38880" end="38895" title="Gary &amp;amp; Mike" label="Gary &amp;amp; Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412516" start="38930" end="38941" title="Tsuneo Gōda" label="Tsuneo Gōda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272738" start="38987" end="38991" title="Domo (NHK)" label="Domo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="39075" end="39080" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637707" start="39316" end="39330" title="Summerton Mill" label="Summerton Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801947" start="39402" end="39412" title="Tikkabilla" label="Tikkabilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q465275" start="39656" end="39673" title="Fantastic Mr. Fox (film)" label="Fantastic Mr. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q521188" start="39694" end="39699" title="$9.99" label="$9.99"/>
<link wikidata="Q20942819" start="39720" end="39729" title="Anomalisa" label="Anomalisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q514859" start="39744" end="39763" title="Henry Selick" label="Henry Selick&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q98057531" start="39764" end="39780" title="Wendell &amp;amp; Wild" label="Wendell and Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q73895818" start="39798" end="39833" title="Guillermo del Toro&amp;#x27;s Pinocchio" label="Guillermo del Toro&amp;#x27;s Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12589460" start="39894" end="39914" title="Curucuru and Friends" label="Curucuru and Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273568" start="39991" end="40006" title="children&amp;#x27;s television program" label="children&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q777278" start="40108" end="40112" title="KBS1" label="KBS1"/>
<link wikidata="Q843004" start="40241" end="40255" title="Frontier Works" label="Frontier Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="40259" end="40264" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161731" start="40306" end="40317" title="Cheburashka" label="Cheburashka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8822" start="40344" end="40357" title="Robot Chicken" label="Robot Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q343566" start="40425" end="40438" title="action figure" label="action figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314323" start="40493" end="40498" title="Laika, LLC" label="Laika"/>
<link wikidata="Q973687" start="40529" end="40548" title="Will Vinton Studios" label="Will Vinton Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="40568" end="40580" title="feature film" label="feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q632668" start="40640" end="40648" title="Coraline (film)" label="Coraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q198028" start="40669" end="40679" title="ParaNorman" label="ParaNorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12103758" start="40700" end="40713" title="The Boxtrolls" label="The Boxtrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786471" start="40734" end="40758" title="Kubo and the Two Strings" label="Kubo and the Two Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388281" start="40782" end="40794" title="Missing Link (2019 film)" label="Missing Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="40825" end="40835" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q223687" start="40840" end="40852" title="Wes Anderson" label="Wes Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="40946" end="40952" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="41216" end="41228" title="stereoscopic" label="stereoscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34929" start="41229" end="41231" title="three-dimensional space" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q632668" start="41832" end="41840" title="Coraline (film)" label="Coraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="41864" end="41875" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q475125" start="41883" end="41901" title="Coraline" label="best-selling novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q203597" start="41962" end="41974" title="Nintendo 3DS" label="Nintendo 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q198028" start="42127" end="42137" title="ParaNorman" label="ParaNorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533348" start="42236" end="42245" title="go motion" label="go motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935109" start="42263" end="42275" title="Phil Tippett" label="Phil Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q181795" start="42310" end="42333" title="The Empire Strikes Back" label="The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193005" start="42354" end="42366" title="Dragonslayer (1981 film)" label="Dragonslayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q372514" start="42395" end="42402" title="RoboCop" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q852589" start="42640" end="42651" title="motion blur" label="motion blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239927" start="42735" end="42752" title="Prehistoric Beast" label="Prehistoric Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q131571" start="42827" end="42838" title="Monoclonius" label="Monoclonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q14332" start="42888" end="42901" title="Tyrannosaurus" label="Tyrannosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028449" start="42970" end="42979" title="Dinosaur! (1985 film)" label="Dinosaur!"/>
<link wikidata="Q174311" start="43041" end="43058" title="Christopher Reeve" label="Christopher Reeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q167726" start="43201" end="43214" title="Jurassic Park (film)" label="Jurassic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q710013" start="43312" end="43331" title="Ladislas Starevich" label="Władysław Starewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151164" start="43390" end="43409" title="The Tale of the Fox" label="The Tale of the Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="43533" end="43559" title="computer-generated imagery" label="computer-generated imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q219124" start="43827" end="43845" title="Guillermo del Toro" label="Guillermo del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q514859" start="43847" end="43859" title="Henry Selick" label="Henry Selick"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="43861" end="43871" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836302" start="43876" end="43889" title="Travis Knight (animator)" label="Travis Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q73895818" start="43968" end="43977" title="Guillermo del Toro&amp;#x27;s Pinocchio" label="Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q532331" start="44427" end="44437" title="Oren Lavie" label="Oren Lavie"/>
<link wikidata="Q532331" start="44470" end="44490" title="Her Morning Elegance" label="Her Morning Elegance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="44827" end="44841" title="Video game" label="computer games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="44873" end="44905" title="Virgin Interactive Entertainment" label="Virgin Interactive Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420494" start="44906" end="44912" title="Mythos Games" label="Mythos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043606" start="44918" end="44934" title="Magic and Mayhem" label="Magic and Mayhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634403" start="45265" end="45276" title="ClayFighter (video game)" label="ClayFighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="45291" end="45300" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q52058" start="45305" end="45318" title="The Neverhood" label="The Neverhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q104161892" start="45329" end="45337" title="Hylics 2" label="Hylics 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="45352" end="45354" title="Personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q175646" start="45401" end="45430" title="scanning tunneling microscope" label="scanning tunneling microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q12331276" start="45515" end="45533" title="A Boy and His Atom" label="A Boy and His Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q173136" start="45901" end="45908" title="Blender (software)" label="Blender"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608065" start="46047" end="46073" title="The Lego Movie" label="&amp;quot;The LEGO Movie&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q849666" start="46171" end="46180" title="Brickfilm" label="Brickfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163395" start="46183" end="46210" title="List of stop motion artists" label="List of stop motion artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863424" start="46213" end="46238" title="List of stop motion films" label="List of stop motion films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617210" start="46241" end="46253" title="Still motion" label="Still motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186563" start="46256" end="46278" title="Time-lapse photography" label="Time-lapse photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q10491427" start="46407" end="46428" title="European Film Gateway" label="European Film Gateway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27037" wikidata="Q248583" url="?curid=27037" title="Screwball comedy">
<text>Screwball comedy is a film subgenre of the romantic comedy genre that became popular during the Great Depression, beginning in the early 1930s and thriving until the early 1950s, that satirizes the traditional love story. It has secondary characteristics similar to film noir, distinguished by a female character who dominates the relationship with the male central character, whose masculinity is challenged, and the two engage in a humorous .

The genre also featured romantic attachments between members of different social classes, as in &quot;It Happened One Night&quot; (1934) and &quot;My Man Godfrey&quot; (1936).

What sets the screwball comedy apart from the generic romantic comedy is that &quot;screwball comedy puts the emphasis on a funny spoofing of love, while the more traditional romantic comedy ultimately accents love.&quot; Other elements of the screwball comedy include fast-paced, overlapping repartee, farcical situations, escapist themes, physical battle of the sexes, disguise and masquerade, and plot lines involving courtship and marriage. Some comic plays are also described as screwball comedies.

==Name==
Screwball comedy gets its name from the screwball, a type of breaking pitch in baseball and fastpitch softball that moves in the opposite direction from all other breaking pitches. These features of the screwball pitch also describe the dynamics between the lead characters in screwball comedy films. According to Gehring (2008):

Still, &quot;screwball&quot; comedy probably drew its name from the term&#x27;s entertainingly unorthodox use in the national pastime. Before the term&#x27;s application in 1930s film criticism, &quot;screwball&quot; had been used in baseball to describe both an oddball player and &quot;any pitched ball that moves in an unusual or unexpected way.&quot; Obviously, these characteristics also describe performers in screwball comedy films, from oddball Carole Lombard to the unusual or unexpected movement of Katharine Hepburn in &quot;Bringing Up Baby&quot; (1938). As with the crazy period antics in baseball, screwball comedy uses nutty behavior as a prism through which to view a topsy-turvy period in American history.

==History==
Screwball comedy has proved to be a popular and enduring film genre. &quot;Three-Cornered Moon&quot; (1933), starring Claudette Colbert, is often credited as the first true screwball, though &quot;Bombshell&quot; starring Jean Harlow followed it in the same year. Although many film scholars agree that its classic period had effectively ended by 1942, elements of the genre have persisted or have been paid homage to in later films. Other film scholars argue that the screwball comedy lives on.

During the Great Depression, there was a general demand for films with a strong social class critique and hopeful, escapist-oriented themes. The screwball format arose largely due to the major film studios&#x27; desire to avoid censorship by the increasingly enforced Hays Code. Filmmakers resorted to handling these elements covertly to incorporate prohibited risqué elements into their plots. The verbal sparring between the sexes served as a stand-in for physical and sexual tension. Though some film scholars, such as William K. Everson, argue that &quot;screwball comedies were not so much rebelling against the Production Code as they were attacking and ridiculing the dull, lifeless respectability that the Code insisted on for family viewing.&quot;

The screwball comedy has close links with the theatrical genre of farce, and some comic plays are also described as screwball comedies. Other genres with which screwball comedy is associated include slapstick, situation comedy, romantic comedy and bedroom farce.

==Characteristics==
Films that are definitive of the genre usually feature farcical situations, a combination of slapstick and fast-paced repartee, and show the struggle between economic classes. They also generally feature a self-confident and often stubborn central female protagonist and a plot involving courtship, marriage, or remarriage. These traits can be seen in both &quot;It Happened One Night&quot; (1934) and &quot;My Man Godfrey&quot; (1936). The film critic Andrew Sarris has defined the screwball comedy as &quot;a sex comedy without the sex.&quot;

Like farce, screwball comedies often involve masquerades and disguises in which a character or characters resort to secrecy. Sometimes screwball comedies feature male characters cross-dressing, further contributing to elements of masquerade (&quot;Bringing Up Baby&quot; (1938), &quot;Love Crazy&quot; (1941), &quot;I Was a Male War Bride&quot; (1949), and &quot;Some Like It Hot&quot; (1959)). At first, the couple seems mismatched and even hostile to each other, but eventually overcome their differences amusingly or entertainingly, leading to romance. Often, this mismatch comes about when the man is of a lower social class than the woman (&quot;It Happened One Night&quot; (1934), &quot;Bringing Up Baby&quot; and &quot;Holiday&quot;, both 1938). The woman often plans the final romantic union from the outset, and the man is seemingly oblivious to this. In &quot;Bringing Up Baby,&quot; the woman tells a third party: &quot;He&#x27;s the man I&#x27;m going to marry. He doesn&#x27;t know it, but I am.&quot;
These pictures also offered a cultural escape valve: a safe battleground to explore serious issues such as class under a comedic and non-threatening framework. Class issues are a strong component of screwball comedies: the upper class is represented as idle, pampered, and having difficulty coping with the real world. By contrast, when lower-class people attempt to pass themselves off as upper class or otherwise insinuate themselves into high society, they can do so with relative ease (&quot;The Lady Eve&quot;, 1941; &quot;My Man Godfrey&quot;, 1936). Some critics believe that the portrayal of the upper class in &quot;It Happened One Night&quot; was brought about by the Great Depression, and the financially struggling moviegoing public&#x27;s desire to see the upper class taught a lesson in humanity.

Another common element of the screwball comedy is fast-talking, witty repartee, such as in &quot;You Can&#x27;t Take It with You&quot; (1938) and &quot;His Girl Friday&quot; (1940). This stylistic device did not originate in the genre: it is also found in many of the old Hollywood cycles, including gangster films and traditional romantic comedies.

Screwball comedies also tend to contain ridiculous, farcical situations, such as in &quot;Bringing Up Baby&quot;, where a couple must take care of a pet leopard during much of the film. Slapstick elements are also frequently present, such as the numerous pratfalls Henry Fonda takes in &quot;The Lady Eve&quot; (1941).

One subgenre of screwball is known as the comedy of remarriage, in which characters divorce and then remarry one another (&quot;The Awful Truth&quot; (1937), &quot;His Girl Friday&quot; (1940), &quot;The Philadelphia Story&quot; (1940)). Some scholars point to this frequent device as evidence of the shift in the American moral code, as it showed freer attitudes toward divorce (though the divorce always turns out to have been a mistake: &quot;You&#x27;ve got an old fashioned idea divorce is something that lasts forever, &#x27;til death do us part.&#x27; Why divorce doesn&#x27;t mean anything nowadays, Hildy, just a few words mumbled over you by a judge.&quot;)

Another subgenre of screwball comedy is the woman chasing a man who is oblivious to or uninterested in her. Examples include Barbara Stanwyck chasing Henry Fonda (&quot;The Lady Eve&quot;, 1941); Sonja Henie chasing John Payne (&quot;Sun Valley Serenade&quot;, 1941, and &quot;Iceland&quot;, 1942); Marion Davies chasing Antonio Moreno (&quot;The Cardboard Lover&quot;, 1928); Marion Davies chasing Bing Crosby (&quot;Going Hollywood&quot;, 1933); and Carole Lombard chasing William Powell (&quot;My Man Godfrey&quot;, 1936).

The philosopher Stanley Cavell has noted that many classic screwball comedies turn on an interlude in the state of Connecticut (&quot;Bringing Up Baby&quot;, &quot;The Lady Eve&quot;, &quot;The Awful Truth&quot;). In &quot;Christmas in Connecticut&quot; (1945), the action moves to Connecticut and remains there for the duration of the film. New York City is also featured in a lot of screwball comedies, which critics have noted may be because of the economic diversity of the city and the ability to contrast different social classes during the Great Depression. The screwball comedies &quot;It Happened One Night&quot; (1934) and &quot;The Palm Beach Story&quot; (1942) also feature characters traveling to and from Florida by train. Trains, another staple of screwball comedies and romantic comedies from the era, are also featured prominently in &quot;Design for Living&quot; (1934), &quot;Twentieth Century&quot; (1934) and &quot;Vivacious Lady&quot; (1938).

==Examples from the classic period==


Other films from this period in other genres incorporate elements of the screwball comedy. For example, Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s thriller &quot;The 39 Steps&quot; (1935) features the gimmick of a young couple who finds themselves handcuffed together and who eventually, almost despite themselves, fall in love with one another, and Woody Van Dyke&#x27;s detective comedy &quot;The Thin Man&quot; (1934), which portrays a witty, urbane couple who trade barbs as they solve mysteries together. Some of the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers musicals of the 1930s also feature screwball comedy plots, such as &quot;The Gay Divorcee&quot; (1934), &quot;Top Hat&quot; (1935), and &quot;Carefree&quot; (1938), which costars Ralph Bellamy. The Eddie Cantor musicals &quot;Whoopee!&quot; (1930) and &quot;Roman Scandals&quot; (1933), and slapstick road movies such as &quot;Six of a Kind&quot; (1934) include screwball elements. Screwball comedies such as &quot;The Philadelphia Story&quot; (1940) and &quot;Ball of Fire&quot; (1941) also received musical remakes, &quot;High Society&quot; (1956) and &quot;A Song is Born&quot; (1948). Some of the Joe E. Brown comedies also fall into this category, particularly &quot;Broadminded&quot; (1931) and &quot;Earthworm Tractors&quot; (1936).

Actors and actresses featured in or associated with screwball comedy:
* Jean Arthur
* Fred Astaire
* Ralph Bellamy
* Eric Blore
* Jack Carson
* Charles Coburn
* Claudette Colbert
* Gary Cooper
* Marion Davies
* William Demarest
* Melvyn Douglas
* Irene Dunne
* Clark Gable
* Cary Grant
* Jean Harlow
* Katharine Hepburn
* Edward Everett Horton
* Harold Lloyd
* Carole Lombard
* Myrna Loy
* Fred MacMurray
* Fredric March
* Joel McCrea
* Ray Milland
* William Powell
* Ginger Rogers
* Rosalind Russell
* Barbara Stanwyck
* James Stewart
Directors of screwball comedies:
* Frank Capra
* George Cukor
* Howard Hawks
* Garson Kanin
* Gregory La Cava
* Mitchell Leisen
* Ernst Lubitsch
* Leo McCarey
* George Stevens
* Preston Sturges
* W. S. Van Dyke
* Billy Wilder
==Later examples==

Later films thought to have revived elements of the classic era screwball comedies include:
* &quot;Champagne for Caesar&quot; (1950), d. Richard Whorf
* &quot;The Mating Season&quot; (1951), d. Mitchell Leisen
*&quot; Monkey Business&quot; (1952), d. Howard Hawks
* &quot;How to Marry a Millionaire&quot; (1953), d. Jean Negulesco
* &quot;Let&#x27;s Do It Again&quot; (1953), d. Alexander Hall, musical remake of &quot;The Awful Truth&quot; (1937)
* &quot;Living It Up&quot; (1954), d. Norman Taurog, remake of &quot;Nothing Sacred&quot; (1937)
* &quot;Three for the Show&quot; (1955), d. H. C. Potter, musical remake of &quot;Too Many Husbands&quot;
* &quot;The Seven Year Itch&quot; (1955), d. Billy Wilder
* &quot;The Birds and the Bees&quot; (1956), d. Norman Taurog, a musical remake of &quot;The Lady Eve&quot; (1941)
* &quot;High Society&quot; (1956), d. Charles Walters, musical remake of &quot;The Philadelphia Story&quot; (1940)
* &quot;You Can&#x27;t Run Away from It&quot; (1956) d. Dick Powell, the second musical remake of &quot;It Happened One Night&quot; (1934)
* &quot;Bundle of Joy&quot; (1956) d. Norman Taurog, musical remake of &quot;Bachelor Mother&quot; (1939)
* &quot;Silk Stockings&quot; (1957), d. Rouben Mamoulian, musical remake of &quot;Ninotchka&quot; (1939)
* &quot;Chalti Ka Naam Gaadi&quot; (1958), d. Satyen Bose
* &quot;Rock-A-Bye Baby&quot;, d. Frank Tashlin, a musical remake of &quot;The Miracle of Morgan&#x27;s Creek&quot; (1944)
* &quot;Bell, Book and Candle&quot; (1958), d. Richard Quine
* &quot;Pillow Talk&quot; (1959), d. Michael Gordon
* &quot;Some Like It Hot&quot; (1959), d. Billy Wilder
* &quot;The Grass Is Greener&quot; (1960), d. Stanley Donen
* &quot;Lover Come Back&quot; (1961), d. Delbert Mann
* &quot;One, Two, Three&quot; (1961), d. Billy Wilder, which contains elements of &quot;Ninotchka&quot;, co-written by Wilder
* &quot;Charade&quot; (1963), d. Stanley Donen
* &quot;It&#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World&quot; (1963), d. Stanley Kramer
* &quot;Move Over, Darling&quot; (1963) d. Michael Gordon, remake of &quot;My Favorite Wife&quot; (1940)
* &quot;Man&#x27;s Favorite Sport?&quot; (1964), d. Howard Hawks, homage to &quot;Bringing Up Baby&quot; (1938), also directed by Hawks
* &quot;Send Me No Flowers&quot; (1964), d. Norman Jewison
* &quot;What&#x27;s New Pussycat?&quot; (1965), d. Clive Donner
* &quot;Walk, Don&#x27;t Run&quot; (1966), d. Charles Walters, remake of &quot;The More the Merrier&quot; (1943)
* &quot;What&#x27;s Up, Doc?&quot; (1972), d. Peter Bogdanovich
* &quot;For Pete&#x27;s Sake&quot; (1974), d. Peter Yates
* &quot;Heaven Can Wait&quot; (1978), d. Warren Beatty and Buck Henry
* &quot;Arthur&quot; (1981), d. Steve Gordon
* &quot;Poochakkoru Mookkuthi&quot; (1984), d. Priyadarshan, based on Charles Dickens&#x27;s play &#x27;The Strange Gentleman&#x27;
* &quot;Unfaithfully Yours&quot; (1984), d. Howard Zieff, a remake of the 1948 Preston Sturges film of the same name
* &quot;Une Femme ou Deux&quot; ( &quot;One Woman or Two&quot;; 1985), d. Daniel Vigne 
* &quot;Desperately Seeking Susan&quot; (1985), d. Susan Seidelman
* &quot;Something Wild&quot; (1986), d. Jonathan Demme
* &quot;Overboard&quot; (1987), d. Garry Marshall
* &quot;Raising Arizona&quot; (1987), d. Coen Brothers
* &quot;Who&#x27;s That Girl&quot; (1987) d. James Foley
* &quot;Switching Channels&quot; (1988), d. Ted Kotcheff, a remake of &quot;His Girl Friday&quot; (1940)
* &quot;Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown&quot; (1988), d. Pedro Almodóvar
* &quot;Oscar&quot; (1991) d. John Landis
* &quot;Sólo con tu pareja&quot; (1991), d. Alfonso Cuarón
* &quot;The Hudsucker Proxy&quot; (1994), d. Joel Coen
* &quot;Radioland Murders&quot; (1994), d. Mel Smith from story by George Lucas
* &quot;Flirting with Disaster&quot; (1996), d. David O. Russell
* &quot;Runaway Bride&quot; (1999) d. Garry Marshall 
* &quot;Little Nicky&quot; (2000), d. Steven Brill
* &quot;Rat Race&quot; (2001), d. Jerry Zucker
* &quot;Intolerable Cruelty&quot; (2003), d. Coen Brothers
* &quot;&quot; (2004), d. Adam McKay
* &quot;I Heart Huckabees&quot; (2004), d. David O. Russell
* &quot;Miss Pettigrew Lives for a Day&quot; (2008), d. Bharat Nalluri
* &quot;Our Idiot Brother&quot; (2011), d. Jesse Peretz
* &quot;While We&#x27;re Young&quot; (2014), d. Noah Baumbach
* &quot;She&#x27;s Funny That Way&quot; (2014), d. Peter Bogdanovich
* &quot;Mistress America&quot; (2015), d. Noah Baumbach
* &quot;Night Owls&quot; (2015), d. Charles Hood
* &quot;Hail, Caesar!&quot; (2016), d. Coen Brothers
* &quot;Chongqing Hot Pot&quot; (2016), d. Yang Qing
* &quot;Hit Man&quot; (2023), d. Richard Linklater
* &quot;Anora&quot; (2024), d. Sean Baker
Elements of classic screwball comedy often found in more recent films which might otherwise be classified as romantic comedies include the &quot;battle of the sexes&quot; (&quot;Down with Love&quot;, &quot;How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days&quot;), witty repartee (&quot;Down with Love&quot;), and the contrast between the wealthy and the middle class (&quot;You&#x27;ve Got Mail&quot;, &quot;Two Weeks Notice&quot;). Many of Elvis Presley&#x27;s films from the 1960s had drawn, consciously or unconsciously, the many characteristics of the screwball comedy genre. Some examples are &quot;Double Trouble&quot;, &quot;Tickle Me&quot;, &quot;Girl Happy&quot; and &quot;Live a Little, Love a Little&quot;. Modern updates on screwball comedy are also sometimes categorized as black comedy (&quot;Intolerable Cruelty&quot;, which also features a twist on the classic screwball element of divorce and remarriage). The Coen Brothers often include screwball elements in a film which may not otherwise be considered screwball or even a comedy.

The Golmaal movies, a series of Hindi-language Indian films, has been described as a screwball comedy franchise.

==Screwball comedy elements in other media and genres==
The screwball film tradition influenced television sitcom and comedy drama genres. Notable screwball couples in television have included Sam and Diane in &quot;Cheers&quot;, Maddie and David in &quot;Moonlighting&quot;, and Joel and Maggie in &quot;Northern Exposure&quot;.

In his 2008 production of the classic Beaumarchais comedy &quot;The Marriage of Figaro&quot;, author William James Royce trimmed the five-act play down to three acts and labeled it a &quot;classic screwball comedy&quot;. The playwright made Suzanne the central character, endowing her with all the feisty comedic strengths of her classic film counterparts. In his adaptation, entitled &quot;One Mad Day!&quot; (a play on Beaumarchais&#x27; original French title), Royce underscored all of the elements of the classic screwball comedy, suggesting that Beaumarchais may have had a hand in the origins of the genre.

The plot of &quot;Corrupting Dr. Nice&quot;, a science fiction novel by John Kessel involving time travel, is modeled on films such as &quot;The Lady Eve&quot; and &quot;Bringing Up Baby&quot;.

==See also==
* Comedy of manners
* Comedy of remarriage
* Farce
* Hawksian woman
* Love-hate relationship
* Sex comedy
* Slapstick film

==References==
==Further reading==
* Wes D. Gehring, 1983. Screwball Comedy: Defining a Film Genre
* Grégoire Halbout, 2022. Hollywood Screwball Comedy 1934-1945: Sex, Love, and Democratic Ideals.
* 

==External links==
* Screwball Comedy—Green Cine
* Home of the Screwball - University of Virginia
* Screwball Comedy—Everything2
* Screwball Comedy Film ()—wordiQ
* Great Directors: Mitchell Leisen - &quot;Senses of Cinema&quot;
* Head Over Heels—&quot;The Guardian&quot;
* La Screwball Comedy—CINEMACLASSIC.free.fr
* Screwball Comedies ()—University of Hamburg</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248583" start="0" end="16" title="Screwball comedy" label="Screwball comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="43" end="58" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="96" end="112" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="266" end="275" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076509" start="383" end="394" title="masculinity" label="masculinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="520" end="532" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q208632" start="548" end="569" title="It Happened One Night" label="It Happened One Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811134" start="593" end="607" title="My Man Godfrey" label="My Man Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238195" start="916" end="924" title="wit" label="repartee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="926" end="934" title="farce" label="farcical"/>
<link wikidata="Q898449" start="947" end="955" title="Escapism" label="escapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151421" start="1073" end="1084" title="Comedy (drama)" label="comic plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q846196" start="1177" end="1186" title="screwball" label="screwball"/>
<link wikidata="Q44891" start="1198" end="1206" title="breaking ball" label="breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063937" start="1207" end="1212" title="pitch (baseball)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="1216" end="1224" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740017" start="1229" end="1247" title="fastpitch softball" label="fastpitch softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q207739" start="1921" end="1935" title="Carole Lombard" label="Carole Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="1977" end="1994" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q179743" start="2004" end="2020" title="Bringing Up Baby" label="Bringing Up Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797225" start="2280" end="2299" title="Three-Cornered Moon" label="Three-Cornered Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q203819" start="2323" end="2340" title="Claudette Colbert" label="Claudette Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758675" start="2402" end="2411" title="Bombshell (1933 film)" label="Bombshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q105719" start="2427" end="2438" title="Jean Harlow" label="Jean Harlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2713" end="2729" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q610292" start="2970" end="2979" title="Motion Picture Production Code" label="Hays Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013826" start="3224" end="3242" title="William K. Everson" label="William K. Everson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="3506" end="3516" title="theatre" label="theatrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="3526" end="3531" title="farce" label="farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="3659" end="3668" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="3670" end="3686" title="situation comedy" label="situation comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="3688" end="3703" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879416" start="3708" end="3721" title="bedroom farce" label="bedroom farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685277" start="3975" end="4010" title="Hawksian woman" label="stubborn central female protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151497" start="4056" end="4066" title="Comedy of remarriage" label="remarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q208632" start="4107" end="4128" title="It Happened One Night" label="It Happened One Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811134" start="4152" end="4166" title="My Man Godfrey" label="My Man Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q507162" start="4197" end="4210" title="Andrew Sarris" label="Andrew Sarris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991560" start="4255" end="4265" title="sex comedy" label="sex comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q431604" start="4468" end="4482" title="cross-dressing" label="cross-dressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179743" start="4538" end="4554" title="Bringing Up Baby" label="Bringing Up Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450374" start="4575" end="4585" title="Love Crazy (1941 film)" label="Love Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525998" start="4606" end="4628" title="I Was a Male War Bride" label="I Was a Male War Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q190086" start="4653" end="4669" title="Some Like It Hot" label="Some Like It Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q208632" start="4941" end="4962" title="It Happened One Night" label="It Happened One Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q179743" start="4983" end="4999" title="Bringing Up Baby" label="Bringing Up Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q528473" start="5016" end="5023" title="Holiday (1938 film)" label="Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212344" start="5801" end="5813" title="The Lady Eve" label="The Lady Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811134" start="5833" end="5847" title="My Man Godfrey" label="My Man Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5983" end="5999" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238195" start="6187" end="6195" title="repartee" label="repartee"/>
<link wikidata="Q637835" start="6214" end="6245" title="You Can&amp;#x27;t Take It with You (film)" label="You Can&amp;#x27;t Take It with You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066714" start="6269" end="6284" title="His Girl Friday" label="His Girl Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195032" start="6389" end="6405" title="Hollywood cycles" label="Hollywood cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444356" start="6417" end="6430" title="gangster film" label="gangster film"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="6733" end="6744" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151497" start="6830" end="6850" title="comedy of remarriage" label="comedy of remarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q278513" start="6916" end="6931" title="The Awful Truth" label="The Awful Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066714" start="6952" end="6967" title="His Girl Friday" label="His Girl Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q498822" start="6988" end="7010" title="The Philadelphia Story (film)" label="The Philadelphia Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q94002" start="7582" end="7598" title="Barbara Stanwyck" label="Barbara Stanwyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="7607" end="7618" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212344" start="7626" end="7638" title="The Lady Eve" label="The Lady Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q204205" start="7653" end="7664" title="Sonja Henie" label="Sonja Henie"/>
<link wikidata="Q723415" start="7673" end="7683" title="John Payne (actor)" label="John Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q366244" start="7691" end="7710" title="Sun Valley Serenade" label="Sun Valley Serenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q685885" start="7734" end="7741" title="Iceland (film)" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q242416" start="7756" end="7769" title="Marion Davies" label="Marion Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q291228" start="7778" end="7792" title="Antonio Moreno" label="Antonio Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954005" start="7800" end="7819" title="The Cardboard Lover" label="The Cardboard Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="7856" end="7867" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616888" start="7875" end="7890" title="Going Hollywood" label="Going Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q207739" start="7909" end="7923" title="Carole Lombard" label="Carole Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q105960" start="7932" end="7946" title="William Powell" label="William Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811134" start="7954" end="7968" title="My Man Godfrey" label="My Man Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q725020" start="8000" end="8014" title="Stanley Cavell" label="Stanley Cavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="8099" end="8110" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q278513" start="8174" end="8189" title="The Awful Truth" label="The Awful Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966030" start="8207" end="8231" title="Christmas in Connecticut" label="Christmas in Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8326" end="8339" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q208632" start="8578" end="8599" title="It Happened One Night" label="It Happened One Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q391515" start="8623" end="8643" title="The Palm Beach Story" label="The Palm Beach Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="8703" end="8710" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808904" start="8841" end="8858" title="Design for Living (film)" label="Design for Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788051" start="8879" end="8896" title="Twentieth Century (film)" label="Twentieth Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306800" start="8920" end="8934" title="Vivacious Lady" label="Vivacious Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="9117" end="9125" title="Thriller film" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q501105" start="9132" end="9144" title="The 39 Steps (1935 film)" label="The 39 Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q547078" start="9320" end="9334" title="Woody Van Dyke" label="Woody Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198497" start="9365" end="9377" title="The Thin Man (film)" label="The Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q100937" start="9492" end="9504" title="Fred Astaire" label="Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q95089" start="9509" end="9522" title="Ginger Rogers" label="Ginger Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="9523" end="9531" title="Musical film" label="musicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q947098" start="9596" end="9612" title="The Gay Divorcee" label="The Gay Divorcee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139031" start="9633" end="9640" title="Top Hat" label="Top Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230318" start="9665" end="9673" title="Carefree (film)" label="Carefree"/>
<link wikidata="Q364135" start="9702" end="9715" title="Ralph Bellamy" label="Ralph Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q350472" start="9721" end="9733" title="Eddie Cantor" label="Eddie Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567265" start="9749" end="9757" title="Whoopee! (film)" label="Whoopee!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794927" start="9781" end="9795" title="Roman Scandals" label="Roman Scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q628165" start="9824" end="9834" title="road movie" label="road movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q586789" start="9850" end="9863" title="Six of a Kind" label="Six of a Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q498822" start="9938" end="9960" title="The Philadelphia Story (film)" label="The Philadelphia Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q391452" start="9984" end="9996" title="Ball of Fire" label="Ball of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q719471" start="10047" end="10059" title="High Society (1956 film)" label="High Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258019" start="10083" end="10097" title="A Song Is Born" label="A Song is Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q727112" start="10124" end="10136" title="Joe E. Brown" label="Joe E. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q18086784" start="10195" end="10206" title="Broadminded (film)" label="Broadminded"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327341" start="10230" end="10248" title="Earthworm Tractors" label="Earthworm Tractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q229338" start="10336" end="10347" title="Jean Arthur" label="Jean Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q100937" start="10350" end="10362" title="Fred Astaire" label="Fred Astaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q364135" start="10365" end="10378" title="Ralph Bellamy" label="Ralph Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q959404" start="10381" end="10391" title="Eric Blore" label="Eric Blore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393256" start="10394" end="10405" title="Jack Carson" label="Jack Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q350690" start="10408" end="10422" title="Charles Coburn" label="Charles Coburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q203819" start="10425" end="10442" title="Claudette Colbert" label="Claudette Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q93957" start="10445" end="10456" title="Gary Cooper" label="Gary Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q242416" start="10459" end="10472" title="Marion Davies" label="Marion Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395104" start="10475" end="10491" title="William Demarest" label="William Demarest"/>
<link wikidata="Q312084" start="10494" end="10508" title="Melvyn Douglas" label="Melvyn Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q230099" start="10511" end="10522" title="Irene Dunne" label="Irene Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q71243" start="10525" end="10536" title="Clark Gable" label="Clark Gable"/>
<link wikidata="Q83410" start="10539" end="10549" title="Cary Grant" label="Cary Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q105719" start="10552" end="10563" title="Jean Harlow" label="Jean Harlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="10566" end="10583" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292160" start="10586" end="10607" title="Edward Everett Horton" label="Edward Everett Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104340" start="10610" end="10622" title="Harold Lloyd" label="Harold Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q207739" start="10625" end="10639" title="Carole Lombard" label="Carole Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q105941" start="10642" end="10651" title="Myrna Loy" label="Myrna Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q356309" start="10654" end="10668" title="Fred MacMurray" label="Fred MacMurray"/>
<link wikidata="Q181819" start="10671" end="10684" title="Fredric March" label="Fredric March"/>
<link wikidata="Q436784" start="10687" end="10698" title="Joel McCrea" label="Joel McCrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q181774" start="10701" end="10712" title="Ray Milland" label="Ray Milland"/>
<link wikidata="Q105960" start="10715" end="10729" title="William Powell" label="William Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q95089" start="10732" end="10745" title="Ginger Rogers" label="Ginger Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q233854" start="10748" end="10764" title="Rosalind Russell" label="Rosalind Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q94002" start="10767" end="10783" title="Barbara Stanwyck" label="Barbara Stanwyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="10786" end="10799" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="10835" end="10846" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q56014" start="10849" end="10861" title="George Cukor" label="George Cukor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581" start="10864" end="10876" title="Howard Hawks" label="Howard Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377923" start="10879" end="10891" title="Garson Kanin" label="Garson Kanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q269585" start="10894" end="10909" title="Gregory La Cava" label="Gregory La Cava"/>
<link wikidata="Q276130" start="10912" end="10927" title="Mitchell Leisen" label="Mitchell Leisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51562" start="10930" end="10944" title="Ernst Lubitsch" label="Ernst Lubitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q332530" start="10947" end="10958" title="Leo McCarey" label="Leo McCarey"/>
<link wikidata="Q51490" start="10961" end="10975" title="George Stevens" label="George Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q546204" start="10978" end="10993" title="Preston Sturges" label="Preston Sturges"/>
<link wikidata="Q547078" start="10996" end="11010" title="W. S. Van Dyke" label="W. S. Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="11013" end="11025" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084596" start="11146" end="11166" title="Champagne for Caesar" label="Champagne for Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431326" start="11184" end="11197" title="Richard Whorf" label="Richard Whorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319600" start="11206" end="11223" title="The Mating Season (film)" label="The Mating Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q276130" start="11241" end="11256" title="Mitchell Leisen" label="Mitchell Leisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q545725" start="11265" end="11280" title="Monkey Business (1952 film)" label="Monkey Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581" start="11298" end="11310" title="Howard Hawks" label="Howard Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q284362" start="11319" end="11345" title="How to Marry a Millionaire" label="How to Marry a Millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q286104" start="11363" end="11377" title="Jean Negulesco" label="Jean Negulesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125681" start="11386" end="11408" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Do It Again (1953 film)" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Do It Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968780" start="11426" end="11440" title="Alexander Hall" label="Alexander Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q278513" start="11466" end="11481" title="The Awful Truth" label="The Awful Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199661" start="11503" end="11515" title="Living It Up" label="Living It Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q95111" start="11533" end="11546" title="Norman Taurog" label="Norman Taurog"/>
<link wikidata="Q964771" start="11564" end="11578" title="Nothing Sacred (film)" label="Nothing Sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535757" start="11600" end="11618" title="Three for the Show" label="Three for the Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q937589" start="11636" end="11648" title="H. C. Potter" label="H. C. Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144353" start="11674" end="11691" title="Too Many Husbands (1940 film)" label="Too Many Husbands"/>
<link wikidata="Q290679" start="11706" end="11725" title="The Seven Year Itch" label="The Seven Year Itch"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="11743" end="11755" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718095" start="11764" end="11786" title="The Birds and the Bees (film)" label="The Birds and the Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q95111" start="11804" end="11817" title="Norman Taurog" label="Norman Taurog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212344" start="11845" end="11857" title="The Lady Eve" label="The Lady Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q719471" start="11879" end="11891" title="High Society (1956 film)" label="High Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q953753" start="11909" end="11924" title="Charles Walters" label="Charles Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q498822" start="11950" end="11972" title="The Philadelphia Story (film)" label="The Philadelphia Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203423" start="11994" end="12025" title="You Can&amp;#x27;t Run Away from It" label="You Can&amp;#x27;t Run Away from It"/>
<link wikidata="Q287977" start="12042" end="12053" title="Dick Powell" label="Dick Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208632" start="12090" end="12111" title="It Happened One Night" label="It Happened One Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997548" start="12133" end="12146" title="Bundle of Joy" label="Bundle of Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q95111" start="12163" end="12176" title="Norman Taurog" label="Norman Taurog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212450" start="12202" end="12217" title="Bachelor Mother" label="Bachelor Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q547209" start="12239" end="12253" title="Silk Stockings (1957 film)" label="Silk Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q51472" start="12271" end="12287" title="Rouben Mamoulian" label="Rouben Mamoulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q589894" start="12313" end="12322" title="Ninotchka" label="Ninotchka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060259" start="12344" end="12364" title="Chalti Ka Naam Gaadi" label="Chalti Ka Naam Gaadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426950" start="12382" end="12393" title="Satyen Bose" label="Satyen Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647525" start="12402" end="12417" title="Rock-A-Bye Baby (film)" label="Rock-A-Bye Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q589459" start="12428" end="12441" title="Frank Tashlin" label="Frank Tashlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589831" start="12469" end="12503" title="The Miracle of Morgan&amp;#x27;s Creek" label="The Miracle of Morgan&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731060" start="12525" end="12546" title="Bell, Book and Candle (film)" label="Bell, Book and Candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q919750" start="12564" end="12577" title="Richard Quine" label="Richard Quine"/>
<link wikidata="Q832487" start="12586" end="12597" title="Pillow Talk (film)" label="Pillow Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q508182" start="12615" end="12629" title="Michael Gordon (film director)" label="Michael Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190086" start="12638" end="12654" title="Some Like It Hot" label="Some Like It Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="12672" end="12684" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850857" start="12693" end="12713" title="The Grass Is Greener" label="The Grass Is Greener"/>
<link wikidata="Q48765" start="12731" end="12744" title="Stanley Donen" label="Stanley Donen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305072" start="12753" end="12768" title="Lover Come Back (1961 film)" label="Lover Come Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q270038" start="12786" end="12798" title="Delbert Mann" label="Delbert Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283810" start="12807" end="12822" title="One, Two, Three" label="One, Two, Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="12840" end="12852" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q496266" start="12933" end="12940" title="Charade (1963 film)" label="Charade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48765" start="12958" end="12971" title="Stanley Donen" label="Stanley Donen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306890" start="12980" end="13016" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World"/>
<link wikidata="Q73136" start="13034" end="13048" title="Stanley Kramer" label="Stanley Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q948836" start="13057" end="13075" title="Move Over, Darling" label="Move Over, Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q508182" start="13092" end="13106" title="Michael Gordon (film director)" label="Michael Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q589729" start="13124" end="13140" title="My Favorite Wife" label="My Favorite Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185956" start="13162" end="13188" title="Man&amp;#x27;s Favorite Sport?" label="Man&amp;#x27;s Favorite Sport?"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581" start="13206" end="13218" title="Howard Hawks" label="Howard Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q179743" start="13236" end="13252" title="Bringing Up Baby" label="Bringing Up Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q942355" start="13298" end="13316" title="Send Me No Flowers" label="Send Me No Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q309214" start="13334" end="13348" title="Norman Jewison" label="Norman Jewison"/>
<link wikidata="Q195402" start="13357" end="13382" title="What&amp;#x27;s New Pussycat?" label="What&amp;#x27;s New Pussycat?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101927" start="13400" end="13412" title="Clive Donner" label="Clive Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120545" start="13421" end="13441" title="Walk, Don&amp;#x27;t Run (film)" label="Walk, Don&amp;#x27;t Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q953753" start="13459" end="13474" title="Charles Walters" label="Charles Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620549" start="13492" end="13512" title="The More the Merrier" label="The More the Merrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356241" start="13534" end="13554" title="What&amp;#x27;s Up, Doc? (1972 film)" label="What&amp;#x27;s Up, Doc?"/>
<link wikidata="Q158250" start="13572" end="13589" title="Peter Bogdanovich" label="Peter Bogdanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064242" start="13598" end="13618" title="For Pete&amp;#x27;s Sake (film)" label="For Pete&amp;#x27;s Sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q314301" start="13636" end="13647" title="Peter Yates" label="Peter Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q637180" start="13656" end="13671" title="Heaven Can Wait (1978 film)" label="Heaven Can Wait"/>
<link wikidata="Q95030" start="13689" end="13702" title="Warren Beatty" label="Warren Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q999332" start="13707" end="13717" title="Buck Henry" label="Buck Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q627438" start="13726" end="13732" title="Arthur (1981 film)" label="Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506633" start="13750" end="13762" title="Steve Gordon (director)" label="Steve Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228499" start="13771" end="13792" title="Poochakkoru Mookkuthi" label="Poochakkoru Mookkuthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115713" start="13810" end="13822" title="Priyadarshan" label="Priyadarshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="13833" end="13848" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765305" start="13903" end="13921" title="Unfaithfully Yours (1984 film)" label="Unfaithfully Yours"/>
<link wikidata="Q427308" start="13939" end="13951" title="Howard Zieff" label="Howard Zieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q578061" start="13969" end="14011" title="Unfaithfully Yours (1948 film)" label="1948 Preston Sturges film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549486" start="14020" end="14037" title="Une Femme ou Deux" label="Une Femme ou Deux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420421" start="14108" end="14133" title="Desperately Seeking Susan" label="Desperately Seeking Susan"/>
<link wikidata="Q270372" start="14151" end="14166" title="Susan Seidelman" label="Susan Seidelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q644485" start="14175" end="14189" title="Something Wild (1986 film)" label="Something Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q48987" start="14207" end="14221" title="Jonathan Demme" label="Jonathan Demme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539658" start="14230" end="14239" title="Overboard (1987 film)" label="Overboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q315087" start="14257" end="14271" title="Garry Marshall" label="Garry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q670439" start="14280" end="14295" title="Raising Arizona" label="Raising Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="14313" end="14326" title="Coen Brothers" label="Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291842" start="14335" end="14355" title="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl (1987 film)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s That Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q721389" start="14372" end="14383" title="James Foley (director)" label="James Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q788256" start="14392" end="14410" title="Switching Channels" label="Switching Channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q725520" start="14428" end="14440" title="Ted Kotcheff" label="Ted Kotcheff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066714" start="14460" end="14475" title="His Girl Friday" label="His Girl Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q643283" start="14497" end="14538" title="Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown" label="Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q55171" start="14556" end="14571" title="Pedro Almodóvar" label="Pedro Almodóvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q302682" start="14580" end="14585" title="Oscar (1991 film)" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51564" start="14602" end="14613" title="John Landis" label="John Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965519" start="14622" end="14640" title="Sólo con tu pareja" label="Sólo con tu pareja"/>
<link wikidata="Q28028" start="14658" end="14672" title="Alfonso Cuarón" label="Alfonso Cuarón"/>
<link wikidata="Q313998" start="14681" end="14700" title="The Hudsucker Proxy" label="The Hudsucker Proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="14718" end="14727" title="Joel Coen" label="Joel Coen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741078" start="14736" end="14753" title="Radioland Murders" label="Radioland Murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q939117" start="14771" end="14780" title="Mel Smith" label="Mel Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="14795" end="14807" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428990" start="14816" end="14838" title="Flirting with Disaster (film)" label="Flirting with Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q314342" start="14856" end="14872" title="David O. Russell" label="David O. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160813" start="14881" end="14894" title="Runaway Bride (film)" label="Runaway Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q315087" start="14911" end="14925" title="Garry Marshall" label="Garry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q267866" start="14935" end="14947" title="Little Nicky" label="Little Nicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q345259" start="14965" end="14977" title="Steven Brill (filmmaker)" label="Steven Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140605" start="14986" end="14994" title="Rat Race (film)" label="Rat Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q363666" start="15012" end="15024" title="Jerry Zucker" label="Jerry Zucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q750117" start="15033" end="15052" title="Intolerable Cruelty" label="Intolerable Cruelty"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="15070" end="15083" title="Coen Brothers" label="Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q350405" start="15110" end="15120" title="Adam McKay" label="Adam McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q695389" start="15129" end="15146" title="I Heart Huckabees" label="I Heart Huckabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q314342" start="15164" end="15180" title="David O. Russell" label="David O. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576633" start="15189" end="15219" title="Miss Pettigrew Lives for a Day" label="Miss Pettigrew Lives for a Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645420" start="15237" end="15251" title="Bharat Nalluri" label="Bharat Nalluri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372081" start="15260" end="15277" title="Our Idiot Brother" label="Our Idiot Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177627" start="15295" end="15307" title="Jesse Peretz" label="Jesse Peretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089779" start="15316" end="15338" title="While We&amp;#x27;re Young (film)" label="While We&amp;#x27;re Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q459349" start="15356" end="15369" title="Noah Baumbach" label="Noah Baumbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q14526650" start="15378" end="15403" title="She&amp;#x27;s Funny That Way (film)" label="She&amp;#x27;s Funny That Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q158250" start="15421" end="15438" title="Peter Bogdanovich" label="Peter Bogdanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q18699754" start="15447" end="15463" title="Mistress America" label="Mistress America"/>
<link wikidata="Q24727693" start="15503" end="15513" title="Night Owls (2015 film)" label="Night Owls"/>
<link wikidata="Q18516636" start="15552" end="15565" title="Hail, Caesar!" label="Hail, Caesar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="15583" end="15596" title="Coen Brothers" label="Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23648377" start="15605" end="15622" title="Chongqing Hot Pot" label="Chongqing Hot Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q114437078" start="15658" end="15665" title="Hit Man (2023 film)" label="Hit Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q123185887" start="15709" end="15714" title="Anora (film)" label="Anora"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="15852" end="15869" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q672528" start="15921" end="15935" title="Down with Love" label="Down with Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327370" start="15949" end="15977" title="How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days" label="How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q284229" start="16096" end="16116" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Got Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q719823" start="16130" end="16146" title="Two Weeks Notice" label="Two Weeks Notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="16163" end="16176" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q603440" start="16326" end="16340" title="Double Trouble (1967 film)" label="Double Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q498809" start="16354" end="16363" title="Tickle Me" label="Tickle Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q498764" start="16377" end="16387" title="Girl Happy" label="Girl Happy"/>
<link wikidata="Q644044" start="16404" end="16432" title="Live a Little, Love a Little" label="Live a Little, Love a Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="16509" end="16521" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q750117" start="16529" end="16548" title="Intolerable Cruelty" label="Intolerable Cruelty"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="16649" end="16662" title="Joel and Ethan Coen" label="Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125174" start="16777" end="16791" title="Golmaal (film series)" label="Golmaal movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q328799" start="16820" end="16832" title="Cinema of India" label="Indian films"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="16994" end="17000" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q859369" start="17005" end="17017" title="comedy drama" label="comedy drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408380" start="17080" end="17093" title="Sam and Diane" label="Sam and Diane"/>
<link wikidata="Q732063" start="17103" end="17109" title="Cheers" label="Cheers"/>
<link wikidata="Q471350" start="17143" end="17155" title="Moonlighting (TV series)" label="Moonlighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900425" start="17167" end="17182" title="List of Northern Exposure characters" label="Joel and Maggie"/>
<link wikidata="Q301345" start="17192" end="17209" title="Northern Exposure" label="Northern Exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q70326" start="17256" end="17268" title="Beaumarchais" label="Beaumarchais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199684" start="17282" end="17304" title="The Marriage of Figaro (play)" label="The Marriage of Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013491" start="17319" end="17338" title="William James Royce" label="William James Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173054" start="17850" end="17869" title="Corrupting Dr. Nice" label="Corrupting Dr. Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="17879" end="17894" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066599" start="17904" end="17915" title="John Kessel" label="John Kessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="17926" end="17937" title="time travel" label="time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q222926" start="18042" end="18059" title="Comedy of manners" label="Comedy of manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151497" start="18062" end="18082" title="Comedy of remarriage" label="Comedy of remarriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="18085" end="18090" title="Farce" label="Farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685277" start="18093" end="18107" title="Hawksian woman" label="Hawksian woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030284" start="18110" end="18132" title="Love-hate relationship" label="Love-hate relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991560" start="18135" end="18145" title="Sex comedy" label="Sex comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112331" start="18148" end="18162" title="Slapstick film" label="Slapstick film"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="18440" end="18462" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q776951" start="18482" end="18493" title="Everything2" label="Everything2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="18618" end="18630" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156725" start="18705" end="18726" title="University of Hamburg" label="University of Hamburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27038" wikidata="Q2441984" url="?curid=27038" title="Lists of science fiction films">
<text>Science fiction films
This is a list of [[science fiction film]]s organized chronologically. These films have been released to a cinema audience by the commercial film industry and are widely distributed with reviews by reputable
critics. (The exception are the films on the made-for-TV list, which are normally not released to a cinema audience.) This includes silent film–era releases, serial films, and feature-length films. All of the films include core elements of science fiction, but can cross into other genres such as drama, mystery, action, horror, fantasy, and comedy.

Among the listed movies are films that have won motion-picture and science fiction awards as well as films that have been listed among the worst movies ever made, or have won one or more Golden Raspberry Awards. Critically distinguished films are indicated by footnotes in the listings.

==Lists by decade==
==See also==

Subgenre lists
*List of comic science fiction films
*List of science fiction horror films
*List of science fiction thriller films
*List of films featuring extraterrestrials
*List of films set in the future
*List of time travel films
*List of films featuring space stations
* List of films featuring dinosaurs
*List of space opera films
Related films
*Fantasy films
*Horror films
*Superhero film

Related lists
*List of science fiction television films
*List of Sci Fi Pictures original films
*List of science fiction anime
*List of film serials
*List of fantasy films
*Lists of horror films
*List of stories set in a future now in the past
*List of fictional spacecraft
*List of fictional space stations
*Starship (interstellar spacecraft)#Fictional examples

Film ratings
*Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation
*Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form
*Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film
*List of films considered the best
*List of films considered the worst
==References==
*


==External links==
* Note: select a decade.
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2441984" start="32" end="65" title="Lists of science fiction films" label="list of [[science fiction film]]s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="163" end="176" title="film industry" label="film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637952" start="275" end="291" title="List of science fiction television films" label="made-for-TV list"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="362" end="373" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751682" start="388" end="399" title="serial film" label="serial film"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="470" end="485" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="527" end="532" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200678" start="534" end="541" title="Mystery film" label="mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="543" end="549" title="Action film" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="551" end="557" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q157394" start="559" end="566" title="Fantasy film" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="572" end="578" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="629" end="643" title="motion picture" label="motion-picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="648" end="663" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776408" start="720" end="742" title="List of films considered the worst" label="worst movies ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q40237" start="768" end="791" title="Golden Raspberry Awards" label="Golden Raspberry Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611912" start="919" end="954" title="List of comic science fiction films" label="List of comic science fiction films"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745426" start="956" end="992" title="List of science fiction horror films" label="List of science fiction horror films"/>
<link wikidata="Q25712076" start="994" end="1032" title="List of science fiction thriller films" label="List of science fiction thriller films"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810780" start="1034" end="1075" title="List of films featuring extraterrestrials" label="List of films featuring extraterrestrials"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620092" start="1077" end="1108" title="List of films set in the future" label="List of films set in the future"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1110" end="1135" title="List of time travel science fiction#Time travel in science fiction films" label="List of time travel films"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316224" start="1137" end="1175" title="List of films featuring space stations" label="List of films featuring space stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15056524" start="1178" end="1211" title="List of films featuring dinosaurs" label="List of films featuring dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1213" end="1238" title="List_of_space_opera_media#Films" label="List of space opera films"/>
<link wikidata="Q157394" start="1254" end="1266" title="Fantasy film" label="Fantasy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="1269" end="1280" title="Horror film" label="Horror film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535153" start="1283" end="1297" title="Superhero film" label="Superhero film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637952" start="1314" end="1354" title="List of science fiction television films" label="List of science fiction television films"/>
<link wikidata="Q17033132" start="1356" end="1394" title="List of Sci Fi Pictures original films" label="List of Sci Fi Pictures original films"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876093" start="1396" end="1425" title="List of science fiction anime" label="List of science fiction anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619871" start="1427" end="1447" title="List of film serials" label="List of film serials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048165" start="1449" end="1470" title="List of fantasy films" label="List of fantasy films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863588" start="1472" end="1493" title="Lists of horror films" label="Lists of horror films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641499" start="1495" end="1542" title="List of stories set in a future now in the past" label="List of stories set in a future now in the past"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750576" start="1544" end="1572" title="List of fictional spacecraft" label="List of fictional spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103176" start="1574" end="1606" title="List of fictional space stations" label="List of fictional space stations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1608" end="1661" title="Starship (interstellar spacecraft)#Fictional examples" label="Starship (interstellar spacecraft)#Fictional examples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414212" start="1677" end="1718" title="Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation" label="Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414212" start="1720" end="1772" title="Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form" label="Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131772" start="1774" end="1816" title="Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film" label="Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898121" start="1818" end="1851" title="List of films considered the best" label="List of films considered the best"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776408" start="1853" end="1887" title="List of films considered the worst" label="List of films considered the worst"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27040" wikidata="Q44687" url="?curid=27040" title="Schutzstaffel">
<text>The Schutzstaffel (; ; SS; also stylised with Armanen runes as ᛋᛋ) was a major paramilitary organisation under Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party in Nazi Germany, and later throughout German-occupied Europe during World War II.

It began with a small guard unit known as the &quot;Saal-Schutz&quot; (&quot;Hall Security&quot;) made up of party volunteers to provide security for party meetings in Munich. In 1925, Heinrich Himmler joined the unit, which had by then been reformed and given its final name. Under his direction (1929–1945) it grew from a small paramilitary formation during the Weimar Republic to one of the most powerful organisations in Nazi Germany. From the time of the Nazi Party&#x27;s rise to power until the regime&#x27;s collapse in 1945, the SS was the foremost agency of security, mass surveillance, and state terrorism within Germany and German-occupied Europe.

The two main constituent groups were the &quot;Allgemeine SS&quot; (General SS) and &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; (Armed SS). The &quot;Allgemeine SS&quot; was responsible for enforcing the racial policy of Nazi Germany and general policing, whereas the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; consisted of the combat units of the SS, with a sworn allegiance to Hitler. A third component of the SS, the &quot;SS-Totenkopfverbände&quot; (SS-TV; &quot;Death&#x27;s Head Units&quot;), ran the concentration camps and extermination camps. Additional subdivisions of the SS included the Gestapo and the &quot;Sicherheitsdienst&quot; (SD) organisations. They were tasked with the detection of actual or potential enemies of the Nazi state, the neutralisation of any opposition, policing the German people for their commitment to Nazi ideology, and providing domestic and foreign intelligence.

The SS was the organisation most responsible for the genocidal murder of an estimated 5.5 to 6 million Jews and millions of other victims during the Holocaust. Members of all of its branches committed war crimes and crimes against humanity during World War II (1939–45). The SS was also involved in commercial enterprises and exploited concentration camp inmates as slave labour. After Nazi Germany&#x27;s defeat, the SS and the Nazi Party were judged by the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg to be criminal organisations. Ernst Kaltenbrunner, the highest-ranking surviving SS main department chief, was found guilty of crimes against humanity at the Nuremberg trials and hanged in 1946.

==Origins==
===Forerunner of the SS===

By 1923, the Nazi Party led by Adolf Hitler had created a small volunteer guard unit known as the &quot;Saal-Schutz&quot; (Hall Security) to provide security at their meetings in Munich. The same year, Hitler ordered the formation of a small bodyguard unit dedicated to his personal service. He wished it to be separate from the &quot;suspect mass&quot; of the party, including the paramilitary &quot;Sturmabteilung&quot; (&quot;Storm Battalion&quot;; SA), which he did not trust. The new formation was designated the &quot;Stabswache&quot; (Staff Guard). Originally the unit was composed of eight men, commanded by Julius Schreck and Joseph Berchtold, and was modelled after the Erhardt Naval Brigade, a &quot;Freikorps&quot; of the time. The unit was renamed &quot;Stoßtrupp&quot; (Shock Troops) in May 1923.

The &quot;Stoßtrupp&quot; was abolished after the failed 1923 Beer Hall Putsch, an attempt by the Nazi Party to seize power in Munich. In 1925, Hitler ordered Schreck to organise a new bodyguard unit, the &quot;Schutzkommando&quot; (Protection Command). It was tasked with providing personal protection for Hitler at party functions and events. That same year, the &quot;Schutzkommando&quot; was expanded to a national organisation and renamed successively the &quot;Sturmstaffel&quot; (Storm Squadron), and finally the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (Protection Squad; SS). Officially, the SS marked its foundation on 9 November 1925 (the second anniversary of the Beer Hall Putsch). The new SS protected party leaders throughout Germany. Hitler&#x27;s personal SS protection unit was later enlarged to include combat units.

===Early commanders===
Schreck, a founding member of the SA and a close confidant of Hitler, became the first SS chief in March 1925. On 15 April 1926, Joseph Berchtold succeeded him as chief of the SS. Berchtold changed the title of the office to &quot;Reichsführer-SS&quot; (Reich Leader-SS). Berchtold was considered more dynamic than his predecessor but became increasingly frustrated by the authority the SA had over the SS. This led to him transferring leadership of the SS to his deputy, Erhard Heiden, on 1 March 1927. Under Heiden&#x27;s leadership, a stricter code of discipline was enforced than would have been tolerated in the SA.

Between 1925 and 1929, the SS was considered to be a small &quot;Gruppe&quot; (battalion) of the SA. Except in the Munich area, the SS was unable to maintain any momentum in its membership numbers, which declined from 1,000 to 280 as the SA continued its rapid growth. As Heiden attempted to keep the SS from dissolving, Heinrich Himmler became his deputy in September 1927. Himmler displayed better organisational abilities than Heiden. The SS established a number of &quot;Gaue&quot; (regions or provinces). The SS-Gaue consisted of &quot;SS-Gau Berlin&quot;, &quot;SS-Gau Berlin Brandenburg&quot;, &quot;SS-Gau Franken&quot;, &quot;SS-Gau Niederbayern&quot;, &quot;SS-Gau Rheinland-Süd&quot;, and &quot;SS-Gau Sachsen&quot;.

===Himmler appointed===

With Hitler&#x27;s approval, Himmler assumed the position of &quot;Reichsführer-SS&quot; in January 1929. There are differing accounts of the reason for Heiden&#x27;s dismissal from his position as head of the SS. The party announced that it was for &quot;family reasons&quot;. Under Himmler, the SS expanded and gained a larger foothold. He considered the SS an elite, ideologically driven National Socialist organisation, a &quot;conflation of Teutonic knights, the Jesuits, and Japanese Samurai&quot;. His ultimate aim was to turn the SS into the most powerful organisation in Germany and the most influential branch of the party. He expanded the SS to 3,000 members in his first year as its leader.

In 1929, the &quot;SS-Hauptamt&quot; (main SS office) was expanded and reorganised into five main offices dealing with general administration, personnel, finance, security, and race matters. At the same time, the SS-Gaue were divided into three &quot;SS-Oberführerbereiche&quot; areas, namely the &quot;SS-Oberführerbereich Ost&quot;, &quot;SS-Oberführerbereich West&quot;, and &quot;SS-Oberführerbereich Süd&quot;. The lower levels of the SS remained largely unchanged. Although officially still considered a sub-organisation of the SA and answerable to the &quot;Stabschef&quot; (SA Chief of Staff), it was also during this time that Himmler began to establish the independence of the SS from the SA. The SS grew in size and power due to its exclusive loyalty to Hitler, as opposed to the SA, which was seen as semi-independent and a threat to Hitler&#x27;s hegemony over the party, mainly because they demanded a &quot;second revolution&quot; beyond the one that brought the Nazi Party to power. By the end of 1933, the membership of the SS reached 209,000. Under Himmler&#x27;s leadership, the SS continued to gather greater power as more and more state and party functions were assigned to its jurisdiction. Over time the SS became answerable only to Hitler, a development typical of the organisational structure of the entire Nazi regime, where legal norms were replaced by actions undertaken under the (leader principle), where Hitler&#x27;s will was considered to be above the law.

In the latter half of 1934, Himmler oversaw the creation of &quot;SS-Junkerschule&quot;, institutions where SS officer candidates received leadership training, political and ideological indoctrination, and military instruction. The training stressed ruthlessness and toughness as part of the SS value system, which helped foster a sense of superiority among the men and taught them self-confidence. The first schools were established at Bad Tölz and Braunschweig, with additional schools opening at Klagenfurt and Prague during the war.

===Ideology===

The SS was regarded as the Nazi Party&#x27;s elite unit. In keeping with the racial policy of Nazi Germany, in the early days all SS officer candidates had to provide proof of Aryan ancestry back to 1750 and for other ranks to 1800. Once the war started and it became more difficult to confirm ancestry, the regulation was amended to proving only the candidate&#x27;s grandparents were Aryan, as spelled out in the Nuremberg Laws. Other requirements were complete obedience to the &quot;Führer&quot; and a commitment to the German people and nation. Himmler also tried to institute physical criteria based on appearance and height, but these requirements were only loosely enforced, and over half the SS men did not meet the criteria. Inducements such as higher salaries and larger homes were provided to members of the SS since they were expected to produce more children than the average German family as part of their commitment to Nazi Party doctrine.

Commitment to SS ideology was emphasised throughout the recruitment, membership process, and training. Members of the SS were indoctrinated in the racial policy of Nazi Germany and were taught that it was necessary to remove from Germany people deemed by that policy as inferior. Esoteric rituals and the awarding of regalia and insignia for milestones in the SS man&#x27;s career suffused SS members even further with Nazi ideology. Members were expected to renounce their Christian faith, and Christmas was replaced with a solstice celebration. Church weddings were replaced with SS &quot;Eheweihen&quot;, a pagan ceremony invented by Himmler. These pseudo-religious rites and ceremonies often took place near SS-dedicated monuments or in special SS-designated places. In 1933, Himmler bought Wewelsburg, a castle in Westphalia. He initially intended it to be used as an SS training centre, but its role came to include hosting SS dinners and neo-pagan rituals.

In 1936, Himmler wrote in the pamphlet &quot;The SS as an Anti-Bolshevist Fighting Organisation&quot;:
The SS ideology included the application of brutality and terror as a solution to military and political issues. The SS stressed total loyalty and obedience to orders unto death. Hitler used this as a powerful tool to further his aims and those of the Nazi Party. The SS was entrusted with the commission of war crimes such as the murder of Jewish civilians. Himmler once wrote that an SS man &quot;hesitates not for a single instant, but executes unquestioningly...&quot; any &quot;Führer-Befehl&quot; (&quot;Führer&quot; order). Their official motto was &quot;Meine Ehre heißt Treue&quot; (My Honour is Loyalty).

As part of its race-centric functions during World War II, the SS oversaw the isolation and displacement of Jews from the populations of the conquered territories, seizing their assets and deporting them to concentration camps and ghettos, where they were used as slave labour or immediately murdered. Chosen to implement the Final Solution ordered by Hitler, the SS were the main group responsible for the institutional murder and democide of more than 20 million people during the Holocaust, including approximately 5.2 million to 6 million Jews and 10.5 million Slavs. A significant number of victims were members of other racial or ethnic groups such as the 258,000 Romani. The SS was involved in murdering people viewed as threats to race hygiene or Nazi ideology, including the mentally or physically disabled, homosexuals, and political dissidents. Members of trade unions and those perceived to be affiliated with groups that opposed the regime (religious, political, social, and otherwise), or those whose views were contradictory to the goals of the Nazi Party government, were rounded up in large numbers; these included clergy of all faiths, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, Freemasons, Communists, and Rotary Club members. According to the judgements rendered at the Nuremberg trials, as well as many war crimes investigations and trials conducted since then, the SS was responsible for the majority of Nazi war crimes. In particular, it was the primary organisation that carried out the Holocaust.

==Pre-war Germany==

After Hitler and the Nazi Party came to power on 30 January 1933, the SS was considered a state organisation and a branch of the government. Law enforcement gradually became the purview of the SS, and many SS organisations became &quot;de facto&quot; government agencies.

The SS established a police state within Nazi Germany, using the secret state police and security forces under Himmler&#x27;s control to suppress resistance to Hitler. In his role as Minister President of Prussia, Hermann Göring had in 1933 created a Prussian secret police force, the &quot;Geheime Staatspolizei&quot; or Gestapo, and appointed Rudolf Diels as its head. Concerned that Diels was not ruthless enough to use the Gestapo effectively to counteract the power of the SA, Göring handed over its control to Himmler on 20 April 1934. Also on that date, in a departure from long-standing German practice that law enforcement was a state and local matter, Hitler appointed Himmler chief of all German police outside Prussia. Himmler named his deputy and protégé Reinhard Heydrich chief of the Gestapo on 22 April 1934. Heydrich also continued as head of the &quot;Sicherheitsdienst&quot; (SD; security service).

The Gestapo&#x27;s transfer to Himmler was a prelude to the Night of the Long Knives, in which most of the SA leadership were arrested and subsequently executed. The SS and Gestapo carried out most of the murders. On 20 July 1934, Hitler detached the SS from the SA, which was no longer an influential force after the purge. The SS became an elite corps of the Nazi Party, answerable only to Hitler. Himmler&#x27;s title of &quot;Reichsführer-SS&quot; now became his actual rank – and the highest rank in the SS, equivalent to the rank of field marshal in the army (his previous rank was &quot;Obergruppenführer&quot;). As Himmler&#x27;s position and authority grew, so in effect did his rank.

On 17 June 1936, all police forces throughout Germany were united under the purview of Himmler and the SS. Himmler and Heydrich thus became two of the most powerful men in the country&#x27;s administration. Police and intelligence forces brought under their administrative control included the SD, Gestapo, &quot;Kriminalpolizei&quot; (Kripo; criminal investigative police), and &quot;Ordnungspolizei&quot; (Orpo; regular uniformed police). In his capacity as police chief, Himmler was nominally subordinate to Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick. In practice, since the SS answered only to Hitler, the de facto merger of the SS and the police made the police independent of Frick&#x27;s control. In September 1939, the security and police agencies, including the &quot;Sicherheitspolizei&quot; (SiPo; security police) and SD (but not the Orpo), were consolidated into the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA), headed by Heydrich. This further increased the collective authority of the SS.

During &quot;Kristallnacht&quot; (9–10 November 1938), SS security services clandestinely coordinated violence against Jews as the SS, Gestapo, SD, Kripo, SiPo, and regular police did what they could to ensure that while Jewish synagogues and community centres were destroyed, Jewish-owned businesses and housing remained intact so that they could later be seized. In the end, thousands of Jewish businesses, homes, and graveyards were vandalised and looted, particularly by members of the SA. Some 500 to 1,000 synagogues were destroyed, mostly by arson. On 11 November, Heydrich reported a death toll of 36 people, but later assessments put the number of deaths at up to two thousand. On Hitler&#x27;s orders, around 30,000 Jewish men were arrested and sent to concentration camps by 16 November. As many as 2,500 of these people died in the following months. It was at this point that the SS state began in earnest its campaign of terror against political and religious opponents, who they imprisoned without trial or judicial oversight for the sake of &quot;security, re-education, or prevention&quot;.

In September 1939, the authority of the SS expanded further when the senior SS officer in each military district also became its chief of police. Most of these SS and police leaders held the rank of SS-&quot;Gruppenführer&quot; or above and answered directly to Himmler in all SS matters within their district. Their role was to police the population and oversee the activities of the SS men within their district. By declaring an emergency, they could bypass the district administrative offices for the SS, SD, SiPo, &quot;SS-Totenkopfverbände&quot; (SS-TV; concentration camp guards), and Orpo, thereby gaining direct operational control of these groups.

===Hitler&#x27;s personal bodyguards===
As the SS grew in size and importance, so too did Hitler&#x27;s personal protection forces. Three main SS groups were assigned to protect Hitler. In 1933, his larger personal bodyguard unit (previously the 1st SS-Standarte) was called to Berlin to replace the Army Chancellery Guard, assigned to protect the Chancellor of Germany. Sepp Dietrich commanded the new unit, previously known as SS-Stabswache Berlin; the name was changed to &quot;SS-Sonderkommando Berlin&quot;. In November 1933, the name was changed to &quot;Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler&quot;. In April 1934, Himmler modified the name to &quot;Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler&quot; (LSSAH). The LSSAH guarded Hitler&#x27;s private residences and offices, providing an outer ring of protection for the Führer and his visitors. LSSAH men manned sentry posts at the entrances to the old Reich Chancellery and the new Reich Chancellery. The number of LSSAH guards was increased during special events. At the Berghof, Hitler&#x27;s residence in the Obersalzberg, a large contingent of the LSSAH patrolled an extensive cordoned security zone.

From 1941 forward, the &quot;Leibstandarte&quot; became four distinct entities, the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; division (unconnected to Hitler&#x27;s protection but a formation of the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot;), the Berlin Chancellory Guard, the SS security regiment assigned to the Obersalzberg, and a Munich-based bodyguard unit which protected Hitler when he visited his apartment and the Brown House Nazi Party headquarters in Munich. Although the unit was nominally under Himmler, Dietrich was the real commander and handled day-to-day administration.

Two other SS units composed the inner ring of Hitler&#x27;s protection. The &quot;SS-Begleitkommando des Führers&quot; (Escort Command of the Führer), formed in February 1932, served as Hitler&#x27;s protection escort while he was travelling. This unit consisted of eight men who served around the clock protecting Hitler in shifts. Later the &quot;SS-Begleitkommando&quot; was expanded and became known as the &quot;Führerbegleitkommando&quot; (&quot;Führer&quot; Escort Command; FBK). It continued under separate command and remained responsible for Hitler&#x27;s protection. The &quot;Führer Schutzkommando&quot; (&quot;Führer&quot; Protection Command; FSK) was a protection unit founded by Himmler in March 1933. Originally it was only charged with protecting Hitler while he was inside the borders of Bavaria. In early 1934, they replaced the &quot;SS-Begleitkommando&quot; for Hitler&#x27;s protection throughout Germany. The FSK was renamed the &quot;Reichssicherheitsdienst&quot; (Reich Security Service; RSD) in August 1935. Johann Rattenhuber, chief of the RSD, for the most part, took his orders directly from Hitler. The current FBK chief acted as his deputy. Wherever Hitler was in residence, members of the RSD and FBK would be present. RSD men patrolled the grounds and FBK men provided close security protection inside. The RSD and FBK worked together for security and personal protection during Hitler&#x27;s trips and public events, but they operated as two groups and used separate vehicles. By March 1938, both units wore the standard field grey uniform of the SS. The RSD uniform had the SD diamond on the lower left sleeve.

===Concentration camps founded===

The SS was closely associated with Nazi Germany&#x27;s concentration camp system. On 26 June 1933, Himmler appointed SS-&quot;Oberführer&quot; Theodor Eicke as commandant of Dachau concentration camp, one of the first Nazi concentration camps. It was created to consolidate the many small camps that had been set up by various police agencies and the Nazi Party to house political prisoners. The organisational structure Eicke instituted at Dachau stood as the model for all later concentration camps. After 1934, Eicke was named commander of the &quot;SS-Totenkopfverbände&quot; (SS-TV), the SS formation responsible for running the concentration camps under the authority of the SS and Himmler. Known as the &quot;Death&#x27;s Head Units&quot;, the SS-TV was first organised as several battalions, each based at one of Germany&#x27;s major concentration camps. Leadership at the camps was divided into five departments: commander and adjutant, political affairs division, protective custody, administration, and medical personnel. By 1935, Himmler secured Hitler&#x27;s approval and the finances necessary to establish and operate additional camps. Six concentration camps housing 21,400 inmates (mostly political prisoners) existed at the start of the war in September 1939. By the end of the war, hundreds of camps of varying size and function had been created, holding nearly 715,000 people, most of whom were targeted by the regime because of their race. The concentration camp population rose in tandem with the defeats suffered by the Nazi regime; the worse the catastrophe seemed, the greater the fear of subversion, prompting the SS to intensify their repression and terror.

==SS in World War II==
By the outbreak of World War II, the SS had consolidated into its final form, which comprised three main organisations: the &quot;Allgemeine SS&quot;, &quot;SS-Totenkopfverbände&quot;, and the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot;, which was founded in 1934 as the &quot;SS-Verfügungstruppe&quot; (SS-VT) and renamed in 1940. The &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; evolved into a second German army alongside the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; and operated in tandem with them, especially with the &quot;Heer&quot; (German Army). However, it never obtained total &quot;independence of command&quot;, nor was it ever a &quot;serious rival&quot; to the German Army. Members were never able to join the ranks of the German High Command and it was dependent on the army for heavy weaponry and equipment. Although SS ranks generally had equivalents in the other services, the SS rank system did not copy the terms and ranks used by the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;″s branches. Instead, it used the ranks established by the post-World War I &quot;Freikorps&quot; and the SA. This was primarily done to emphasise the SS as being independent of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;.

===Invasion of Poland===

In the September 1939 invasion of Poland, the LSSAH and SS-VT fought as separate mobile infantry regiments. The LSSAH became notorious for torching villages without military justification. Members of the LSSAH committed war crimes in numerous towns, including the murder of 50 Polish Jews in Błonie and the massacre of 200 civilians, including children, who were machine-gunned in Złoczew. Shootings also took place in Bolesławiec, Torzeniec, Goworowo, Mława, and Włocławek. Some senior members of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; were not convinced the units were fully prepared for combat. Its units took unnecessary risks and had a higher casualty rate than the army. &quot;Generaloberst&quot; Fedor von Bock was quite critical; following an April 1940 visit of the &quot;SS-Totenkopf&quot; division, he found their battle training was &quot;insufficient&quot;. Hitler thought the criticism was typical of the army&#x27;s &quot;outmoded conception of chivalry.&quot; In its defence, the SS insisted that its armed formations had been hampered by having to fight piecemeal and were improperly equipped by the army.

After the invasion, Hitler entrusted the SS with extermination actions codenamed Operation Tannenberg and AB-Aktion to remove potential leaders who could form a resistance to German occupation. The murders were committed by &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; (task forces; deployment groups), assisted by local paramilitary groups. Men for the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; units were drawn from the SS, the SD, and the police. Some 65,000 Polish civilians, including activists, intelligentsia, scholars, teachers, actors, former officers, and others, were murdered by the end of 1939. When the army leadership registered complaints about the brutality being meted out by the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;, Heydrich informed them that he was acting &quot;in accordance with the special order of the &quot;Führer&quot;.&quot; The first systematic mass shooting of Jews by the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; took place on 6 September 1939 during the attack on Kraków.

Satisfied with their performance in Poland, Hitler allowed further expansion of the armed SS formations but insisted new units remain under the operational control of the army. While the &quot;SS-Leibstandarte&quot; remained an independent regiment functioning as Hitler&#x27;s personal bodyguards, the other regiments—&quot;SS-Deutschland&quot;, &quot;SS-Germania,&quot; and &quot;SS-Der Führer&quot;—were combined to form the &quot;SS-Verfügungs-Division&quot;. A second SS division, the &quot;SS-Totenkopf&quot;, was formed from SS-TV concentration camp guards, and a third, the &quot;SS-Polizei&quot;, was created from police volunteers. The SS gained control over its own recruitment, logistics, and supply systems for its armed formations at this time. The SS, Gestapo, and SD were in charge of the provisional military administration in Poland until the appointment of Hans Frank as Governor-General on 26 October 1939.

===Battle of France===

On 10 May 1940, Hitler launched the Battle of France, a major offensive against France and the Low Countries. The SS supplied two of the 89 divisions employed. The LSSAH and elements of the SS-VT participated in the ground invasion of the Netherlands. Simultaneously, airborne troops were dropped to capture key Dutch airfields, bridges, and railways. In the five-day campaign, the LSSAH linked up with army units and airborne troops after several clashes with Dutch defenders.

SS troops did not take part in the thrust through the Ardennes and the river Meuse. Instead, the &quot;SS-Totenkopf&quot; was summoned from the army reserve to fight in support of &quot;Generalmajor&quot; Erwin Rommel&#x27;s 7th Panzer Division as they advanced toward the English Channel. On 21 May, the British launched an armoured counterattack against the flanks of the 7th Panzer Division and &quot;SS-Totenkopf&quot;. The Germans then trapped the British and French troops in a huge pocket at Dunkirk. On 27 May, 4 Company, &quot;SS-Totenkopf&quot; perpetrated the Le Paradis massacre, where 97 men of the 2nd Battalion, Royal Norfolk Regiment were machine-gunned after surrendering, with survivors finished off with bayonets. Two men survived. By 28 May the &quot;SS-Leibstandarte&quot; had taken Wormhout, from Dunkirk. There, soldiers of the 2nd Battalion were responsible for the Wormhoudt massacre, where 81 British and French soldiers were murdered after they surrendered. According to historian Charles Sydnor, the &quot;fanatical recklessness in the assault, suicidal defence against enemy attacks, and savage atrocities committed in the face of frustrated objectives&quot; exhibited by the &quot;SS-Totenkopf&quot; division during the invasion were typical of the SS troops as a whole.

At the close of the campaign, Hitler expressed his pleasure with the performance of the &quot;SS-Leibstandarte&quot;, telling them: &quot;Henceforth it will be an honour for you, who bear my name, to lead every German attack.&quot; The SS-VT was renamed the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; in a speech made by Hitler in July 1940. Hitler then authorised the enlistment of &quot;people perceived to be of related stock&quot;, as Himmler put it, to expand the ranks. Danes, Dutch, Norwegians, Swedes, and Finns volunteered to fight in the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; under the command of German officers. They were brought together to form the new division &quot;SS-Wiking&quot;. In January 1941, the &quot;SS-Verfügungs&quot; Division was renamed &quot;SS-Reich&quot; Division (Motorised), and was renamed as the 2nd SS Panzer Division &quot;Das Reich&quot; when it was reorganised as a &quot;Panzergrenadier&quot; division in 1942.

===Campaign in the Balkans===
In April 1941, the German Army invaded Yugoslavia and Greece. The LSSAH and &quot;Das Reich&quot; were attached to separate army Panzer corps. Fritz Klingenberg, a company commander in the &quot;Das Reich&quot; division, led his men across Yugoslavia to the capital, Belgrade, where a small group in the vanguard accepted the surrender of the city on 13 April. A few days later Yugoslavia surrendered. SS police units immediately began taking hostages and carrying out reprisals, a practice that became common. In some cases, they were joined by the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;. Similar to Poland, the war policies of the Nazis in the Balkans resulted in brutal occupation and racist mass murder. Serbia became the second country (after Estonia) declared &quot;Judenfrei&quot; (free of Jews).

In Greece, the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; and &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; encountered resistance from the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) and the Greek Army. The fighting was intensified by the mountainous terrain, with its heavily defended narrow passes. The LSSAH was at the forefront of the German push. The BEF evacuated by sea to Crete, but had to flee again in late May when the Germans arrived. Like Yugoslavia, the conquest of Greece brought its Jews into danger, as the Nazis immediately took a variety of measures against them. Initially confined in ghettos, most were transported to Auschwitz concentration camp in March 1943, where they were murdered in the gas chambers on arrival. Of Greece&#x27;s 80,000 Jews, only 20 per cent survived the war.

==War in the east==
On 22 June 1941, Hitler launched Operation Barbarossa, the invasion of the Soviet Union. The expanding war and the need to control occupied territories provided the conditions for Himmler to further consolidate the police and military organs of the SS. Rapid acquisition of vast territories in the East placed considerable strain on the SS police organisations as they struggled to adjust to the changing security challenges.

The 1st and 2nd SS Infantry Brigades, which had been formed from surplus concentration camp guards of the SS-TV, and the SS Cavalry Brigade moved into the Soviet Union behind the advancing armies. At first, they fought Soviet partisans, but by the autumn of 1941, they left the anti-partisan role to other units and actively took part in the Holocaust. While assisting the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;, they formed firing parties that participated in the liquidation of the Jewish population of the Soviet Union.

On 31 July 1941, Göring gave Heydrich written authorisation to ensure the cooperation of administrative leaders of various government departments to undertake genocide of the Jews in territories under German control. Heydrich was instrumental in carrying out these exterminations, as the Gestapo was ready to organise deportations in the West and his &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; were already conducting extensive murder operations in the East. On 20 January 1942, Heydrich chaired a meeting, called the Wannsee Conference, to discuss the implementation of the plan.

During battles in the Soviet Union in 1941 and 1942, the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; suffered enormous casualties. The LSSAH and &quot;Das Reich&quot; lost over half their troops to illness and combat casualties. In need of recruits, Himmler began to accept soldiers that did not fit the original SS racial profile. In early 1942, &quot;SS-Leibstandarte&quot;, &quot;SS-Totenkopf&quot;, and &quot;SS-Das Reich&quot; were withdrawn to the West to refit and were converted to &quot;Panzergrenadier&quot; divisions. The SS-Panzer Corps returned to the Soviet Union in 1943 and participated in the Third Battle of Kharkov in February and March.

===The Holocaust===

The SS was built on a culture of violence, which was exhibited in its most extreme form by the mass murder of civilians and prisoners of war on the Eastern Front. Augmented by personnel from the Kripo, Orpo (Order Police), and &quot;Waffen-SS&quot;, the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; reached a total strength of 3,000 men. &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; A, B, and C were attached to Army Groups North, Centre, and South; &quot;Einsatzgruppe&quot; D was assigned to the 11th Army. The &quot;Einsatzgruppe&quot; for Special Purposes operated in eastern Poland starting in July 1941. Historian Richard Rhodes describes them as being &quot;outside the bounds of morality&quot;; they were &quot;judge, jury and executioner all in one&quot;, with the authority to kill anyone at their discretion. Following Operation Barbarossa, these &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; units, together with the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; and Order Police as well as with assistance from the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;, engaged in the mass murder of the Jewish population in occupied eastern Poland and the Soviet Union. The greatest extent of &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; action occurred in 1941 and 1942 in Ukraine and Russia. Before the invasion there were five million registered Jews throughout the Soviet Union, with three million of those residing in the territories occupied by the Germans; by the time the war ended, over two million of these had been murdered.

The extermination activities of the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; generally followed a standard procedure, with the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; chief contacting the nearest &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; unit commander to inform him of the impending action; this was done so they could coordinate and control access to the execution grounds. Initially, the victims were shot, but this method proved impracticable for an operation of this scale. Also, after Himmler observed the shooting of 100 Jews at Minsk in August 1941, he grew concerned about the impact such actions were having on the mental health of his SS men. He decided that alternate methods of murder should be found, which led to the introduction of gas vans. However, these were not popular with the men, as they regarded removing the dead bodies from the van and burying them to have been unpleasant. Prisoners or auxiliaries were often assigned to do this task so as to spare the SS men the trauma.

===Anti-partisan operations===

In response to the army&#x27;s difficulties in dealing with Soviet partisans, Hitler decided in July 1942 to transfer anti-partisan operations to the police. This placed the matter under Himmler&#x27;s purview. As Hitler had ordered on 8 July 1941 that all Jews were to be regarded as partisans, the term &quot;anti-partisan operations&quot; was used as a euphemism for the murder of Jews as well as actual combat against resistance elements. In July 1942 Himmler ordered that the term &quot;partisan&quot; should no longer be used; instead resisters to Nazi rule would be described as &quot;bandits&quot;.

Himmler set the SS and SD to work on developing additional anti-partisan tactics and launched a propaganda campaign. Sometime in June 1943, Himmler issued the &quot;Bandenbekämpfung&quot; (bandit fighting) order, simultaneously announcing the existence of the &quot;Bandenkampfverbände&quot; (bandit fighting formations), with &quot;SS-Obergruppenführer&quot; Erich von dem Bach-Zelewski as its chief. Employing troops primarily from the SS police and &quot;Waffen-SS&quot;, the &quot;Bandenkampfverbände&quot; had four principal operational components: propaganda, centralised control and coordination of security operations, training of troops, and battle operations. Once the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; had secured territorial objectives, the &quot;Bandenkampfverbände&quot; first secured communications facilities, roads, railways, and waterways. Thereafter, they secured rural communities and economic installations such as factories and administrative buildings. An additional priority was securing agricultural and forestry resources. The SS oversaw the collection of the harvest, which was deemed critical to strategic operations. Any Jews in the area were rounded up and killed. Communists and people of Asiatic descent were killed presumptively under the assumption that they were Soviet agents.

===Death camps===

After the start of the war, Himmler intensified the activity of the SS within Germany and in Nazi-occupied Europe. Increasing numbers of Jews and German citizens deemed politically suspect or social outsiders were arrested. As the Nazi regime became more oppressive, the concentration camp system grew in size and lethal operation, and grew in scope as the economic ambitions of the SS intensified.

Intensification of the killing operations took place in late 1941 when the SS began construction of stationary gassing facilities to replace the use of &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; for mass murders. Victims at these new extermination camps were killed with the use of carbon monoxide gas from automobile engines. During Operation Reinhard, run by officers from the &quot;Totenkopfverbände&quot;, who were sworn to secrecy, three extermination camps were built in occupied Poland: Bełżec (operational by March 1942), Sobibór (operational by May 1942), and Treblinka (operational by July 1942), with squads of Trawniki men (Eastern European collaborators) overseeing hundreds of &quot;Sonderkommando&quot; prisoners, who were forced to work in the gas chambers and crematoria before being murdered themselves. On Himmler&#x27;s orders, by early 1942 the concentration camp at Auschwitz was greatly expanded to include the addition of gas chambers, where victims were killed using the pesticide Zyklon B.

For administrative reasons, all concentration camp guards and administrative staff became full members of the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; in 1942. The concentration camps were placed under the command of the &quot;SS-Wirtschafts-Verwaltungshauptamt&quot; (SS Main Economic and Administrative Office; WVHA) under Oswald Pohl. Richard Glücks served as the Inspector of Concentration Camps, which in 1942 became office &quot;D&quot; under the WVHA. Exploitation and extermination became a balancing act as the military situation deteriorated. The labour needs of the war economy, especially for skilled workers, meant that some Jews escaped the genocide. On 30 October 1942, due to severe labour shortages in Germany, Himmler ordered that large numbers of able-bodied people in Nazi-occupied Soviet territories be taken prisoner and sent to Germany as forced labour.

By 1944, the SS-TV had been organised into three divisions: staff of the concentration camps in Germany and Austria, in the occupied territories, and of the extermination camps in Poland. By 1944, it became standard practice to rotate SS members in and out of the camps, partly based on manpower needs, but also to provide easier assignments to wounded &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; members. This rotation of personnel meant that nearly the entire SS knew what was going on inside the concentration camps, making the entire organisation liable for war crimes and crimes against humanity.

==Business empire==

In 1934, Himmler founded the first SS business venture, &quot;Nordland-Verlag&quot;, a publishing house that released propaganda material and SS training manuals. Thereafter, he purchased Allach Porcelain, which then began to produce SS memorabilia. Because of the labour shortage and a desire for financial gain, the SS started exploiting concentration camp inmates as slave labour. Most of the SS businesses lost money until Himmler placed them under the administration of Pohl&#x27;s &quot;Verwaltung und Wirtschaftshauptamt Hauptamt&quot; (Administration and Business office; VuWHA) in 1939. Even then, most of the enterprises did not fare well, as SS men were not selected for their business experience, and the workers were starving. In July 1940 Pohl established the &quot;Deutsche Wirtschaftsbetriebe GmbH&quot; (German Businesses Ltd; DWB), an umbrella corporation under which he took over administration of all SS business concerns. Eventually, the SS founded nearly 200 holding companies for their businesses.

In May 1941 the VuWHA founded the &quot;Deutsche Ausrüstungswerke&quot; GmbH (German Equipment Works; DAW), which was created to integrate the SS business enterprises with the burgeoning concentration camp system. Himmler subsequently established four major new concentration camps in 1941: Auschwitz, Gross-Rosen, Natzweiler-Struthof, and Neuengamme. Each had at least one factory or quarry nearby where the inmates were forced to work. Himmler took a particular interest in providing labourers for IG Farben, which was constructing a synthetic rubber factory at Auschwitz III–Monowitz. The plant was almost ready to commence production when it was overrun by Soviet troops in 1945. The life expectancy of inmates at Monowitz averaged about three months. This was typical of the camps, as inmates were underfed and lived under disastrously bad living conditions. Their workload was intentionally made impossibly high, under the policy of extermination through labour.

In 1942, Himmler consolidated all of the offices for which Pohl was responsible into one, creating the SS Main Economic and Administrative Office (&quot;Wirtschafts- und Verwaltungshauptamt&quot;; WVHA). The entire concentration camp system was placed under the authority of the WVHA. The SS owned Sudetenquell GmbH, a mineral water producer in the Sudetenland. By 1944, the SS had purchased 75 per cent of the mineral water producers in Germany and were intending to acquire a monopoly. Several concentration camps produced building materials such as stone, bricks, and cement for the SS-owned &quot;Deutsche Erd- und Steinwerke&quot; (German Earth And Stone Works; DEST). In the occupied Eastern territories, the SS acquired a monopoly in brick production by seizing all 300 extant brickworks. The DWB also founded the &quot;Ost-Deutsche Baustoffwerke&quot; (East German Building Supply Works; GmbH or ODBS) and &quot;Deutsche Edelmöbel&quot; GmbH (German Noble Furniture). These operated in factories the SS had confiscated from Jews and Poles.

The SS owned experimental farms, bakeries, meat packing plants, leather works, clothing and uniform factories, and small arms factories. Under the direction of the WVHA, the SS sold camp labour to various factories at a rate of three to six &quot;Reichsmarks&quot; per prisoner per day. The SS confiscated and sold the property of concentration camp inmates, confiscated their investment portfolios and their cash, and profited from their dead bodies by selling their hair to make felt and melting down their dental work to obtain gold from the fillings. The total value of assets looted from the victims of Operation Reinhard alone (not including Auschwitz) was listed by Odilo Globocnik as 178,745,960.59 Reichsmarks. Items seized included of gold worth 843,802.75 RM, as well as of silver, of platinum, 249,771.50 American dollars, 130 diamond solitaires, 2,511.87 carats of brilliants, 13,458.62 carats of diamonds, and 114 kg of pearls. According to Nazi legislation, Jewish property belonged to the state, but many SS camp commandants and guards stole items such as diamonds or currency for personal gain or took seized foodstuffs and alcohol to sell on the black market.

==Military reversals==
On 5 July 1943, the Germans launched the Battle of Kursk, an offensive designed to eliminate the Kursk salient. The &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; by this time had been expanded to 12 divisions, and most took part in the battle. Due to stiff Soviet resistance, Hitler halted the attack by the evening of 12 July. On 17 July he called off the operation and ordered a withdrawal. Thereafter, the Germans were forced onto the defensive as the Red Army began the liberation of Western Russia. The losses incurred by the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; and the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; during the Battle of Kursk occurred nearly simultaneously with the Allied assault into Italy, opening a two-front war for Germany.

===Normandy landings===

Alarmed by the raids on St Nazaire and Dieppe in 1942, Hitler had ordered the construction of fortifications he called the Atlantic Wall all along the Atlantic coast, from Spain to Norway, to protect against an expected Allied invasion. Concrete gun emplacements were constructed at strategic points along the coast, and wooden stakes, metal tripods, mines, and large anti-tank obstacles were placed on the beaches to delay the approach of landing craft and impede the movement of tanks. In addition to several static infantry divisions, eleven panzer and &quot;Panzergrenadier&quot; divisions were deployed nearby. Four of these formations were &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; divisions. In addition, the &quot;SS-Das Reich&quot; was located in Southern France, the LSSAH was in Belgium refitting after fighting in the Soviet Union, and the newly formed panzer division &quot;SS-Hitlerjugend&quot;, consisting of 17- and 18-year-old Hitler Youth members supported by combat veterans and experienced NCOs, was stationed west of Paris. The creation of the &quot;SS-Hitlerjugend&quot; was a sign of Hitler&#x27;s desperation for more troops, especially ones with unquestioning obedience.

The Normandy landings took place beginning on 6 June 1944. The 21st Panzer Division under &quot;Generalmajor&quot; Edgar Feuchtinger, positioned south of Caen, was the only panzer division close to the beaches. The division included 146 tanks and 50 assault guns, plus supporting infantry and artillery. At 02:00, &quot;Generalleutnant&quot; Wilhelm Richter, commander of the 716th Static Infantry Division, ordered the 21st Panzer Division into position to counter-attack. However, as the division was part of the armoured reserve, Feuchtinger was obliged to seek clearance from OKW before he could commit his formation. Feuchtinger did not receive orders until nearly 09:00, but in the meantime, on his own initiative he put together a battle group (including tanks) to fight the British forces east of the Orne. &quot;SS-Hitlerjugend&quot; began to deploy in the afternoon of 6 June, with its units undertaking defensive actions the following day. They also took part in the Battle for Caen (June–August 1944). On 7–8 and 17 June, members of the &quot;SS-Hitlerjugend&quot; shot and killed twenty Canadian prisoners of war in the Ardenne Abbey massacre.

The Allies continued to make progress in the liberation of France, and on 4 August Hitler ordered a counter-offensive (Operation Lüttich) from Vire towards Avranches. The operation included LSSAH, &quot;Das Reich&quot;, 2nd, and 116th Panzer Divisions, with support from infantry and elements of the 17th SS Panzergrenadier Division &quot;Götz von Berlichingen&quot; under &quot;SS-Oberstgruppenführer&quot; Paul Hausser. These forces were to mount an offensive near Mortain and drive west through Avranches to the coast. The Allied forces were prepared for this offensive, and an air assault on the combined German units proved devastating. On 21 August, 50,000 German troops, including most of the LSSAH, were encircled by the Allies in the Falaise Pocket. Remnants of the LSSAH which escaped were withdrawn to Germany for refitting. Paris was liberated on 25 August, and the last of the German forces withdrew over the Seine by the end of August, ending the Normandy campaign.

===Battle for Germany===

&quot;Waffen-SS&quot; units that had survived the summer campaigns were withdrawn from the front line to refit. Two of them, the 9th SS and 10th SS Panzer Divisions, did so in the Arnhem region of Holland in early September 1944. Coincidentally, on 17 September, the Allies launched in the same area Operation Market Garden, a combined airborne and land operation designed to seize control of the lower Rhine. The 9th and 10th Panzers were among the units that repulsed the attack.

In December 1944, Hitler launched the Ardennes Offensive, also known as the Battle of the Bulge, a significant counterattack against the western Allies through the Ardennes with the aim of reaching Antwerp while encircling the Allied armies in the area. The offensive began with an artillery barrage shortly before dawn on 16 December. Spearheading the attack were two panzer armies composed largely of &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; divisions. The battlegroups found advancing through the forests and wooded hills of the Ardennes difficult in the winter weather, but they initially made good progress in the northern sector. They soon encountered strong resistance from the US 2nd and 99th Infantry Divisions. By 23 December, the weather improved enough for Allied air forces to attack the German forces and their supply columns, causing fuel shortages. In increasingly difficult conditions, the German advance slowed and was stopped. Hitler&#x27;s failed offensive cost 700 tanks and most of their remaining mobile forces in the west, as well as most of their irreplaceable reserves of manpower and materiel.

During the battle, SS-&quot;Obersturmbannführer&quot; Joachim Peiper left a path of destruction, which included &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; soldiers under his command murdering American POWs and unarmed Belgian civilians in the Malmedy massacre. Captured SS soldiers who were part of &quot;Kampfgruppe Peiper&quot; were tried during the Malmedy massacre trial following the war for this massacre and several others in the area. Many of the perpetrators were sentenced to hang, but the sentences were commuted. Peiper was imprisoned for eleven years for his role in the murders.

In the east, the Red Army resumed its offensive on 12 January 1945. German forces were outnumbered twenty to one in aircraft, eleven to one in infantry, and seven to one in tanks on the Eastern Front. By the end of the month, the Red Army had made bridgeheads across the Oder, the last geographic obstacle before Berlin. The western Allies continued to advance as well, but not as rapidly as the Red Army. The Panzer Corps conducted a successful defensive operation on 17–24 February at the Hron River, stalling the Allied advance towards Vienna. The 1st and 2nd SS Panzer Corps made their way towards Austria but were slowed by damaged railways.

Budapest fell on 13 February. Hitler ordered Dietrich&#x27;s 6th Panzer Army to move into Hungary to protect the Nagykanizsa oilfields and refineries, which he deemed the most strategically valuable fuel reserves on the Eastern Front. &quot;Frühlingserwachsen&quot; (Operation Spring Awakening), the final German offensive in the east, took place in early March. German forces attacked near Lake Balaton, with 6th Panzer Army advancing north towards Budapest and 2nd Panzer Army moving east and south. Dietrich&#x27;s forces at first made good progress, but as they drew near the Danube, the combination of muddy terrain and strong Soviet resistance brought them to a halt. By 16 March, the battle was lost. Enraged by the defeat, Hitler ordered the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; units involved to remove their cuff titles as a mark of disgrace. Dietrich refused to carry out the order.

By this time, on both the Eastern and Western Front, the activities of the SS were becoming clear to the Allies, as the concentration and extermination camps were being overrun. Allied troops were filled with disbelief and repugnance at the evidence of Nazi brutality in the camps.

On 9 April 1945, Königsberg fell to the Red Army, and on 13 April Dietrich&#x27;s SS unit was forced out of Vienna. The Battle of Berlin began at 03:30 on 16 April with a massive artillery barrage. Within the week, fighting was taking place inside the city. Among the many elements defending Berlin were French, Latvian, and Scandinavian &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; troops. Hitler, now residing in the &quot;Führerbunker&quot; under the Reich Chancellery, continued to hope that his remaining SS soldiers could rescue the capital. In spite of the hopelessness of the situation, members of the SS patrolling the city continued to shoot or hang soldiers and civilians for what they considered to be acts of cowardice or defeatism. The Berlin garrison surrendered on 2 May, two days after Hitler committed suicide. As members of SS expected little mercy from the Red Army, they attempted to move westward to surrender to the western Allies instead.

==SS units and branches==
===Reich Security Main Office===
Heydrich held the title of &quot;Chef der Sicherheitspolizei und des SD&quot; (Chief of the Security Police and SD) until 27 September 1939, when he became chief of the newly established Reich Security Main Office (RSHA). From that point forward, the RSHA was in charge of SS security services. It had under its command the SD, Kripo, and Gestapo, as well as several offices to handle finance, administration, and supply. Heinrich Müller, who had been chief of operations for the Gestapo, was appointed Gestapo chief at this time. Arthur Nebe was chief of the Kripo, and the two branches of SD were commanded by a series of SS officers, including Otto Ohlendorf and Walter Schellenberg. The SD was considered an elite branch of the SS, and its members were better educated and typically more ambitious than those within the ranks of the &quot;Allgemeine SS&quot;. Members of the SD were specially trained in criminology, intelligence, and counterintelligence. They also gained a reputation for ruthlessness and unwavering commitment to Nazi ideology.

Heydrich was attacked in Prague on 27 May 1942 by a British-trained team of Czech and Slovak soldiers who had been sent by the Czechoslovak government-in-exile to assassinate him in Operation Anthropoid. He died from his injuries a week later. Himmler ran the RSHA personally until 30 January 1943, when Heydrich&#x27;s positions were taken over by Kaltenbrunner.

=== &quot;SS-Sonderkommandos&quot;===

Beginning in 1938 and throughout World War II, the SS enacted a procedure where offices and units of the SS could form smaller sub-units, known as &quot;SS-Sonderkommandos&quot;, to carry out special tasks, including large-scale murder operations. The use of &quot;SS-Sonderkommandos&quot; was widespread. According to former SS-&quot;Sturmbannführer&quot; Wilhelm Höttl, not even the SS leadership knew how many &quot;SS-Sonderkommandos&quot; were constantly being formed, disbanded, and reformed for various tasks, especially on the Eastern Front.

An &quot;SS-Sonderkommando&quot; unit led by SS-&quot;Sturmbannführer&quot; Herbert Lange murdered 1,201 psychiatric patients at the Tiegenhof psychiatric hospital in the Free City of Danzig, 1,100 patients in Owińska, 2,750 patients at Kościan, and 1,558 patients at Działdowo, as well as hundreds of Poles at Fort VII, where the mobile gas van and gassing bunker were developed. In 1941–42, &quot;SS-Sonderkommando Lange&quot; set up and managed the first extermination camp, at Chełmno, where 152,000 Jews were killed using gas vans.

After the Battle of Stalingrad ended in February 1943, Himmler realised that Germany would likely lose the war and ordered the formation of &quot; Sonderkommando&quot; 1005, a special task force under SS-&quot;Standartenführer&quot; Paul Blobel. The unit&#x27;s assignment was to visit mass graves on the Eastern Front to exhume bodies and burn them in an attempt to cover up the genocide. The task remained unfinished at the end of the war, and many mass graves remain unmarked and unexcavated.

The &quot;Eichmann Sonderkommando&quot; was a task force headed by Adolf Eichmann that arrived in Budapest on 19 March 1944, the same day that Axis forces invaded Hungary. Their task was to take a direct role in the deportation of Hungarian Jews to Auschwitz. The &quot;SS-Sonderkommandos&quot; enlisted the aid of antisemitic elements from the Hungarian gendarmerie and pro-German administrators from within the Hungarian Interior Ministry. Round-ups began on 16 April, and from 14 May, four trains of 3,000 Jews per day left Hungary and travelled to the camp at Auschwitz II-Birkenau, arriving along a newly built spur line that terminated a few hundred metres from the gas chambers. Between 10 and 25 per cent of the people on each train were chosen as forced labourers; the rest were killed within hours of arrival. Under international pressure, the Hungarian government halted deportations on 6 July 1944, by which time over 437,000 of Hungary&#x27;s 725,000 Jews had been murdered.

===&quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;===

The &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; had its origins in the ad hoc &quot;Einsatzkommando&quot; formed by Heydrich following the &quot;Anschluss&quot; in Austria in March 1938. Two units of &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; were stationed in the Sudetenland in October 1938. When military action turned out not to be necessary because of the Munich Agreement, the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; were assigned to confiscate government papers and police documents. They secured government buildings, questioned senior civil servants, and arrested as many as 10,000 Czech communists and German citizens. The &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; also followed &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; troops and killed potential partisans. Similar groups were used in 1939 for the occupation of Czechoslovakia.

Hitler felt that the planned extermination of the Jews was too difficult and important to be entrusted to the military. In 1941 the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; were sent into the Soviet Union to begin large-scale genocide of Jews, Romani people, and communists. Historian Raul Hilberg estimates that between 1941 and 1945 the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; and related agencies murdered more than two million people, including 1.3 million Jews. The largest mass shooting perpetrated by the &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; was at Babi Yar outside Kiev, where 33,771 Jews were massacred in a single operation on 29–30 September 1941. In the Rumbula massacre (November–December 1941), 25,000 victims from the Riga ghetto were murdered. In another set of mass shootings (December 1941-January 1942), the &quot;Einsatzgruppe&quot; massacred over 10,000 Jews at Drobytsky Yar in Kharkov.

The last &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; were disbanded in mid-1944 (although some continued to exist on paper until 1945) due to the German retreat on both fronts and the consequent inability to continue extermination activities. Former &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; members were either assigned duties in the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; or concentration camps. Twenty-four &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; commanders were tried for war crimes following the war.

===SS Court Main Office===
The SS Court Main Office (&quot;Hauptamt SS-Gericht&quot;) was an internal legal system for conducting investigations, trials, and punishment of the SS and police. It had more than 600 lawyers on staff in the main offices in Berlin and Munich. Proceedings were conducted at 38 regional SS courts throughout Germany. It was the only authority authorised to try SS personnel, except for SS members who were on active duty in the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; (in such cases, the SS member in question was tried by a standard military tribunal). Its creation placed the SS beyond the reach of civilian legal authority. Himmler personally intervened as he saw fit regarding convictions and punishment. Historian Karl Dietrich Bracher describes this court system as one factor in the creation of the Nazi totalitarian police state, as it removed objective legal procedures, rendering citizens defenceless against the &quot;summary justice of the SS terror.&quot;

===SS Cavalry===
Shortly after Hitler seized power in 1933, most horse riding associations were taken over by the SA and SS. Members received combat training to serve in the &quot;Reiter-SS&quot; (SS Cavalry Corps). The first SS cavalry regiment, designated &quot;SS-Totenkopf Reitstandarte 1&quot;, was formed in September 1939. Commanded by then SS-&quot;Standartenführer&quot; Hermann Fegelein, the unit was assigned to Poland, where they took part in the extermination of Polish intelligentsia. Additional squadrons were added in May 1940, for a total of fourteen.

The unit was split into two regiments in December 1939, with Fegelein in charge of both. By March 1941 their strength was 3,500 men. In July 1941, they were assigned to the Pripyat Marshes massacres, tasked with rounding up and exterminating Jews and partisans in the Pripyat swamps. The two regiments were amalgamated into the SS Cavalry Brigade on 31 July, twelve days after the operation started. Fegelein&#x27;s final report, dated 18 September 1941, states that they killed 14,178 Jews, 1,001 partisans, and 699 Red Army soldiers, with 830 prisoners taken. Historian Henning Pieper estimates the actual number of Jews killed was closer to 23,700. The SS Cavalry Brigade took serious losses in November 1941 in the Battle of Moscow, with casualties of up to 60 per cent in some squadrons. Fegelein was appointed as commander of the 8th SS Cavalry Division &quot;Florian Geyer&quot; on 20 April 1943. This unit saw service in the Soviet Union in attacks on partisans and civilians. In addition, SS Cavalry regiments served in Croatia and Hungary.

===SS Medical Corps===
The SS Medical Corps were initially known as the &quot;Sanitätsstaffel&quot; (sanitary units). After 1931, the SS formed the headquarters office &quot;Amt&quot; V as the central office for SS medical units. An SS medical academy was established in Berlin in 1938 to train &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; physicians. SS medical personnel did not often provide actual medical care; their primary responsibility was medicalised genocide. At Auschwitz, about three quarters of new arrivals, including almost all children, women with small children, all the elderly, and all those who appeared on brief and superficial inspection by an SS doctor not to be completely fit were killed within hours of arrival. In their role as &quot;Desinfektoren&quot; (disinfectors), SS doctors also made selections among existing prisoners as to their fitness to work and supervised the murder of those deemed unfit. Inmates in deteriorating health were examined by SS doctors, who decided whether or not they would be able to recover in less than two weeks. Those too ill or injured to recover in that time frame were killed.

At Auschwitz, the actual delivery of gas to the victims was always handled by the SS, on the order of the supervising SS doctor. Many of the SS doctors also conducted inhumane medical experiments on camp prisoners. The most well-known SS doctor, Josef Mengele, served as a medical officer at Auschwitz under the command of Eduard Wirths of the camp&#x27;s medical corps. Mengele undertook selections even when he was not assigned to do so in the hope of finding subjects for his experiments. He was particularly interested in locating sets of twins. In contrast to most of the doctors, who viewed undertaking selections as one of their most stressful and horrible duties, Mengele undertook the task with a flamboyant air, often smiling or whistling a tune. After the war, many SS doctors were charged with war crimes for their medical experiments and for their role in gas chamber selections.

===Other SS units===
====&quot;Ahnenerbe&quot;====
The &quot;Ahnenerbe&quot; (Ancestral Heritage Organisation) was founded in 1935 by Himmler and became part of the SS in 1939. It was an umbrella agency for more than fifty organisations tasked with studying German racial identity and ancient Germanic traditions and language. The agency sponsored archaeological expeditions in Germany, Scandinavia, the Middle East, Tibet, and elsewhere to search for evidence of Aryan roots, influence, and superiority. Further planned expeditions were postponed indefinitely at the start of the war.

====&quot;SS-Frauenkorps&quot;====
The &quot;SS-Frauenkorps&quot; was an auxiliary reporting and clerical unit, which included the &quot;SS-Helferinnenkorps&quot; (Women Helper Corps), made up of female volunteers. Members were assigned as administrative staff and supply personnel and served in command positions and as guards at women&#x27;s concentration camps. While female concentration and extermination camp guards were civilian employees of the SS, the &quot;SS-Helferinnen&quot; who completed training at the &quot;Reichsschule für SS-Helferinnen&quot; in Oberehnheim (Alsace) were members of the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot;. Like their male equivalents in the SS, females participated in the mass murder of Jews, Poles, and others.

In 1942, Himmler set up the &quot;Reichsschule für SS Helferinnen&quot; (Reich School for SS Helpers) in Oberehnheim to train women in communications so that they could free up men for combat roles. Himmler also intended to replace all female civilian employees in his service with &quot;SS-Helferinnen&quot; members, as they were selected and trained according to Nazi ideology. The school was closed on 22 November 1944 due to the Allied advance.

====&quot;SS-Mannschaften&quot;====
The &quot;SS-Mannschaften&quot; (Auxiliary-SS) were not considered regular SS members, but were conscripted from other branches of the German military, the Nazi Party, the SA, and the &quot;Volkssturm&quot; for service in concentration camps and extermination camps.

==Foreign legions and volunteers==
Beginning in 1940, Himmler opened up &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; recruiting to ethnic Germans that were not German citizens. In March 1941, the SS Main Office established the &quot;Germanische Leitstelle&quot; (Germanic Guidance Office) to establish &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; recruiting offices in Nazi-occupied Europe. The majority of the resulting foreign &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; units wore a distinctive national collar patch and preceded their SS rank titles with the prefix &quot;Waffen&quot; instead of SS. Volunteers from Scandinavian countries filled the ranks of two divisions, the &quot;SS-Wiking&quot; and &quot;SS-Nordland&quot;. Swiss German speakers joined in substantial numbers. Belgian Flemings joined Dutchmen to form the &quot;SS-Nederland&quot; legion, and their Walloon compatriots joined the &quot;SS-Wallonien&quot;. By the end of 1943 about a quarter of the SS were ethnic Germans from across Europe, and by June 1944, half the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; were foreign nationals.

Additional &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; units were added from the Ukrainians, Albanians from Kosovo, Serbians, Croatians, Turkic, Caucasians, Cossack, and Tatars. The Ukrainians and Tatars, who had suffered persecution under Joseph Stalin, were likely motivated primarily by opposition to the Soviet government rather than ideological agreement with the SS. The exiled Grand Mufti of Jerusalem Amin al-Husseini was made an SS-&quot;Gruppenführer&quot; by Himmler in May 1943. He subsequently used antisemitism and anti-Serb racism to recruit a &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; division of Bosnian Muslims, the &quot;SS-Handschar&quot;. The year-long Soviet occupation of the Baltic states at the beginning of World War II resulted in volunteers for Latvian and Estonian &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; units. The Estonian Legion had 1,280 volunteers under training by the end of 1942. Approximately 25,000 men served in the Estonian SS division, with thousands more conscripted into Police Front battalions and border guard units. Most of the Estonians were fighting primarily to regain their independence and as many as 15,000 of them died fighting alongside the Germans. In early 1944, Himmler even contacted Pohl to suggest releasing Muslim prisoners from concentration camps to supplement his SS troops.

The Indian Legion was a &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; unit formed in August 1942 chiefly from disaffected Indian soldiers of the British Indian Army captured in the North African Campaign. In August 1944 it was transferred to the auspices of the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; as the &quot;Indische Freiwilligen-Legion der Waffen-SS&quot;. There was also a French volunteer division, &quot;SS-Charlemagne&quot;, which was formed in 1944 mainly from the remnants of the Legion of French Volunteers Against Bolshevism and French &quot;Sturmbrigade&quot;.

==Ranks and uniforms==
The SS established its own symbolism, rituals, customs, ranks, and uniforms to set itself apart from other organisations. Before 1929, the SS wore the same brown uniform as the SA, with the addition of a black tie and a black cap with a &quot;Totenkopf&quot; (death&#x27;s head) skull and bones symbol, moving to an all-black uniform in 1932. In 1935, the SS combat formations adopted a service uniform in field grey for everyday wear. The SS also developed its own field uniforms, which included reversible smocks and helmet covers printed with camouflage patterns. Uniforms were manufactured in hundreds of licensed factories, with some workers being prisoners of war performing forced labour. Many were produced in concentration camps.

Hitler and the Nazi Party understood the power of emblems and insignia to influence public opinion. The stylised lightning bolt logo of the SS was chosen in 1932. The logo is a pair of runes from a set of 18 Armanen runes created by Guido von List in 1906. It is similar to the ancient Sowilō rune, which symbolises the sun, but was renamed as &quot;Sig&quot; (victory) in List&#x27;s iconography. The &quot;Totenkopf&quot; symbolised the wearer&#x27;s willingness to fight unto the death, and also served to frighten the enemy.

==SS membership estimates 1925–1945==
After 1933 a career in the SS became increasingly attractive to Germany&#x27;s social elite, who began joining the movement in great numbers, usually motivated by political opportunism. By 1938 about one-third of the SS leadership were members of the upper middle class. The trend reversed after the first Soviet counter-offensive of 1942.

==SS offices==
By 1942 all activities of the SS were managed through twelve main offices.
* Personal Staff &quot;Reichsführer-SS&quot;
* SS Main Office (SS-HA)
* &quot;SS-Führungshauptamt&quot; (SS Main Operational Office; SS-FHA)
* Reich Security Main Office (RSHA)
* SS Main Economic and Administrative Office (WVHA)
* &quot;Ordnungspolizei Hauptamt&quot; (Main Office of the Order Police)
* SS Court Main Office
* SS Race and Settlement Main Office (RuSHA)
* SS Personnel Main Office
* &quot;Hauptamt Volksdeutsche Mittelstelle&quot; (Racial German Assistance Main Office; VOMI)
* SS Education Office
* Main Office of the Reich Commissioner for the Consolidation of German Nationhood (RKFDV)

==Austrian SS==
The term &quot;Austrian SS&quot; is often used to describe that portion of the SS membership from Austria, but it was never a recognised branch of the SS. In contrast to SS members from other countries, who were grouped into either the Germanic-SS or the Foreign Legions of the &quot;Waffen-SS&quot;, Austrian SS members were regular SS personnel. It was technically under the command of the SS in Germany but often acted independently concerning Austrian affairs. The Austrian SS was founded in 1930 and by 1934 was acting as a covert force to bring about the &quot;Anschluss&quot; with Germany, which occurred in March 1938. Early Austrian SS leaders were Kaltenbrunner and Arthur Seyss-Inquart. Austrian SS members served in every branch of the SS. Austrians constituted 8 per cent of Nazi Germany&#x27;s population and 13 per cent of the SS; 40 per cent of the staff and 75 per cent of commanders at death camps were Austrian.

After the &quot;Anschluss&quot;, the Austrian SS was folded into &quot;SS-Oberabschnitt Donau&quot;. The third regiment of the &quot;SS-Verfügungstruppe&quot; (&quot;Der Führer&quot;) and the fourth &quot;Totenkopf&quot; regiment (&quot;Ostmark&quot;) were recruited in Austria shortly thereafter. On Heydrich&#x27;s orders, mass arrests of potential enemies of the Reich began immediately after the &quot;Anschluss&quot;. Mauthausen was the first concentration camp opened in Austria following the &quot;Anschluss&quot;. Before the invasion of the Soviet Union, Mauthausen was the harshest of the camps in the Greater German Reich.

The Hotel Metropole was transformed into the headquarters for the Gestapo in Vienna in April 1938. With a staff of 900 (80 per cent of whom were recruited from the Austrian police), it was the largest Gestapo office outside Berlin. An estimated 50,000 people were interrogated or tortured there. The Gestapo in Vienna was headed by Franz Josef Huber, who also served as chief of the Central Agency for Jewish Emigration in Vienna. Although its de facto leaders were Adolf Eichmann and later Alois Brunner, Huber was nevertheless responsible for the mass deportation of Austrian Jews.

==Post-war activity and aftermath==
Following Nazi Germany&#x27;s collapse, the SS ceased to exist. Numerous members of the SS, many of them still committed Nazis, remained at large in Germany and across Europe. On 21 May 1945, the British captured Himmler, who was in disguise and carrying a fraudulent passport. At an internment camp near Lüneburg, he committed suicide by biting down on a cyanide capsule. Several other leading members of the SS fled, but some were quickly captured. Ernst Kaltenbrunner, chief of the RSHA and the highest-ranking surviving SS main department chief upon Himmler&#x27;s suicide, was captured and arrested in the Bavarian Alps. He was among the 22 defendants put on trial at the International Military Tribunal in 1945–46.

Some SS members were subject to summary execution, torture, and beatings at the hands of freed prisoners, displaced persons, or Allied soldiers. American soldiers of the 157th Regiment, who entered the concentration camp at Dachau in April 1945 and viewed the acts committed by the SS, shot some of the remaining SS camp guards. On 15 April 1945, British troops entered Bergen-Belsen. They placed the SS guards on starvation rations, made them work without breaks, forced them to deal with the remaining corpses, and stabbed them with bayonets or struck them with their rifle butts if they slowed their pace. Some members of the US Army Counter Intelligence Corps delivered captured SS camp guards to displaced person camps, where they knew they would be subject to summary execution.

===International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg===
The Allies commenced legal proceedings against captured Nazis, establishing the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg in 1945. The first war crimes trial of 24 prominent figures such as Göring, Albert Speer, Joachim von Ribbentrop, Alfred Rosenberg, Hans Frank, and Kaltenbrunner took place beginning in November 1945. They were accused of four counts: conspiracy, waging a war of aggression, war crimes, and crimes against humanity in violation of international law. Twelve received the death penalty, including Kaltenbrunner, who was convicted of crimes against humanity and executed on 16 October 1946. The former commandant at Auschwitz, Rudolf Höss, who testified on behalf of Kaltenbrunner and others, was tried and executed in 1947.

Additional SS trials and convictions followed. Many defendants attempted to exculpate themselves using the excuse that they were merely following superior orders, which they had to obey unconditionally as part of their sworn oath and duty. The courts did not find this to be a legitimate defence. A trial of 40 SS officers and guards from Auschwitz took place in Kraków in November 1947. Most were found guilty, and 23 received the death penalty. The twelve subsequent Nuremberg trials took place in 1946–1949; also, an estimated 37,000 members of the SS were tried and convicted in Soviet courts. Sentences included hangings and long terms of hard labour. Piotr Cywiński, director of the Auschwitz-Birkenau Museum, estimates that of the 70,000 members of the SS involved in crimes in concentration camps, only about 1,650 to 1,700 were tried after the war. The International Military Tribunal declared the SS a criminal organisation in 1946.

===Escapes===
After the war, many former Nazis fled to South America, especially to Argentina, where they were welcomed by Juan Perón&#x27;s regime. In the 1950s, former Dachau inmate Lothar Hermann discovered that Buenos Aires resident Ricardo Klement was, in fact, Adolf Eichmann, who had in 1948 obtained false identification and a landing permit for Argentina through an organisation directed by Bishop Alois Hudal, an Austrian cleric with Nazi sympathies, then residing in Italy. Eichmann was captured in Buenos Aires on 11 May 1960 by Mossad, the Israeli intelligence agency. At his trial in Jerusalem in 1961, he was found guilty and sentenced to death by hanging. Eichmann was quoted as having stated, &quot;I will jump into my grave laughing because the fact that I have the death of five million Jews [or Reich enemies, as he later claimed to have said] on my conscience gives me extraordinary satisfaction.&quot; Franz Stangl, the commandant of Treblinka, also escaped to South America with the assistance of Hudal&#x27;s network. He was deported to Germany in 1967 and was sentenced to life in prison in 1970. He died in 1971.

Mengele, worried that his capture would mean a death sentence, fled Germany on 17 April 1949. Assisted by a network of former SS members, he travelled to Genoa, where he obtained a passport under the alias &quot;Helmut Gregor&quot; from the International Committee of the Red Cross. He sailed to Argentina in July. Aware that he was still a wanted man, he moved to Paraguay in 1958 and Brazil in 1960. In both instances he was assisted by former &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; pilot Hans-Ulrich Rudel. Mengele suffered a stroke while swimming and drowned in 1979.

Thousands of Nazis, including former SS members such as Trawniki guard Jakob Reimer and Circassian collaborator Tscherim Soobzokov, fled to the United States under the guise of refugees, sometimes using forged documents. Other SS men, such as Soobzokov, SD officer Wilhelm Höttl, Eichmann aide Otto von Bolschwing, and accused war criminal Theodor Saevecke, were employed by American intelligence agencies against the Soviets. As CIA officer Harry Rositzke noted, &quot;It was a visceral business of using any bastard so long as he was anti-Communist... The eagerness or desire to enlist collaborators means that sure, you didn&#x27;t look at their credentials too closely.&quot; Similarly, the Soviets used SS personnel after the war; Operation Theo, for instance, disseminated &quot;subversive rumours&quot; in Allied-occupied Germany.

Simon Wiesenthal and others have speculated about the existence of a Nazi fugitive network code-named ODESSA (an acronym for &quot;Organisation der ehemaligen SS-Angehörigen&quot;, Organisation of former SS members) that allegedly helped war criminals find refuge in Latin America. British writer Gitta Sereny, who conducted interviews with SS men, considers the story untrue and attributes the escapes to postwar chaos and Hudal&#x27;s Vatican-based network. While the existence of ODESSA remains unproven, Sereny notes that &quot;there certainly were various kinds of Nazi aid organisations after the war — it would have been astonishing if there hadn&#x27;t been.&quot;

==See also==
* Germanic SS
* Glossary of Nazi Germany
* HIAG
* List of SS personnel
* List of &quot;Waffen-SS&quot; divisions
* Myth of the clean &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;

==Informational notes==
==Citations==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 


==External links==
* Judgment of Nuremberg Trials on the SS
* SS at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
* Testimonies concerning SS crimes in occupied Poland in &quot;Chronicles of Terror&quot; testimony database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="23" end="25" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q320451" start="41" end="59" title="Esoteric insignia of the Schutzstaffel" label="with Armanen runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="79" end="91" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="111" end="123" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="132" end="142" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="146" end="158" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="181" end="203" title="German-occupied Europe" label="German-occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="211" end="223" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="394" end="400" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="411" end="427" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="590" end="605" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="804" end="821" title="mass surveillance" label="mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q623179" start="827" end="842" title="state terrorism" label="state terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q291031" start="934" end="947" title="Allgemeine SS" label="Allgemeine SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="977" end="986" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912661" start="1069" end="1098" title="racial policy of Nazi Germany" label="racial policy of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q312204" start="1270" end="1290" title="SS-Totenkopfverbände" label="SS-Totenkopfverbände"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060098" start="1311" end="1328" title="Totenkopf" label="Death&amp;#x27;s Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="1351" end="1370" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="1375" end="1393" title="extermination camp" label="extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="1443" end="1450" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="1465" end="1482" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="Sicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="1684" end="1697" title="Nazism" label="Nazi ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883980" start="1822" end="1886" title="Holocaust victims" label="an estimated 5.5 to 6 million Jews and millions of other victims"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1894" end="1907" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="1950" end="1959" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="1965" end="1988" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="2075" end="2127" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="exploited concentration camp inmates as slave labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="2208" end="2239" title="Nuremberg trials" label="International Military Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q78473" start="2283" end="2302" title="Ernst Kaltenbrunner" label="Ernst Kaltenbrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="2502" end="2512" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2520" end="2532" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="2668" end="2674" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="2890" end="2904" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Sturmabteilung"/>
<link wikidata="Q58046" start="3105" end="3119" title="Julius Schreck" label="Julius Schreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q60449" start="3124" end="3140" title="Joseph Berchtold" label="Joseph Berchtold"/>
<link wikidata="Q658327" start="3169" end="3190" title="Marinebrigade Ehrhardt" label="Erhardt Naval Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q156611" start="3200" end="3209" title="Freikorps" label="Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16607081" start="3250" end="3271" title="Stoßtrupp-Hitler" label="&amp;quot;Stoßtrupp&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="3363" end="3379" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Beer Hall Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60222" start="4618" end="4631" title="Erhard Heiden" label="Erhard Heiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="5089" end="5105" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056405" start="5225" end="5233" title="List of Gauleiters" label="a number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252884" start="5237" end="5253" title="Gau (territory)" label="&amp;quot;Gaue&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="5968" end="5984" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="5990" end="5997" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="6003" end="6019" title="Samurai" label="Japanese Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q702882" start="6245" end="6256" title="SS Main Office" label="SS-Hauptamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484212" start="6791" end="6800" title="Stabschef" label="Stabschef"/>
<link wikidata="Q459760" start="7783" end="7798" title="SS-Junker Schools" label="SS-Junkerschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q280491" start="8154" end="8162" title="Bad Tölz" label="Bad Tölz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="8167" end="8179" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q41753" start="8216" end="8226" title="Klagenfurt" label="Klagenfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="8231" end="8237" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912661" start="8348" end="8377" title="racial policy of Nazi Germany" label="racial policy of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8447" end="8461" title="Aryan race#Nazism" label="Aryan ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="8686" end="8700" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002560" start="9508" end="9516" title="Esoteric Nazism" label="Esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720521" start="9753" end="9773" title="Christmas in Nazi Germany" label="solstice celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q637827" start="10023" end="10033" title="Wewelsburg" label="Wewelsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8614" start="10047" end="10057" title="Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q552076" start="10858" end="10880" title="Meine Ehre heißt Treue" label="Meine Ehre heißt Treue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="11020" end="11024" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583015" start="11143" end="11150" title="Jewish ghettos established by Nazi Germany" label="ghettos"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="11238" end="11252" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186609" start="11344" end="11352" title="democide" label="democide"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="11477" end="11482" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="11582" end="11588" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q701673" start="11651" end="11663" title="Nazi eugenics" label="race hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="12066" end="12090" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="12092" end="12102" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="12104" end="12114" title="Communism" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="12120" end="12131" title="Rotary International" label="Rotary Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="12185" end="12201" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="12675" end="12683" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q217405" start="12733" end="12745" title="police state" label="police state"/>
<link wikidata="Q621709" start="12895" end="12924" title="Minister President of Prussia" label="Minister President of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="12926" end="12940" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="12972" end="12985" title="secret police" label="secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="13034" end="13041" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q60940" start="13057" end="13069" title="Rudolf Diels" label="Rudolf Diels"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="13480" end="13497" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="13582" end="13599" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="Sicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q130783" start="13691" end="13715" title="Night of the Long Knives" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820253" start="14170" end="14183" title="Generalfeldmarschall" label="field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154633" start="14225" end="14242" title="Obergruppenführer" label="Obergruppenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q684093" start="14639" end="14654" title="Kriminalpolizei" label="Kriminalpolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q160552" start="14711" end="14726" title="Ordnungspolizei" label="Ordnungspolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q76887" start="14855" end="14868" title="Wilhelm Frick" label="Wilhelm Frick"/>
<link wikidata="Q684065" start="15092" end="15110" title="Sicherheitspolizei" label="Sicherheitspolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="15195" end="15221" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reich Security Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="15323" end="15336" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q655130" start="16578" end="16598" title="SS and police leader" label="SS and police leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q19007787" start="16626" end="16639" title="Gruppenführer" label="Gruppenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312204" start="16942" end="16962" title="SS-Totenkopfverbände" label="SS-Totenkopfverbände"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596596" start="17322" end="17338" title="1st SS-Standarte" label="1st SS-Standarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="17424" end="17445" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q57175" start="17447" end="17460" title="Sepp Dietrich" label="Sepp Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q156970" start="17721" end="17750" title="1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler" label="Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q698208" start="17959" end="17976" title="Reich Chancellery" label="Reich Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q163181" start="18079" end="18086" title="Berghof (residence)" label="Berghof"/>
<link wikidata="Q284309" start="18119" end="18131" title="Obersalzberg" label="Obersalzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q819575" start="18596" end="18607" title="Brown House, Munich" label="Brown House"/>
<link wikidata="Q669111" start="18844" end="18874" title="SS-Begleitkommando des Führers" label="SS-Begleitkommando des Führers"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="19568" end="19575" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q699687" start="19720" end="19743" title="Reichssicherheitsdienst" label="Reichssicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q61498" start="19796" end="19814" title="Johann Rattenhuber" label="Johann Rattenhuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q157476" start="20570" end="20580" title="Oberführer" label="Oberführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65098" start="20587" end="20600" title="Theodor Eicke" label="Theodor Eicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054507" start="20604" end="20614" title="commandant" label="commandant"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="20618" end="20643" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="22352" end="22361" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q661889" start="22408" end="22427" title="SS-Verfügungstruppe" label="SS-Verfügungstruppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="22543" end="22552" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="22619" end="22623" title="German Army (1935–1945)" label="Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="23321" end="23339" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q608376" start="23591" end="23597" title="Błonie" label="Błonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q249059" start="23680" end="23687" title="Złoczew" label="Złoczew"/>
<link wikidata="Q156828" start="23718" end="23729" title="Bolesławiec" label="Bolesławiec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827514" start="23731" end="23740" title="Torzeniec" label="Torzeniec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590116" start="23742" end="23750" title="Goworowo, Płońsk County" label="Goworowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q983868" start="23752" end="23757" title="Mława" label="Mława"/>
<link wikidata="Q106681" start="23763" end="23772" title="Włocławek" label="Włocławek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12789691" start="23969" end="23982" title="Generaloberst" label="Generaloberst"/>
<link wikidata="Q70534" start="23989" end="24003" title="Fedor von Bock" label="Fedor von Bock"/>
<link wikidata="Q702638" start="24491" end="24511" title="Operation Tannenberg" label="Operation Tannenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q286474" start="24516" end="24525" title="German AB-Aktion in Poland" label="AB-Aktion"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="24640" end="24654" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="24878" end="24892" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="25350" end="25356" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q160133" start="25793" end="25815" title="2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich" label="SS-Verfügungs-Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q163809" start="25941" end="25963" title="4th SS Polizei Panzergrenadier Division" label="&amp;quot;SS-Polizei&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q60087" start="26235" end="26245" title="Hans Frank" label="Hans Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="26347" end="26363" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="26406" end="26419" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649081" start="26543" end="26561" title="German invasion of the Netherlands" label="of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="26844" end="26852" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="26867" end="26872" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009153" start="26976" end="26988" title="Generalmajor" label="Generalmajor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="26995" end="27007" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q260811" start="27015" end="27034" title="7th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="7th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="27063" end="27078" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="27289" end="27296" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q641064" start="27361" end="27380" title="Le Paradis massacre" label="Le Paradis massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374594" start="27417" end="27439" title="Royal Norfolk Regiment" label="Royal Norfolk Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q173366" start="27513" end="27520" title="bayonet" label="bayonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q670807" start="27594" end="27602" title="Wormhout" label="Wormhout"/>
<link wikidata="Q541107" start="27680" end="27698" title="Wormhoudt massacre" label="Wormhoudt massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q156170" start="28737" end="28746" title="5th SS Panzer Division Wiking" label="SS-Wiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q160133" start="28888" end="28932" title="2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich" label="2nd SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Das Reich&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q590507" start="28968" end="28983" title="Panzergrenadier" label="Panzergrenadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="29070" end="29088" title="Invasion of Yugoslavia" label="invaded Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="29093" end="29099" title="German invasion of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995579" start="29168" end="29180" title="Panzer corps" label="Panzer corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753412" start="29182" end="29199" title="Fritz Klingenberg" label="Fritz Klingenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="29306" end="29314" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="29770" end="29777" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q375916" start="29794" end="29803" title="Judenfrei" label="Judenfrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="29922" end="29949" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="29964" end="29974" title="Hellenic Army" label="Greek Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="30153" end="30158" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="30412" end="30440" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="30488" end="30499" title="gas chamber" label="gas chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="30632" end="30652" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="30674" end="30686" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923573" start="31147" end="31165" title="SS Cavalry Brigade" label="SS Cavalry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="31245" end="31261" title="Soviet partisans" label="Soviet partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q152120" start="32040" end="32058" title="Wannsee Conference" label="Wannsee Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q157873" start="32692" end="32715" title="Third Battle of Kharkov" label="Third Battle of Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="32909" end="32922" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q163084" start="33137" end="33154" title="Army Group North" label="Army Groups North"/>
<link wikidata="Q158260" start="33156" end="33162" title="Army Group Centre" label="Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q266893" start="33168" end="33173" title="Army Group South" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q155434" start="33223" end="33232" title="11th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="11th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q686683" start="33345" end="33359" title="Richard Rhodes" label="Richard Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="34672" end="34677" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q152982" start="34884" end="34892" title="Gas van" label="gas vans"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="35873" end="35883" title="Propaganda in Nazi Germany" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377800" start="35942" end="35958" title="Bandenbekämpfung" label="Bandenbekämpfung"/>
<link wikidata="Q57267" start="36137" end="36164" title="Erich von dem Bach-Zelewski" label="Erich von dem Bach-Zelewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="37716" end="37734" title="extermination camp" label="extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q158044" start="37816" end="37834" title="Operation Reinhard" label="Operation Reinhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q160143" start="37976" end="37982" title="Belzec extermination camp" label="Bełżec"/>
<link wikidata="Q152658" start="38012" end="38019" title="Sobibor extermination camp" label="Sobibór"/>
<link wikidata="Q152010" start="38051" end="38060" title="Treblinka extermination camp" label="Treblinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12162151" start="38104" end="38116" title="Trawniki men" label="Trawniki men"/>
<link wikidata="Q311773" start="38179" end="38193" title="Sonderkommando" label="Sonderkommando"/>
<link wikidata="Q152409" start="38488" end="38496" title="Zyklon B" label="Zyklon B"/>
<link wikidata="Q218737" start="38749" end="38791" title="SS Main Economic and Administrative Office" label="SS Main Economic and Administrative Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q57679" start="38805" end="38816" title="Oswald Pohl" label="Oswald Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q62642" start="38818" end="38832" title="Richard Glücks" label="Richard Glücks"/>
<link wikidata="Q276752" start="38847" end="38879" title="Concentration Camps Inspectorate" label="Inspector of Concentration Camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="39342" end="39355" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="39913" end="39936" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q463980" start="40148" end="40164" title="Allach (porcelain)" label="Allach Porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266305" start="40740" end="40773" title="Deutsche Wirtschaftsbetriebe" label="Deutsche Wirtschaftsbetriebe GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q160268" start="41284" end="41295" title="Gross-Rosen concentration camp" label="Gross-Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q639319" start="41297" end="41316" title="Natzweiler-Struthof concentration camp" label="Natzweiler-Struthof"/>
<link wikidata="Q312478" start="41322" end="41332" title="Neuengamme concentration camp" label="Neuengamme"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="41482" end="41491" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q700356" start="41546" end="41568" title="Monowitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz III–Monowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q321194" start="41921" end="41949" title="extermination through labour" label="extermination through labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="42301" end="42312" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q318003" start="42553" end="42581" title="German Earth and Stone Works" label="Deutsche Erd- und Steinwerke"/>
<link wikidata="Q155009" start="43248" end="43258" title="Reichsmark" label="Reichsmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820702" start="43455" end="43486" title="August Frank memorandum" label="selling their hair to make felt"/>
<link wikidata="Q84441" start="43674" end="43689" title="Odilo Globocnik" label="Odilo Globocnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="44244" end="44259" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Battle of Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159" start="44300" end="44305" title="Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="44634" end="44642" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="44829" end="44854" title="Italian campaign (World War II)" label="Allied assault into Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q572676" start="44943" end="44953" title="St Nazaire Raid" label="St Nazaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="44958" end="44964" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="45042" end="45055" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="45655" end="45670" title="Southern France" label="Southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q158277" start="45786" end="45801" title="12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend" label="SS-Hitlerjugend"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="45843" end="45855" title="Hitler Youth" label="Hitler Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q158950" start="45909" end="45912" title="Non-commissioned officer" label="NCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="46100" end="46117" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q213379" start="46159" end="46179" title="21st Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="21st Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q16009153" start="46192" end="46204" title="Generalmajor" label="Generalmajor"/>
<link wikidata="Q64323" start="46211" end="46228" title="Edgar Feuchtinger" label="Edgar Feuchtinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="46250" end="46254" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q745798" start="46346" end="46357" title="assault gun" label="assault gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100519" start="46416" end="46431" title="Generalleutnant" label="Generalleutnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429393" start="46472" end="46502" title="716th Static Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="716th Static Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="46676" end="46679" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="OKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q659526" start="46905" end="46909" title="Orne (river)" label="Orne"/>
<link wikidata="Q696823" start="47074" end="47089" title="Battle for Caen" label="Battle for Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22947455" start="47229" end="47251" title="Ardenne Abbey massacre" label="Ardenne Abbey massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q698220" start="47373" end="47390" title="Operation Lüttich" label="Operation Lüttich"/>
<link wikidata="Q220684" start="47397" end="47401" title="Vire" label="Vire"/>
<link wikidata="Q204430" start="47410" end="47419" title="Avranches" label="Avranches"/>
<link wikidata="Q210387" start="47474" end="47477" title="2nd Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q170787" start="47483" end="47505" title="116th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="116th Panzer Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q197622" start="47554" end="47620" title="17th SS Panzergrenadier Division Götz von Berlichingen" label="17th SS Panzergrenadier Division &amp;quot;Götz von Berlichingen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q161218" start="47627" end="47661" title="SS-Oberst-Gruppenführer" label="&amp;quot;SS-Oberstgruppenführer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q57181" start="47662" end="47674" title="Paul Hausser" label="Paul Hausser"/>
<link wikidata="Q325187" start="47721" end="47728" title="Mortain" label="Mortain"/>
<link wikidata="Q602744" start="47997" end="48011" title="Falaise pocket" label="Falaise Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q696835" start="48090" end="48109" title="Liberation of Paris" label="Paris was liberated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="48176" end="48181" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159267" start="48390" end="48396" title="9th SS Panzer Division Hohenstaufen" label="9th SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q164557" start="48401" end="48425" title="10th SS Panzer Division Frundsberg" label="10th SS Panzer Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310" start="48441" end="48447" title="Arnhem" label="Arnhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="48561" end="48584" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="48664" end="48669" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="48820" end="48839" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="48942" end="48949" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q210607" start="49413" end="49416" title="2nd Infantry Division (United States)" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q277245" start="49421" end="49444" title="99th Infantry Division (United States)" label="99th Infantry Divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q161102" start="49875" end="49894" title="Obersturmbannführer" label="Obersturmbannführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57199" start="49901" end="49915" title="Joachim Peiper" label="Joachim Peiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="50027" end="50031" title="Prisoner of war" label="POWs"/>
<link wikidata="Q162228" start="50069" end="50085" title="Malmedy massacre" label="Malmedy massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q896206" start="50178" end="50200" title="Malmedy massacre trial" label="Malmedy massacre trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="50691" end="50695" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q213230" start="50911" end="50915" title="Hron" label="Hron"/>
<link wikidata="Q700270" start="50971" end="50974" title="I SS Panzer Corps" label="1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q701700" start="50979" end="50998" title="II SS Panzer Corps" label="2nd SS Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q246340" start="51129" end="51144" title="6th Panzer Army" label="6th Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q14424" start="51181" end="51192" title="Nagykanizsa" label="Nagykanizsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q155995" start="51335" end="51361" title="Operation Spring Awakening" label="Operation Spring Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q18286261" start="51871" end="51881" title="cuff title" label="cuff title"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120832" start="52248" end="52258" title="Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="52351" end="52367" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q153491" start="52633" end="52645" title="Führerbunker" label="Führerbunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993476" start="53011" end="53035" title="Death of Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler committed suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q58030" start="53653" end="53668" title="Heinrich Müller (Gestapo)" label="Heinrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q57742" start="53762" end="53773" title="Arthur Nebe" label="Arthur Nebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57575" start="53878" end="53892" title="Otto Ohlendorf" label="Otto Ohlendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q57781" start="53897" end="53916" title="Walter Schellenberg" label="Walter Schellenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q430161" start="54410" end="54442" title="Czechoslovak government-in-exile" label="Czechoslovak government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858950" start="54465" end="54485" title="Assassination of Reinhard Heydrich" label="Operation Anthropoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q161104" start="55022" end="55037" title="Sturmbannführer" label="Sturmbannführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q85465" start="55044" end="55057" title="Wilhelm Höttl" label="Wilhelm Höttl"/>
<link wikidata="Q67997" start="55314" end="55327" title="Herbert Lange" label="Herbert Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q604251" start="55371" end="55380" title="Nowy Dwór Gdański" label="Tiegenhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="55409" end="55428" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q51012" start="55448" end="55455" title="Owińska" label="Owińska"/>
<link wikidata="Q52889" start="55475" end="55482" title="Kościan" label="Kościan"/>
<link wikidata="Q983720" start="55506" end="55515" title="Działdowo" label="Działdowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165076" start="55549" end="55557" title="Fort VII" label="Fort VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q160152" start="55719" end="55726" title="Chełmno extermination camp" label="Chełmno"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="55786" end="55806" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q645971" start="55916" end="55948" title="Sonderaktion 1005" label="&amp;quot; Sonderkommando&amp;quot; 1005"/>
<link wikidata="Q156395" start="55986" end="56002" title="Standartenführer" label="Standartenführer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57984" start="56009" end="56020" title="Paul Blobel" label="Paul Blobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28085" start="56340" end="56354" title="Adolf Eichmann" label="Adolf Eichmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059658" start="56416" end="56443" title="German invasion of Hungary (1944)" label="Axis forces invaded Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="57306" end="57320" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="57424" end="57433" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="57624" end="57640" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="58026" end="58054" title="Occupation of Czechoslovakia (1938–1945)" label="occupation of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213553" start="58328" end="58340" title="Raul Hilberg" label="Raul Hilberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q48766" start="58576" end="58584" title="Babi Yar" label="Babi Yar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="58593" end="58597" title="Kyiv" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350607" start="58686" end="58702" title="Rumbula massacre" label="Rumbula massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q698342" start="58753" end="58764" title="Riga Ghetto" label="Riga ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q561913" start="58903" end="58916" title="Drobytsky Yar" label="Drobytsky Yar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="58920" end="58927" title="Kharkiv" label="Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247084" start="59406" end="59426" title="SS Court Main Office" label="SS Court Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q69799" start="60102" end="60123" title="Karl Dietrich Bracher" label="Karl Dietrich Bracher"/>
<link wikidata="Q57676" start="60733" end="60749" title="Hermann Fegelein" label="Hermann Fegelein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245544" start="61096" end="61121" title="Pripyat Marshes massacres" label="Pripyat Marshes massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q117504" start="61191" end="61205" title="Pripet Marshes" label="Pripyat swamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923573" start="61251" end="61269" title="SS Cavalry Brigade" label="SS Cavalry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="61642" end="61658" title="Battle of Moscow" label="Battle of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q270763" start="61759" end="61808" title="8th SS Cavalry Division Florian Geyer" label="8th SS Cavalry Division &amp;quot;Florian Geyer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q57109" start="63340" end="63353" title="Josef Mengele" label="Josef Mengele"/>
<link wikidata="Q77330" start="63417" end="63430" title="Eduard Wirths" label="Eduard Wirths"/>
<link wikidata="Q160394" start="64049" end="64058" title="Ahnenerbe" label="Ahnenerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q22727" start="65417" end="65428" title="Obernai" label="Oberehnheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q157912" start="65988" end="65998" title="Volkssturm" label="Volkssturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q169945" start="66712" end="66723" title="11th SS Volunteer Panzergrenadier Division Nordland" label="SS-Nordland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215722" start="66835" end="66847" title="Volunteer Legion Netherlands" label="SS-Nederland"/>
<link wikidata="Q220658" start="66909" end="66921" title="Walloon Legion" label="SS-Wallonien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965318" start="67147" end="67157" title="Ukrainian collaboration with Nazi Germany" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q160776" start="67159" end="67168" title="21st Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Skanderbeg" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="67174" end="67180" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="67306" end="67319" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164745" start="67475" end="67491" title="Amin al-Husseini" label="Amin al-Husseini"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="67659" end="67674" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosnian Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q141482" start="67686" end="67698" title="13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar (1st Croatian)" label="SS-Handschar"/>
<link wikidata="Q58473" start="67727" end="67758" title="occupation of the Baltic states" label="occupation of the Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="67819" end="67825" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="67831" end="67838" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741063" start="67873" end="67888" title="Estonian Legion" label="Estonian Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q706802" start="68373" end="68386" title="Indian Legion" label="Indian Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="68490" end="68509" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="68526" end="68548" title="North African campaign" label="North African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q225723" start="68742" end="68756" title="33rd Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Charlemagne" label="SS-Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q568676" start="68821" end="68867" title="Legion of French Volunteers Against Bolshevism" label="Legion of French Volunteers Against Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060098" start="69172" end="69181" title="Totenkopf" label="Totenkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="69475" end="69485" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q9298753" start="69877" end="69890" title="Armanen runes" label="Armanen runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q94040" start="69902" end="69916" title="Guido von List" label="Guido von List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398029" start="69955" end="69961" title="Sowilō (rune)" label="Sowilō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751085" start="70488" end="70506" title="upper middle class" label="upper middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q211417" start="70670" end="70712" title="Personal Staff Reichsführer-SS" label="Personal Staff &amp;quot;Reichsführer-SS&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q702882" start="70715" end="70729" title="SS Main Office" label="SS Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574127" start="70746" end="70765" title="SS Führungshauptamt" label="SS-Führungshauptamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="70811" end="70837" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reich Security Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q218737" start="70847" end="70889" title="SS Main Economic and Administrative Office" label="SS Main Economic and Administrative Office"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70905" end="70929" title="Ordnungspolizei#Organization" label="Ordnungspolizei Hauptamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247084" start="70972" end="70992" title="SS Court Main Office" label="SS Court Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q606806" start="70995" end="71029" title="SS Race and Settlement Main Office" label="SS Race and Settlement Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q249540" start="71040" end="71064" title="SS Personnel Main Office" label="SS Personnel Main Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q701763" start="71073" end="71108" title="Volksdeutsche Mittelstelle" label="Hauptamt Volksdeutsche Mittelstelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24964728" start="71162" end="71181" title="SS Education Office" label="SS Education Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q549610" start="71203" end="71264" title="Reich Commissioner for the Consolidation of German Nationhood" label="Reich Commissioner for the Consolidation of German Nationhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q650219" start="71966" end="71986" title="Arthur Seyss-Inquart" label="Arthur Seyss-Inquart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825494" start="72293" end="72315" title="Austrian SS" label="SS-Oberabschnitt Donau"/>
<link wikidata="Q160139" start="72645" end="72655" title="Mauthausen concentration camp" label="Mauthausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630962" start="72860" end="72875" title="Hotel Metropole, Vienna" label="Hotel Metropole"/>
<link wikidata="Q72774" start="73188" end="73205" title="Franz Josef Huber" label="Franz Josef Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q190814" start="73239" end="73285" title="Central Agency for Jewish Emigration in Vienna" label="Central Agency for Jewish Emigration in Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q84335" start="73347" end="73360" title="Alois Brunner" label="Alois Brunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920" start="73782" end="73790" title="Lüneburg" label="Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q78473" start="73928" end="73947" title="Ernst Kaltenbrunner" label="Ernst Kaltenbrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411906" start="74088" end="74101" title="Bavarian Alps" label="Bavarian Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="74154" end="74185" title="Nuremberg trials" label="International Military Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="74231" end="74248" title="summary execution" label="summary execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q707038" start="74485" end="74526" title="Dachau liberation reprisals" label="shot some of the remaining SS camp guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137074" start="74828" end="74862" title="Counterintelligence Corps" label="US Army Counter Intelligence Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154868" start="74900" end="74922" title="Displaced persons camps in post–World War II Europe" label="displaced person camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="75180" end="75190" title="war crimes" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="75237" end="75249" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="75251" end="75273" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q75849" start="75275" end="75291" title="Alfred Rosenberg" label="Alfred Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q76975" start="75685" end="75696" title="Rudolf Höss" label="Rudolf Höss"/>
<link wikidata="Q153817" start="75930" end="75945" title="superior orders" label="superior orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858302" start="76003" end="76013" title="Oaths to Hitler" label="sworn oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070370" start="76242" end="76269" title="subsequent Nuremberg trials" label="subsequent Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q922196" start="76441" end="76455" title="Piotr Cywiński" label="Piotr Cywiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="76851" end="76861" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="76943" end="76955" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q94526" start="77135" end="77146" title="Alois Hudal" label="Alois Hudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="77269" end="77275" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q78931" start="77652" end="77664" title="Franz Stangl" label="Franz Stangl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="78022" end="78027" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987345" start="78109" end="78149" title="International Committee of the Red Cross" label="International Committee of the Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="78320" end="78329" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57131" start="78342" end="78359" title="Hans-Ulrich Rudel" label="Hans-Ulrich Rudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125338" start="78495" end="78507" title="Jakob Reimer" label="Jakob Reimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849459" start="78536" end="78554" title="Tscherim Soobzokov" label="Tscherim Soobzokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q85465" start="78689" end="78702" title="Wilhelm Höttl" label="Wilhelm Höttl"/>
<link wikidata="Q868876" start="78718" end="78737" title="Otto von Bolschwing" label="Otto von Bolschwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q84672" start="78764" end="78780" title="Theo Saevecke" label="Theodor Saevecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="78854" end="78857" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q49086" start="79263" end="79279" title="Simon Wiesenthal" label="Simon Wiesenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159658" start="79365" end="79371" title="ODESSA" label="ODESSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="79530" end="79543" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q213690" start="79560" end="79572" title="Gitta Sereny" label="Gitta Sereny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108401" start="79952" end="79963" title="Germanic SS" label="Germanic SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q682540" start="79966" end="79990" title="Glossary of Nazi Germany" label="Glossary of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q703256" start="79993" end="79997" title="HIAG" label="HIAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q928021" start="80000" end="80020" title="List of SS personnel" label="List of SS personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q712891" start="80023" end="80062" title="List of Waffen-SS divisions" label="List of &amp;quot;Waffen-SS&amp;quot; divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q973290" start="80065" end="80104" title="Myth of the clean Wehrmacht" label="Myth of the clean &amp;quot;Wehrmacht&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q238990" start="80469" end="80508" title="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum" label="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27045" wikidata="Q2296283" url="?curid=27045" title="New Wave (science fiction)">
<text>The New Wave was a science fiction style of the 1960s and 1970s, characterized by a great degree of experimentation with the form and content of stories, greater imitation of the styles of non-science fiction literature, and an emphasis on the psychological and social sciences as opposed to the physical sciences. New Wave authors often considered themselves as part of the modernist tradition of fiction, and the New Wave was conceived as a deliberate change from the traditions of the science fiction characteristic of pulp magazines, which many of the writers involved considered irrelevant or unambitious.

The most prominent source of New Wave science fiction was the British magazine &quot;New Worlds&quot;, edited by Michael Moorcock, who became editor during 1964. In the United States, Harlan Ellison&#x27;s 1967 anthology &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot; is often considered as the best early representation of the genre. Worldwide, Ursula K. Le Guin, Stanisław Lem, J. G. Ballard, Samuel R. Delany, Roger Zelazny, Joanna Russ, James Tiptree Jr. (a pseudonym of Alice Bradley Sheldon), Thomas M. Disch and Brian Aldiss were also major writers associated with the style.

The New Wave was influenced by postmodernism, surrealism, the politics of the 1960s, such as the controversy concerning the Vietnam War, and by social trends such as the drug subculture, sexual liberation, and environmentalism. Although the New Wave was critiqued for the self-absorption of some of its writers, it was influential in the development of subsequent genres, primarily cyberpunk and slipstream. 

== Origins and use of the term ==

=== Origins ===
The phrase &quot;New Wave&quot; was used generally for new artistic fashions during the 1960s, imitating the term &quot;nouvelle vague&quot; used for certain French cinematic styles. P. Schuyler Miller, the regular book reviewer of &quot;Analog Science Fiction and Fact&quot;, first used it in the November 1961 issue to describe a new generation of British authors: &quot;It&#x27;s a moot question whether Carnell discovered the ‘big names’ of British science fiction—Wyndham, Clarke, Russell, Christopher—or whether they discovered him. Whatever the answer, there is no question at all about the ‘new wave’: Tubb, Aldiss, and to get to my point, Kenneth Bulmer and John Brunner&quot;.

=== Subsequent usage ===
The term &#x27;New Wave&#x27; has been incorporated into the concept of New Wave Fabulism, a form of magic realism &quot;which often blend a realist or postmodern aesthetic with nonrealistic interruptions, in which alternative technologies, ontologies, social structures, or biological forms make their way in to otherwise realistic plots&quot;.:76 New Wave Fabulism itself has been related to the slipstream literary genre, an interface between mainstream or postmodern fiction and science fiction.

The concept of a &#x27;new wave&#x27; has been applied to science fiction in other countries, including for some Arabic science fiction, with Ahmed Khaled Tawfik&#x27;s best-selling novel &quot;Utopia&quot; being considered a prominent example, and Chinese science fiction, where it has been applied to some of the work of Wang Jinkang and Liu Cixin, including Liu&#x27;s &quot;Remembrance of Earth&#x27;s Past&quot; trilogy (2006–2010), works that emphasize China&#x27;s increase of power, the development myth, and posthumanity.

== Description ==
The early proponents of New Wave considered it as a major change from with the genre&#x27;s past, and it was so experienced by many readers during the late 1960s and early 1970s. New Wave writers often considered themselves as part of the modernist and then postmodernist traditions and sometimes mocked the traditions of older science fiction, which many of them regarded as stodgy, adolescent and badly written. Many also rejected the content of the Golden Age of Science Fiction, emphasizing not on outer space but human psychology, that is, subjectivity, dreams, and the unconscious. Nonetheless, during the New Wave period, traditional types of science fiction continued to appear, and in Rob Latham&#x27;s opinion, the broader genre had absorbed the New Wave&#x27;s agenda and mostly neutralized it by the conclusion of the 1970s.

=== Format ===
The New Wave coincided with a major change in the production and distribution of science fiction, as the pulp magazine era was replaced by the book market; it was in a sense also a reaction against typical pulp magazine styles.

=== Topics ===
The New Wave interacted with a number of themes during the 1960s and 1970s, including sexuality; drug culture, especially the work of William S. Burroughs and the use of psychedelic drugs; and the popularity of environmentalism. J. G. Ballard&#x27;s themes included alienation, social isolation, class discrimination, and the end of civilization, in settings ranging from a single apartment block (&quot;High Rise&quot;) to entire worlds. Rob Latham noted that several of J. G. Ballard&#x27;s works of the 1960s (e.g., the quartet begun by &quot;The Wind from Nowhere&quot; [1960]), engaged with the concept of eco-catastrophe, as did Disch&#x27;s &quot;The Genocides&quot; and Ursula K. Le Guin&#x27;s short novel &quot;The Word for World Is Forest&quot;. The latter, with its description of the use of napalm on indigenous people, was also influenced by Le Guin&#x27;s perceptions of the Vietnam War, and both emphasized anti-technocratic fatalism instead of imperial hegemony via technology, with the New Wave later interacting with feminism, ecological activism and postcolonial rhetoric. A major concern of the New Wave was a fascination with entropy, i.e., that the world (and the universe) must tend to disorder, eventually resulting in &quot;heat death&quot;. The New Wave also engaged with utopia, a common theme of science fiction, offering more nuanced interpretations.:74–80

=== Style ===
Transformation of style was part of the basis of the New Wave fashion.:286 Combined with controversial topics, it introduced innovations of form, style, and aesthetics, involving more literary ambitions and experimental use of language, with significantly less emphasis on physical science or technological themes in its content. For example, in the story &quot;A Rose for Ecclesiastes&quot; (1963), Roger Zelazny introduces numerous literary allusions, complex onomastic patterns, multiple meanings, and innovative themes, and other Zelazny works, such as &quot;The Doors of His Face, the Lamps of His Mouth&quot; (1965) and &quot;He Who Shapes&quot; (1966) involve literary self-reflexivity, playful collocations, and neologisms. In stories like &quot;Repent, Harlequin!&quot; Said the Ticktockman, Harlan Ellison is considered as using gonzo-style syntax. Many New Wave authors used obscenity and vulgarity intensely or frequently. Concerning visual aspects, some scenes of J. G. Ballard&#x27;s novels reference the surrealist paintings of Max Ernst and Salvador Dalí.

=== Differences between American and British New Waves ===
The British and American New Wave trends overlapped but were somewhat different. Judith Merril noted that New Wave SF was being called &quot;the New Thing&quot;. In a 1967 article for &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction&quot; she contrasted the SF New Wave of England and the United States, writing:

They call it the New Thing. The people who call it that mostly don&#x27;t like it, and the only general agreements they seem to have are that Ballard is its Demon and I am its prophetess—and that it is what is wrong with Tom Disch, and with British s-f in general... The American counterpart is less cohesive as a &quot;school&quot; or &quot;movement&quot;: it has had no single publication in which to concentrate its development, and was, in fact, till recently, all but excluded from the regular s-f magazines. But for the same reasons, it is more diffuse and perhaps more widespread.:105

The science fiction academic Edward James also discussed differences between the British and American SF New Wave. He believed that the former was, due to J. G. Ballard and Michael Moorcock, associated mainly with a specific magazine with a set programme that had little subsequent influence. James noted additionally that even the London-based American writers of the time, such as Samuel R. Delany, Thomas M. Disch, and John Sladek, had their own agendas. James asserted the American New Wave did not reach the status of a &quot;movement&quot; but was rather a concordance of talent that introduced new ideas and better standards to the authoring of science fiction, including through the first three seasons of &quot;Star Trek&quot;. In his opinion, &quot;...the American New Wave ushered in a great expansion of the field and of its readership... it is clear that the rise in literary and imaginative standards associated with the late 1960s contributed a great deal to some of the most original writers of the 1970s, including John Crowley, Joe Haldeman, Ursula K. Le Guin, James Tiptree, Jr., and John Varley.&quot;

== History ==
===Influences and predecessors===
Though the New Wave began during the 1960s, some of its tenets can be found in H. L. Gold&#x27;s editorship of &quot;Galaxy&quot;, which began publication in 1950. James Gunn described Gold&#x27;s emphasis as being &quot;not on the adventurer, the inventor, the engineer, or the scientist, but on the average citizen,&quot; and according to SF historian David Kyle, Gold&#x27;s work would result in the New Wave.:119-120

The New Wave was partly a rejection of the Golden Age of Science Fiction. Algis Budrys in 1965 wrote of the &quot;recurrent strain in &#x27;Golden Age&#x27; science fiction of the 1940s—- the implication that sheer technological accomplishment would solve all the problems, hooray, and that all the problems were what they seemed to be on the surface&quot;. The New Wave was not defined as a development from the science fiction which came before it, but initially reacted against it. New Wave writers did not operate as an organized group, but some of them felt the tropes of the pulp magazine and Golden Age periods had become over-used, and should be abandoned: J. G. Ballard stated in 1962 that &quot;science fiction should turn its back on space, on interstellar travel, extra-terrestrial life forms, (and) galactic wars&quot;, and Brian Aldiss said in &quot;Trillion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction&quot; that &quot;the props of SF are few: rocket ships, telepathy, robots, time travel...like coins, they become debased by over-circulation.&quot; Harry Harrison summarised the period by saying &quot;old barriers were coming down, pulp taboos were being forgotten, new themes and new manners of writing were being explored&quot;.

New Wave writers began to use non-science fiction literary themes, such as the example of beat writer William S. Burroughs—New Wave authors Philip José Farmer and Barrington J. Bayley wrote pastiches of his work (&quot;The Jungle Rot Kid on the Nod&quot; and &quot;The Four Colour Problem&quot;, respectively), while J. G. Ballard published an admiring essay in an issue of &quot;New Worlds&quot;. Burroughs&#x27; use of experimentation such as the cut-up technique and his use of science fiction tropes in new manners proved the extent to which prose fiction could seem revolutionary, and some New Wave writers sought to emulate this style.

Ursula K. Le Guin, one of the newer writers to be published during the 1960s, describes the transition to the New Wave era thus:

Other writers and works seen as preluding or transitioning to the New Wave include Ray Bradbury&#x27;s &quot;The Martian Chronicles,&quot; Walter M. Miller&#x27;s 1959 &quot;A Canticle for Leibowitz,&quot; Cyril M. Kornbluth and Frederik Pohl&#x27;s anti-hyper-consumerist &quot;The Space Merchants&quot; (1952), Kurt Vonnegut&#x27;s mocking &quot;Player Piano&quot; (1952) and &quot;The Sirens of Titan&quot; (1959), Theodore Sturgeon&#x27;s humanist &quot;More Than Human&quot; (1953) and the hermaphrodite society of &quot;Venus Plus X&quot; (1960), and Philip José Farmer&#x27;s human-extraterrestrial sexual encounters in &quot;The Lovers&quot; (1952) and &quot;Strange Relations&quot; (1960).

===Beginnings===

There is not any consensus about a precise beginning for the New Wave—British author Adam Roberts refers to Alfred Bester as having single-handedly invented the genre, and in the introduction to a collection of Leigh Brackett&#x27;s short fiction, Michael Moorcock referred to her as one of the genre&#x27;s &quot;true godmothers&quot;. Algis Budrys said that in New Wave writers &quot;there are echoes... of Philip K. Dick, Walter Miller, Jr. and, by all odds, Fritz Leiber&quot;. However, it is accepted by many critics that the New Wave began in England with the magazine &quot;New Worlds&quot; and Michael Moorcock. who was appointed editor in 1964 (first issue number 142, May and June); Moorcock was editor until 1973. While the American magazines &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; and &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction&quot; had from the start printed unusually literary stories, Moorcock made that into a more definite policy, and he sought to use the magazine to &quot;define a new avant-garde role&quot; for science fiction by the use of &quot;new literary techniques and modes of expression&quot;.:251-252 No other science fiction magazine was made to differ as consistently from traditional science fiction as much as &quot;New Worlds&quot;. By the time it ceased regular publication it had rejected identification with the genre of science fiction itself, styling itself as an experimental literary journal. In the United States, the best known representation of the genre is probably the 1967 anthology &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot;, edited by Harlan Ellison.

According to Brian W. Aldiss, during Moorcock&#x27;s editorship of &quot;New Worlds&quot;, &quot;galactic wars went out; drugs came in; there were fewer encounters with aliens, more in the bedroom. Experimentation in prose styles became one of the orders of the day, and the baleful influence of William Burroughs often threatened to gain the upper hand.&quot; Judith Merril observed, &quot;...this magazine [&quot;New Worlds&quot;] was the publishing thermometer of the trend that was dubbed &quot;the New Wave&quot;. In the United States the trend created an intense, incredible controversy. In Britain people either found it of interest or they didn&#x27;t, but in the States it was heresy on the one hand and wonderful revolution on the other.&quot;

Brooks Landon, professor of English at the University of Iowa, says of &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot; that it

was innovative and influential before it had any readers simply because it was the first big original anthology of SF, offering prices to its writers that were competitive with the magazines. The readers soon followed, however, attracted by 33 stories by SF writers both well-established and relatively unheard of. These writers responded to editor Harlan Ellison&#x27;s call for stories that could not be published elsewhere or had never been written in the face of almost certain censorship by SF editors... [T]o SF readers, especially in the United States, &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot; certainly felt like a revolution... &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot; marks an emblematic turning point for American SF.

As an anthologist and speaker Merril with other authors advocated a reestablishment of science fiction within the literary mainstream and better literary standards. Her &quot;incredible controversy&quot; is characterized by David Hartwell in the opening sentence of a book chapter entitled &quot;New Wave: The Great War of the 1960s&quot;: &quot;Conflict and argument are an enduring presence in the SF world, but literary politics has yielded to open warfare on the largest scale only once.&quot; The changes were more than the experimental and explicitly provocative as inspired by Burroughs; in coherence with the literary &quot;nouvelle vague&quot;, although not in close association to it, and addressing a less restricted pool of readers, the New Wave was reversing the standard hero&#x27;s attitude toward action and science. It illustrated egotism—often by depriving the plot of motivation toward a rational explanation.:87

In 1962 Ballard wrote:

I&#x27;ve often wondered why s-f shows so little of the experimental enthusiasm which has characterized painting, music and the cinema during the last four or five decades, particularly as these have become wholeheartedly speculative, more and more concerned with the creation of new states of mind, constructing fresh symbols and languages where the old cease to be valid... The biggest developments of the immediate future will take place, not on the Moon or Mars, but on Earth, and it is &quot;inner space&quot;, not outer, that need to be explored. The only truly alien planet is Earth. In the past the scientific bias of s-f has been towards the physical sciences—rocketry, electronics, cybernetics—and the emphasis should switch to the biological sciences. Accuracy, that last refuge of the unimaginative, doesn&#x27;t matter a hoot... It is that &quot;inner&quot; space-suit which is still needed, and it is up to science fiction to build it! 

In 1963 Moorcock wrote, 
&quot;Let&#x27;s have a quick look at what a lot of science fiction lacks. Briefly, these are some of the qualities I miss on the whole—passion, subtlety, irony, original characterization, original and good style, a sense of involvement in human affairs, colour, density, depth, and, on the whole, real feeling from the writer...&quot;
Roger Luckhurst pointed out that J. G. Ballard&#x27;s 1962 essay, &quot;Which Way to Inner Space?&quot; &quot;showed the influence of media theorist Marshall McLuhan and the &#x27;anti-psychiatry&#x27; of R. D. Laing.&quot; Luckhurst traces the influence of both these thinkers in Ballard&#x27;s fiction, in particular &quot;The Atrocity Exhibition&quot; (1970).

After Ellison&#x27;s &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot;, Judith Merril contributed to this fiction in the United States by editing the anthology &quot;England Swings SF: Stories of Speculative Fiction&quot; (Doubleday 1968).

The New Wave also had political associations:

For example, Judith Merril, &quot;one of the most visible—and voluble—apostles of the New Wave in 1960s sf&quot;:251 remembers her return from England to the United States: &quot;So I went home ardently looking for a revolution. I kept searching until the Chicago Democratic Convention in 1968. I went to Chicago partly to seek out a revolution, if there was one happening, and partly because my seventeen-year-old daughter... wanted to go.&quot; Merril said later, &quot;At the end of the Convention week, the taste of America was sour in all our mouths&quot;; she soon became a political refugee living in Canada.

Roger Luckhurst disagreed with critics who perceived the New Wave mainly in terms of difference (he gives the example of Thomas Clareson), suggesting that such a model &quot;doesn&#x27;t quite seem to map onto the American scene, even though the wider conflicts of the 1960s liberalization in universities, the civil rights movement and the cultural contradictions inherent in consumer society were starker and certainly more violent than in Britain.&quot; In particular, he noted:

The young turks within SF also had an ossified &#x27;ancient regime&#x27; to topple: John Campbell&#x27;s intolerant right-wing editorials for &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; (which he renamed &quot;Analog&quot; in 1960) teetered on the self parody. In 1970, when the campus revolt against American involvement in Vietnam reached its height and resulted in the National Guard shooting four students dead in Kent State University, Campbell editorialized that the &#x27;punishment was due&#x27;, and rioters should expect to be met with lethal force. Vietnam famously divided the SF community to the extent that, in 1968, &#x27;Galaxy&#x27; magazine carried two adverts, one signed by writers in favour and one by those against the war. Caution is needed when assessing any literary movement, particularly regarding transitions. Science fiction writer Bruce Sterling, reacting to his association with another SF movement in the 1980s, remarked, &quot;When did the New Wave SF end? Who was the last New Wave SF writer? You can&#x27;t be a New Wave SF writer today. You can recite the numbers of them: Ballard, Ellison, Spinrad, Delaney, blah, blah, blah. What about a transitional figure like Zelazny? A literary movement isn&#x27;t an army. You don&#x27;t wear a uniform and swear allegiance. It&#x27;s just a group of people trying to develop a sensibility.&quot;

Similarly, Rob Latham observed:

...indeed, one of the central ways the New Wave was experienced, in the US and Britain, was as a &quot;liberated&quot; outburst of erotic expression, often counterpoised, by advocates of the &quot;New Thing&quot; (as Merril called it), with the priggish Puritanism of the Golden Age. Yet this stark contrast, while not unreasonable, tends ultimately, as do most of the historical distinctions drawn between the New Wave and its predecessors, to overemphasize rupture at the expense of continuity, effectively &quot;disappearing&quot; some of the pioneering trends in 1950s sf that paved the way for the New Wave&#x27;s innovations.

However, Darren Harris-Fain of Shawnee State University emphasized New Wave in terms of difference:
===Decline===
In the August 1970 issue of the &quot;SFWA Forum&quot;, a publication for Science Fiction Writers of America members, Harlan Ellison stated that the New Wave furore, which had flourished during the late 1960s, appeared to have been &quot;blissfully laid to rest&quot;. He also claimed that there was no real conflict between writers:

It was all a manufactured controversy, staged by fans to hype their own participation in the genre. Their total misunderstanding of what was happening (not unusual for fans, as history... shows us) managed to stir up a great deal of pointless animosity and if it had any real effect I suspect it was in the unfortunate area of causing certain writers to feel they were unable to keep up and consequently they slowed their writing output.

Latham however remarks that Ellison&#x27;s analysis &quot;obscures Ellison&#x27;s own prominent role—and that of other professional authors and editors such as Judith Merril, Michael Moorcock, Lester Del Rey, Frederik Pohl, and Donald A. Wollheim—in fomenting the conflict...&quot;

For Roger Luckhurst, the closing of &quot;New Worlds&quot; magazine in 1970 (one of many years it closed) &quot;marked the containment of New Wave experiment with the rest of the counter-culture. The various limping manifestations of New World across the 1970s... demonstrated the posthumous nature of its avant-gardism.&quot;

By the early 1970s, a number of writers and readers were commenting about the differences between the winners of the Nebula Awards, which had been created in 1965 by the SFWA and were awarded by professional writers, and winners of the Hugo Awards, awarded by fans at the annual World Science Fiction Convention, with some arguing that this indicated that many authors were alienated from the sentiments of their readers: &quot;While some writers and fans continued to argue about the New Wave until the end of the 1970s—in &quot;The World of Science Fiction, 1926–1976: The History of a Subculture&quot;, for instance, Lester Del Ray devotes several pages to castigating the movement—for the most part the controversy died down as the decade wore on.&quot;

== Impact ==
In a 1979 essay, Professor Patrick Parrinder, commenting on the nature of science fiction, noted that &quot;any meaningful act of defamiliarization can only be relative, since it is not possible for man to imagine what is utterly alien to him; the utterly alien would also be meaningless.&quot; He also states, &quot;Within SF, however, it is not necessary to break with the wider conventions of prose narrative in order to produce work that is validly experimental. The &#x27;New Wave&#x27; writing of the 1960s, with its fragmented and surrealistic forms, has not made a lasting impact, because it cast its net too wide. To reform SF one must challenge the conventions of the genre on their own terms.&quot;

Others ascribe a more important, though still limited, effect. Veteran science fiction writer Jack Williamson (1908–2006) when asked in 1991: &quot;Did the [New] Wave&#x27;s emphasis on experimentalism and its conscious efforts to make SF more &#x27;literary&#x27; have any kind of permanent effects on the field?&quot; replied:

After it subsided—it&#x27;s old hat now—it probably left us with a sharpened awareness of language and a keener interest in literary experiment. It did wash up occasional bits of beauty and power. For example, it helped launch the careers of such writers as [Samuel R.] Chip Delany, Brian Aldiss, and Harlan Ellison, all of whom seem to have gone on their own highly individualistic directions. But the key point here is that New Wave SF failed to move people. I&#x27;m not sure if this failure was due to its pessimistic themes or to people feeling the stuff was too pretentious. But it never really grabbed hold of people&#x27;s imaginations.

Hartwell observed that &quot;there is something efficacious in sf&#x27;s marginality and always tenuous self-identity—its ambiguous generic distinction from other literary categories—and, perhaps more importantly, in its distinction from what has variously been called realist, mainstream, or mundane fiction.&quot; Hartwell maintained that after the New Wave, science fiction had still managed to retain this &quot;marginality and tenuous self-identity&quot;:

The British and American New Wave in common would have denied the genre status of SF entirely and ended the continual development of new specialized words and phrases common to the body of SF, without which SF would be indistinguishable from mundane fiction in its entirety (rather than only out on the borders of experimental SF, which is properly indistinguishable from any other experimental literature). The denial of special or genre status is ultimately the cause of the failure of the New Wave to achieve popularity, which, if it had become truly dominant, would have destroyed SF as a separate field.

Scientific and technological themes were more important than literary trends to Campbell, and some major &quot;Astounding&quot; contributors Isaac Asimov, Robert A. Heinlein, and L. Sprague de Camp had scientific or engineering educations. Asimov said in 1967 &quot;I hope that when the New Wave has deposited its froth and receded, the vast and solid shore of &quot;science&quot; fiction will appear once more&quot;. Yet, Asimov himself was to illustrate just how that &quot;SF shore&quot; did indeed re-emerge—- but changed. A biographer noted that during the 1960s:

...stories and novels that Asimov must not have liked and must have felt were not part of the science fiction he had helped to shape were winning acclaim and awards. He also must have felt that science fiction no longer needed him. His science fiction writing... became even more desultory and casual.

Asimov&#x27;s return to serious writing in 1972 with &quot;The Gods Themselves&quot; (when much of the debate about the New Wave had dissipated) was an act of courage...

Darren Harris-Fain observed on this resumption of writing SF by Asimov that

...the novel [&quot;The Gods Themselves&quot;] is noteworthy for how it both shows that Asimov was indeed the same writer in the 1970s that he had been in the 1950s and that he nonetheless had been affected by the New Wave even if he was never part of it. His depiction of an alien ménage a trois, complete with homoerotic scenes between the two males, marks an interesting departure from his earlier fiction, in which sex of any sort is conspicuously absent. Also there is some minor experimentation with structure.

Other themes dealt with in the novel are concerns for the environment and &quot;human stupidity and the delusional belief in human superiority&quot;, both frequent topics in New Wave SF.

Still other commentators ascribe a much greater effect to the New Wave. Commenting in 2002 on the publication of the 35th Anniversary edition of Ellison&#x27;s &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot; anthology, the critic Greg L. Johnson remarked that

...if the New Wave did not entirely revolutionize the way SF was written, (the exploration of an invented world through the use of an adventure plot remains the prototypical SF story outline), they did succeed in pushing the boundaries of what could be considered SF, and their use of stylistic innovations from outside SF helped raise standards. It became less easy for writers to get away with stock characters spouting wooden dialogue laced with technical jargon. Such stories still exist, and are still published, but are no longer typical of the field.

Asimov agreed that &quot;on the whole, the New Wave was a good thing&quot;. He described several &quot;interesting side effects&quot; of the New Wave. Non-American SF became more prominent and the genre became an international phenomenon. Other changes noted were that &quot;the New Wave encouraged more and more women to begin reading and writing science fiction... The broadening of science fiction meant that it was approaching the &#x27;mainstream&#x27;... in style and content. It also meant that increasing numbers of mainstream novelists were recognizing the importance of changing technology and the popularity of science fiction, and were incorporating science fiction motifs into their own novels.&quot;

Critic Rob Latham identifies three trends that associated New Wave with the emergence of cyberpunk during the 1980s. He said that changes of technology as well as an economic recession constricted the market for science fiction, generating a &quot;widespread&quot; malaise among fans, while established writers were forced to reduce their output (or, like Isaac Asimov, shifted their emphasis to other subjects); finally, editors encouraged new methods that earlier ones tended to discourage.

== Criticisms ==
Moorcock, Ballard, and others engendered some animosity to their writings. When reviewing &quot;2001: A Space Odyssey&quot;, Lester del Rey described it as &quot;the first of the New Wave-Thing movies, with the usual empty symbolism&quot;. When reviewing &quot;World&#x27;s Best Science Fiction: 1966&quot;, Algis Budrys mocked Ellison&#x27;s &quot; &#x27;Repent, Harlequin!&#x27; Said the Ticktockman&quot; and two other stories as &quot;rudimentary social consciousness... deep stuff&quot; and insufficient for &quot;an outstanding science-fiction story&quot;. Hartwell noted Budrys&#x27;s &quot;ringing scorn and righteous indignation&quot; that year in &quot;one of the classic diatribes against Ballard and the new mode of SF then emergent&quot;: 

A story by J. G. Ballard, as you know, calls for people who don&#x27;t think. One begins with characters who regard the physical universe as a mysterious and arbitrary place, and who would not dream of trying to understand its actual laws. Furthermore, to be the protagonist of a J. G. Ballard novel, or anything more than a very minor character therein, you must have cut yourself off from the entire body of scientific education. In this way, when the world disaster—be it wind or water—comes upon you, you are under absolutely no obligation to do anything about it but sit and worship it. Even more further, some force has acted to remove from the face of the world all people who might impose good sense or rational behavior on you...

Budrys in &quot;Galaxy&quot;, when reviewing a collection of recent stories from the magazine, said in 1965 that &quot;There is this sense in this book... that modern science fiction reflects a dissatisfaction with things as they are, sometimes to the verge of indignation, but also retains optimism about the eventual outcome&quot;. Despite his criticism of Ballard and Aldiss (&quot;the least talented&quot; of the four), Budrys called them, Roger Zelazny, and Samuel R. Delany &quot;an earthshaking new kind&quot; of writers. Asimov said in 1967 of the New Wave, &quot;I want science fiction. I think science fiction isn&#x27;t really science fiction if it lacks science. And I think the better and truer the science, the better and truer the science fiction&quot;, but Budrys that year warned that the four would soon leave those &quot;still reading everything from the viewpoint of the 1944 &quot;Astounding&quot;... nothing but a complete collection of yellowed, crumble-edged bewilderment&quot;.

While acknowledging the New Wave&#x27;s &quot;energy, high talent and dedication&quot;, and stating that it &quot;may in fact be the shape of tomorrow&#x27;s science fiction generally — hell, it may be the shape of today&#x27;s science fiction&quot;, as examples of the fashion Budrys much preferred Zelazny&#x27;s &quot;This Immortal&quot; to Thomas Disch″s &quot;The Genocides&quot;. Predicting that Zelazny&#x27;s career would be more important and lasting than Disch&#x27;s, he described the latter&#x27;s book as &quot;unflaggingly derivative of&quot; the New Wave and filled with &quot;dumb, resigned victims&quot; who &quot;run, hide, slither, grope and die&quot;, like Ballard&#x27;s &quot;The Drowned World&quot; but unlike &quot;The Moon is a Harsh Mistress&quot; (&quot;about people who do something about their troubles&quot;). Writing in &quot;The Dreams Our Stuff Is Made Of&quot;, Disch observed that &quot;Literary movements tend to be compounded, in various proportions, of the genius of two or three genuinely original talents, some few other capable or established writers who have been co-opted or gone along for the ride, the apprentice work of epigones and wannabes, and a great deal of hype. My sense of the New Wave, with twenty-five years of hindsight, is that its irreducible nucleus was the dyad of J. G. Ballard and Michael Moorcock...&quot;

==Authors and works==
The New Wave was not a formal organization with a fixed membership. Thomas M. Disch, for instance, rejected his association with some other New Wave authors.:425 Nonetheless, it is possible to associate specific authors and works, especially anthologies, with the fashion. Michael Moorcock, J. G. Ballard, and Brian Aldiss are considered principal writers of the New Wave. Judith Merril&#x27;s annual anthologies (1957–1968) &quot;were the first heralds of the coming of the [New Wave] cult,&quot;:105 and Damon Knight&#x27;s &quot;Orbit&quot; series and Harlan Ellison&#x27;s &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot; featured American writers inspired by British writers as well as British authors. Among the stories Ellison printed in &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot; were Philip José Farmer&#x27;s &quot;Riders of the Purple Wage&quot;, Norman Spinrad&#x27;s &quot;Carcinoma Angels&quot;, Samuel R. Delany&#x27;s &quot;Aye, and Gomorrah&quot; and stories by Brian Aldiss, J. G. Ballard, John Brunner, David R. Bunch, Philip K. Dick, Sonya Dorman, Carol Emshwiller, John Sladek, Theodore Sturgeon, and Roger Zelazny.

Alfred Bester was championed by New Wave writers and is seen as a major influence. Thomas M. Disch&#x27;s work is associated with the New Wave, and &quot;The Genocides&quot; has been seen as emblematic of the genre, as has the 1971 Disch anthology of eco-catastrophe stories &quot;The Ruins of Earth&quot;. Critic John Clute wrote of M. John Harrison&#x27;s early writing that it &quot;...reveals its New-Wave provenance in narrative discontinuities and subheads after the fashion of J. G. Ballard&quot;.

Brian Aldiss&#x27;s &quot;Barefoot in the Head&quot; (1969) and Norman Spinrad&#x27;s &quot;No Direction Home&quot; (1971) are seen as illustrative of the effect of the drug culture, especially psychedelics, on New Wave. On the topic of entropy, Ballard provided &quot;an explicitly cosmological vision of entropic decline of the universe&quot; in &quot;The Voices of Time&quot;, which provided a typology of ideas that subsequent New Wave writers developed in different contexts, with one of the best instances being Pamela Zoline&#x27;s &quot;The Heat Death of the Universe&quot;. Like other writers for &quot;New Worlds&quot;, Zoline used &quot;science-fictional and scientific language and imagery to describe perfectly &#x27;ordinary&#x27; scenes of life&quot;, and by doing so produced &quot;altered perceptions of reality in the reader&quot;. New Wave works engaging with utopia, gender, and sexuality include Ursula K. Le Guin&#x27;s &quot;The Left Hand of Darkness&quot; (1969), Joanna Russ&#x27;s &quot;The Female Man&quot; (1975), and Marge Piercy&#x27;s &quot;Woman on the Edge of Time&quot; (1976).:82–85 In Robert Silverberg&#x27;s story &quot;The Man in the Maze&quot;, in a reversal typical of the New Wave, Silverberg portrays a disabled man using an alien labyrinthine city to reject abled society. Samuel R. Delany&#x27;s &quot;Babel-17&quot; (1966) provides an example of a New Wave work engaging with Sapir-Whorfian linguistic relativity, as does Ian Watson&#x27;s &quot;The Embedding&quot; (1973).:86–87

Two examples of New Wave writers using utopia as a theme are Ursula K. Le Guin&#x27;s &quot;The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia&quot; (1974) and Samuel R. Delany&#x27;s &quot;Trouble on Triton: An Ambiguous Heterotopia&quot; (1976),:74–80 while John Brunner is a primary exponent of dystopian New Wave science fiction.

Examples of modernism in New Wave include Philip José Farmer&#x27;s Joycean &quot;Riders of the Purple Wage&quot; (1967), John Brunner&#x27;s &quot;Stand on Zanzibar&quot; (1968), which is written in the style of John Don Passos&#x27;s &quot;U.S.A.&quot; trilogy (1930–1936), and Thomas Disch&#x27;s &quot;Camp Concentration&quot;, which includes a stream of literary references, including to Thomas Mann.:61–62 The influence of postmodernism in New Wave can be seen in Brian Aldiss&#x27;s &quot;Report on Probability A&quot;, Philip K. Dick&#x27;s &quot;Ubik&quot;, J. G. Ballard&#x27;s collection &quot;The Atrocity Exhibition&quot;, and Samuel R. Delany&#x27;s &quot;Dhalgren&quot; and &quot;Triton&quot;.:66–67

The majority of stories in Ben Bova&#x27;s &quot;The Best of the Nebulas&quot;, such as Roger Zelazny&#x27;s &quot;A Rose for Ecclesiastes&quot;, are considered as being by New Wave writers or as involving New Wave techniques. &quot;The Martian Time-Slip&quot; (1964) and other works by Philip K. Dick are viewed as New Wave.

Brian Aldiss, Harlan Ellison, Robert Silverberg, Norman Spinrad, and Roger Zelazny are writers whose work, though not necessarily considered New Wave at the time of publication, later became associated with the term. Of later authors, some of the work of Joanna Russ is considered to bear stylistic resemblance to New Wave.

== See also ==
* Avant-Pop
* Cyberpunk
* Feminist science fiction
* The Golden Age of Science Fiction
* Interstitial Fiction
* Mundane science fiction
* Pulp fiction
* Slipstream
* Transrealism

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==

==Further reading==
* Broderick, D. (2003). &quot;New wave and backwash: 1960–1980&quot;. In &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction&quot;, pp. 48–63, Cambridge University Press. .
* Butler, Andrew M. (2013). &quot;Solar Flares: Science Fiction in the 1970s&quot;, Liverpool University Press, Online .
* Clute, John, David Langford, Peter Nicholls and Graham Sleight. &quot;The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction&quot; (3rd ed.). &quot;SFE: SF Encyclopedia&quot; Home Page.
** &quot;New Wave&quot;.
* Harris-Fain, D. &quot;Dangerous Visions&quot;. In G. Canavan &amp; E. Link (eds.), &quot;The Cambridge Companion to American Science Fiction&quot; (pp. 31–43), Cambridge University Press. .
* Lockwood, Stephen P. (1985). &quot;The New Wave in Science Fiction: A Primer&quot;, Indiana University.
* Steble, Janez (2014). &quot;New Wave in Science Fiction or the Explosion of the Genre&quot;. Doctoral dissertation, University of Ljubljana.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2296283" start="4" end="12" title="New Wave (science fiction)" label="New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q905770" start="244" end="277" title="Soft science fiction" label="psychological and social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q725757" start="296" end="313" title="hard science fiction" label="physical sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q971480" start="375" end="384" title="Literary modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="522" end="535" title="pulp magazine" label="pulp magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027727" start="697" end="707" title="New Worlds (magazine)" label="New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="725" end="741" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="796" end="810" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q745250" start="839" end="856" title="Dangerous Visions" label="Dangerous Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="941" end="958" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530" start="960" end="973" title="Stanisław Lem" label="Stanisław Lem"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="975" end="988" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="990" end="1006" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="1008" end="1021" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q265270" start="1023" end="1034" title="Joanna Russ" label="Joanna Russ"/>
<link wikidata="Q234928" start="1036" end="1053" title="James Tiptree Jr." label="James Tiptree Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q708581" start="1094" end="1109" title="Thomas M. Disch" label="Thomas M. Disch"/>
<link wikidata="Q238702" start="1114" end="1126" title="Brian Aldiss" label="Brian Aldiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="1210" end="1223" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="1225" end="1235" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="1276" end="1287" title="Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War" label="controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1303" end="1314" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1349" end="1364" title="Counterculture of the 1960s#Marijuana, LSD, and other recreational drugs" label="drug subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="1366" end="1383" title="Sexual revolution" label="sexual liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="1389" end="1405" title="environmental movement" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="1561" end="1570" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059772" start="1575" end="1585" title="Slipstream genre" label="slipstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q193541" start="1760" end="1774" title="nouvelle vague" label="nouvelle vague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900938" start="1823" end="1841" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="1878" end="1909" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Analog Science Fiction and Fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225230" start="2047" end="2054" title="John Carnell" label="Carnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q313673" start="2109" end="2116" title="John Wyndham" label="Wyndham"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="2118" end="2124" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q329999" start="2126" end="2133" title="Eric Frank Russell" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q552025" start="2135" end="2146" title="John Christopher" label="Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003235" start="2250" end="2254" title="Edwin Charles Tubb" label="Tubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q238702" start="2256" end="2262" title="Brian Aldiss" label="Aldiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q708029" start="2288" end="2302" title="Kenneth Bulmer" label="Kenneth Bulmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q378807" start="2307" end="2319" title="John Brunner (novelist)" label="John Brunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q147516" start="2454" end="2467" title="magic realism" label="magic realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059772" start="2751" end="2761" title="Slipstream genre" label="slipstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q113013" start="2813" end="2823" title="Postmodern literature" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695887" start="2996" end="3015" title="Ahmed Khaled Tawfik" label="Ahmed Khaled Tawfik"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586718" start="3103" end="3126" title="Chinese science fiction" label="Chinese science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q607588" start="3194" end="3203" title="Liu Cixin" label="Liu Cixin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29841269" start="3232" end="3264" title="Remembrance of Earth&amp;#x27;s Past" label="Remembrance of Earth&amp;#x27;s Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q18276277" start="3371" end="3380" title="posthuman" label="posthuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q971480" start="3643" end="3652" title="Literary modernism" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="3662" end="3675" title="Postmodernism" label="postmodernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420210" start="3856" end="3885" title="Golden Age of Science Fiction" label="Golden Age of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q31210233" start="4098" end="4108" title="Rob Latham" label="Rob Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="4587" end="4596" title="Human sexuality" label="sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389669" start="4598" end="4610" title="drug culture" label="drug culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="4635" end="4655" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314176" start="4671" end="4687" title="psychedelic drug" label="psychedelic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="4767" end="4777" title="Social alienation" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778765" start="4779" end="4795" title="social isolation" label="social isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414964" start="4797" end="4817" title="class discrimination" label="class discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531622" start="4823" end="4846" title="Global catastrophic risk" label="the end of civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249908" start="4905" end="4914" title="High-Rise (novel)" label="High Rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q31210233" start="4940" end="4950" title="Rob Latham" label="Rob Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009727" start="5047" end="5068" title="The Wind from Nowhere" label="The Wind from Nowhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773220" start="5155" end="5168" title="The Genocides" label="The Genocides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447776" start="5222" end="5250" title="The Word for World Is Forest" label="The Word for World Is Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5391" end="5402" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="5649" end="5656" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q139931" start="5751" end="5761" title="Heat death of the universe" label="heat death"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="5800" end="5806" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396397" start="6265" end="6288" title="A Rose for Ecclesiastes" label="A Rose for Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="6303" end="6316" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q506667" start="6346" end="6354" title="allusion" label="allusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q175156" start="6365" end="6374" title="Onomastics" label="onomastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23581141" start="6466" end="6511" title="The Doors of His Face, the Lamps of His Mouth" label="The Doors of His Face, the Lamps of His Mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034534" start="6529" end="6554" title="The Dream Master" label="&amp;quot;He Who Shapes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540312" start="6651" end="6702" title="&amp;quot;Repent, Harlequin!&amp;quot; Said the Ticktockman" label="&amp;quot;Repent, Harlequin!&amp;quot; Said the Ticktockman"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="6704" end="6718" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q374313" start="6742" end="6747" title="Gonzo journalism" label="gonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q154842" start="6946" end="6955" title="Max Ernst" label="Max Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="6960" end="6973" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343720" start="7972" end="7984" title="Edward James (historian)" label="Edward James"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8663" end="8672" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q736447" start="8975" end="8987" title="John Crowley (author)" label="John Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q347461" start="8989" end="9001" title="Joe Haldeman" label="Joe Haldeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="9003" end="9020" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234928" start="9022" end="9040" title="James Tiptree, Jr." label="James Tiptree, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q504805" start="9046" end="9057" title="John Varley (author)" label="John Varley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627887" start="9193" end="9203" title="H. L. Gold" label="H. L. Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007573" start="9231" end="9237" title="Galaxy Science Fiction" label="Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q715505" start="9278" end="9288" title="James Gunn (author)" label="James Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420210" start="9579" end="9608" title="Golden Age of Science Fiction" label="Golden Age of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q547414" start="9610" end="9622" title="Algis Budrys" label="Algis Budrys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420210" start="10135" end="10145" title="Golden Age of Science Fiction" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="10201" end="10214" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10400" end="10451" title="Trillion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction" label="Trillion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q489193" start="10600" end="10614" title="Harry Harrison (writer)" label="Harry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="10886" end="10906" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q296256" start="10924" end="10942" title="Philip José Farmer" label="Philip José Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q790762" start="10947" end="10967" title="Barrington J. Bayley" label="Barrington J. Bayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q252299" start="11233" end="11249" title="cut-up technique" label="cut-up technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="11427" end="11444" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40640" start="11640" end="11652" title="Ray Bradbury" label="Ray Bradbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q918052" start="11666" end="11688" title="The Martian Chronicles" label="The Martian Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q357839" start="11696" end="11712" title="Walter M. Miller Jr." label="Walter M. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659714" start="11731" end="11755" title="A Canticle for Leibowitz" label="A Canticle for Leibowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q376859" start="11763" end="11781" title="Cyril M. Kornbluth" label="Cyril M. Kornbluth"/>
<link wikidata="Q312641" start="11786" end="11799" title="Frederik Pohl" label="Frederik Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391635" start="11836" end="11855" title="The Space Merchants" label="The Space Merchants"/>
<link wikidata="Q49074" start="11870" end="11883" title="Kurt Vonnegut" label="Kurt Vonnegut"/>
<link wikidata="Q649267" start="11905" end="11917" title="Player Piano (novel)" label="Player Piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294155" start="11941" end="11960" title="The Sirens of Titan" label="The Sirens of Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q240253" start="11975" end="11992" title="Theodore Sturgeon" label="Theodore Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q845613" start="12015" end="12030" title="More Than Human" label="More Than Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q429159" start="12083" end="12095" title="Venus Plus X" label="Venus Plus X"/>
<link wikidata="Q296256" start="12114" end="12132" title="Philip José Farmer" label="Philip José Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q350734" start="12360" end="12372" title="Adam Roberts (British writer)" label="Adam Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q286116" start="12383" end="12396" title="Alfred Bester" label="Alfred Bester"/>
<link wikidata="Q298242" start="12486" end="12500" title="Leigh Brackett" label="Leigh Brackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="12684" end="12698" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q357839" start="12700" end="12718" title="Walter Miller, Jr." label="Walter Miller, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q313185" start="12737" end="12749" title="Fritz Leiber" label="Fritz Leiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027727" start="12856" end="12866" title="New Worlds (magazine)" label="New Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="12877" end="12893" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="13035" end="13050" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="13067" end="13112" title="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy &amp;amp; Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="13278" end="13289" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384425" start="13677" end="13689" title="experimental fiction" label="experimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368848" start="13690" end="13706" title="literary journal" label="literary journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q745250" start="13810" end="13827" title="Dangerous Visions" label="Dangerous Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="13845" end="13859" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q276304" start="14223" end="14236" title="Judith Merril" label="Judith Merril"/>
<link wikidata="Q66123325" start="16889" end="16900" title="Inner space (science fiction)" label="inner space"/>
<link wikidata="Q193871" start="17854" end="17870" title="Marshall McLuhan" label="Marshall McLuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238584" start="17910" end="17921" title="R. D. Laing" label="R. D. Laing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="18593" end="18630" title="1968 Democratic Convention" label="Chicago Democratic Convention in 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q435056" start="19522" end="19535" title="John W. Campbell" label="John Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="19580" end="19618" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="&amp;quot;Astounding Science Fiction&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="19805" end="19872" title="Kent State shootings" label="National Guard shooting four students dead in Kent State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q312995" start="20294" end="20308" title="Bruce Sterling" label="Bruce Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491567" start="21505" end="21529" title="Shawnee State University" label="Shawnee State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="21662" end="21696" title="Science Fiction Writers of America" label="Science Fiction Writers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="23090" end="23102" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364364" start="23143" end="23147" title="Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America" label="SFWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="23209" end="23219" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q617378" start="23252" end="23284" title="World Science Fiction Convention" label="World Science Fiction Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147453" start="23772" end="23789" title="Patrick Parrinder" label="Patrick Parrinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q316788" start="24550" end="24565" title="Jack Williamson" label="Jack Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955361" start="25387" end="25429" title="Sense of wonder" label="grabbed hold of people&amp;#x27;s imaginations"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="26645" end="26657" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="26659" end="26677" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q316313" start="26683" end="26701" title="L. Sprague de Camp" label="L. Sprague de Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q389750" start="27436" end="27455" title="The Gods Themselves" label="The Gods Themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q31210233" start="29855" end="29865" title="Rob Latham" label="Rob Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="29937" end="29946" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302387" start="30023" end="30032" title="Recession of 1958" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="30204" end="30216" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30455" end="30476" title="2001: A Space Odyssey (film)" label="2001: A Space Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q684748" start="30484" end="30498" title="Lester del Rey" label="Lester del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30620" end="30659" title="World&amp;#x27;s Best Science Fiction: 1966" label="World&amp;#x27;s Best Science Fiction: 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540312" start="30702" end="30766" title="&amp;quot;Repent, Harlequin!&amp;quot; Said the Ticktockman" label="&amp;quot; &amp;#x27;Repent, Harlequin!&amp;#x27; Said the Ticktockman&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="32297" end="32310" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="32316" end="32332" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="32755" end="32765" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567510" start="33178" end="33191" title="This Immortal" label="This Immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q708581" start="33201" end="33213" title="Thomas Disch" label="Thomas Disch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773220" start="33222" end="33235" title="The Genocides" label="The Genocides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519711" start="33555" end="33572" title="The Drowned World" label="The Drowned World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410482" start="33596" end="33624" title="The Moon is a Harsh Mistress" label="The Moon is a Harsh Mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730986" start="33714" end="33745" title="The Dreams Our Stuff Is Made Of" label="The Dreams Our Stuff Is Made Of"/>
<link wikidata="Q708581" start="34318" end="34333" title="Thomas M. Disch" label="Thomas M. Disch"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="34523" end="34539" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="34541" end="34554" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q238702" start="34560" end="34572" title="Brian Aldiss" label="Brian Aldiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q276304" start="34623" end="34636" title="Judith Merril" label="Judith Merril"/>
<link wikidata="Q534599" start="34756" end="34768" title="Damon Knight" label="Damon Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100032" start="34782" end="34787" title="Orbit (anthology series)" label="Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q311253" start="34805" end="34819" title="Harlan Ellison" label="Harlan Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q745250" start="34833" end="34850" title="Dangerous Visions" label="Dangerous Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q296256" start="35011" end="35029" title="Philip José Farmer" label="Philip José Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332642" start="35043" end="35068" title="Riders of the Purple Wage" label="Riders of the Purple Wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q455951" start="35076" end="35090" title="Norman Spinrad" label="Norman Spinrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q438164" start="35128" end="35144" title="Samuel R. Delany" label="Samuel R. Delany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4831111" start="35158" end="35175" title="Aye, and Gomorrah" label="Aye, and Gomorrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q378807" start="35226" end="35238" title="John Brunner (novelist)" label="John Brunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176217" start="35240" end="35254" title="David R. Bunch" label="David R. Bunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="35256" end="35270" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490778" start="35272" end="35284" title="Sonya Dorman" label="Sonya Dorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2939834" start="35286" end="35302" title="Carol Emshwiller" label="Carol Emshwiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701769" start="35304" end="35315" title="John Sladek" label="John Sladek"/>
<link wikidata="Q240253" start="35317" end="35334" title="Theodore Sturgeon" label="Theodore Sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="35340" end="35353" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q286116" start="35356" end="35369" title="Alfred Bester" label="Alfred Bester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773220" start="35510" end="35523" title="The Genocides" label="The Genocides"/>
<link wikidata="Q963799" start="35690" end="35706" title="M. John Harrison" label="M. John Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q455951" start="35926" end="35940" title="Norman Spinrad" label="Norman Spinrad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36031" end="36043" title="Counterculture of the 1960s#Marijuana, LSD, and other recreational drugs" label="drug culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773063" start="36210" end="36240" title="The Voices of Time (short story)" label="&amp;quot;The Voices of Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048656" start="36380" end="36393" title="Pamela Zoline" label="Pamela Zoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008211" start="36810" end="36835" title="The Left Hand of Darkness" label="The Left Hand of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202654" start="36875" end="36889" title="The Female Man" label="The Female Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q273385" start="36908" end="36920" title="Marge Piercy" label="Marge Piercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030746" start="36934" end="36959" title="Woman on the Edge of Time" label="Woman on the Edge of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q314553" start="36983" end="37000" title="Robert Silverberg" label="Robert Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732094" start="37014" end="37045" title="The Man in the Maze (novel)" label="&amp;quot;The Man in the Maze&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722309" start="37209" end="37217" title="Babel-17" label="Babel-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q179677" start="37299" end="37320" title="linguistic relativity" label="linguistic relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371639" start="37330" end="37340" title="Ian Watson (author)" label="Ian Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q467720" start="37481" end="37518" title="The Dispossessed" label="The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844314" start="37566" end="37609" title="Triton (novel)" label="Trouble on Triton: An Ambiguous Heterotopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q378807" start="37636" end="37648" title="John Brunner (novelist)" label="John Brunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="37674" end="37683" title="dystopian" label="dystopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q971480" start="37723" end="37732" title="Literary modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="37779" end="37786" title="James Joyce" label="Joycean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332642" start="37793" end="37818" title="Riders of the Purple Wage" label="Riders of the Purple Wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416458" start="37859" end="37876" title="Stand on Zanzibar" label="Stand on Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q312407" start="37924" end="37939" title="John Dos Passos" label="John Don Passos"/>
<link wikidata="Q971694" start="37947" end="37973" title="U.S.A. (trilogy)" label="&amp;quot;U.S.A.&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3654602" start="38017" end="38035" title="Camp Concentration" label="Camp Concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q37030" start="38104" end="38115" title="Thomas Mann" label="Thomas Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314127" start="38207" end="38230" title="Report on Probability A" label="Report on Probability A"/>
<link wikidata="Q617357" start="38266" end="38270" title="Ubik" label="Ubik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083082" start="38316" end="38339" title="The Atrocity Exhibition" label="The Atrocity Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706366" start="38381" end="38389" title="Dhalgren" label="Dhalgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844314" start="38406" end="38412" title="Triton (novel)" label="Triton"/>
<link wikidata="Q436664" start="38454" end="38462" title="Ben Bova" label="Ben Bova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396397" start="38542" end="38565" title="A Rose for Ecclesiastes" label="A Rose for Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39096" end="39105" title="Avant-Pop: Fiction for a Daydream Nation" label="Avant-Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="39108" end="39117" title="Cyberpunk" label="Cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435402" start="39120" end="39144" title="Feminist science fiction" label="Feminist science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420210" start="39147" end="39180" title="Golden Age of Science Fiction" label="The Golden Age of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092619" start="39183" end="39203" title="Interstitial Fiction" label="Interstitial Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952674" start="39206" end="39229" title="Mundane science fiction" label="Mundane science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="39232" end="39244" title="Pulp magazine" label="Pulp fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059772" start="39247" end="39257" title="Slipstream genre" label="Slipstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835350" start="39260" end="39272" title="Transrealism (literature)" label="Transrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="39474" end="39500" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658601" start="39588" end="39614" title="Liverpool University Press" label="Liverpool University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="39697" end="39732" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377" start="40235" end="40258" title="University of Ljubljana" label="University of Ljubljana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27052" wikidata="Q56061" url="?curid=27052" title="Administrative division">
<text>Administrative divisions (also administrative units, administrative regions, subnational entities, or constituent states, as well as many similar generic terms) are geographical areas into which a particular independent sovereign state is divided. Such a unit usually has an administrative authority with the power to take administrative or policy decisions for its area. Administrative divisions are often used as polygons in geospatial analysis.

== Description ==
Usually, sovereign states have several levels of administrative division. Common names for the principal (largest) administrative divisions include: states (subnational states, rather than sovereign states), provinces, lands, oblasts and regions. These in turn are often subdivided into smaller administrative units known by names such as comarcas, raions or districts, which are further subdivided into municipalities, communes or communities constituting the smallest units of subdivision (the local governments). Some administrative division names (such as departments, cantons, prefectures, counties or governorates) can be used for principal, second-level, or third-level divisions.

The levels of administrative divisions and their structure largely varies by country (and sometimes within a single country). Usually the smaller the country is (by area or population), the fewer levels of administrative divisions it has. For example, Vatican City does not have any administrative subdivisions, and Monaco has only one level (both are city-states), while such countries as France and Pakistan have five levels each. The United States is composed of states, possessions, territories, and a federal district, each with varying numbers of subdivisions.

The principal administrative division of a country is sometimes called the &quot;&quot;first-level&quot; (or &quot;first-order&quot;) administrative division&quot; or &quot;first administrative level&quot;. Its next subdivision might be called &quot;second-level administrative division&quot; or &quot;second administrative level&quot; and so on. An alternative terminology is provided by the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics which terms the principal division as the second level or NUTS-2.

Administrative divisions are conceptually separate from dependent territories, with the former being an integral part of the state and the other being only under some lesser form of control. However, the term &quot;administrative division&quot; can include dependent territories as well as accepted administrative divisions (for example, in geographical databases).

Communities united in a federation under a federal government are more specifically known as federated states. A federated state may be referred to as a province, region, canton, land, governorate, oblast, emirate, or country. Administrative units that are not federated or confederated but enjoy a greater degree of autonomy or self-government than other territories within the same country can be considered autonomous regions or de facto constituent states of that country. This relationship is by some authors called a federacy or asymmetric federalism. An example is the autonomous republic of Karakalpakstan within Uzbekistan.

== Examples ==
=== Terminology ===
Due to variations in their use worldwide, consistency in the translation of terms from non-English to English is sometimes difficult to maintain. In many of the following terms originating from British cultural influence, areas of relatively low mean population density might bear a title of an entity one would expect to be either larger or smaller. There is no fixed rule, for &quot;all politics is local&quot; as is perhaps well demonstrated by their relative lack of systemic order.

In the realm of self-government, any of these can and does occur along a stretch of road—which for the most part is passing through rural, unsettled countryside. Since the terms are administrative political divisions of the local regional government, their exact relationship and definitions are subject to home rule considerations, tradition, as well as state statute law and local governmental (administrative) definition and control. In British cultural legacy, some territorial entities began with fairly expansive counties which encompass an appreciably large area, but were divided over time into a number of smaller entities.

Within those entities are the large and small cities or towns, which may or may not be the county seat. Some of the world&#x27;s larger cities culturally, if not officially, span several counties, and those crossing state or provincial boundaries have much in common culturally as well, but are rarely incorporated within the same municipal government. Many sister cities share a water boundary, which quite often serves as a border of both cities and counties. For example, Cambridge and Boston, Massachusetts appear to the casual traveler as one large city, while locally they each are quite culturally different and occupy different counties.

==== List ====
*Area
*Autonomous community
*Banat
*Banner
*Barangay
*Barony
*Capital city
*Canton
*County
*Community
*Constituency
*Crown Dependency
*Department
*District
*Division
*Duchy
*Federal subjects
*Governorate
*Hundred
*Kampong
*Kingdom
* Legal entity
*Local council
*Municipality
**Regional
**Regional county
**Rural
*Oblast
*Parish
*Prefecture
*Principality
*Province
*Public body
*Regency
*Region
*Republic
*Riding
*State
*Special administrative region
*Territory
*Theme
*Voivodeship
==== Urban or rural regions ====
General terms for these incorporated places include &quot;municipality&quot;, &quot;settlement&quot;, &quot;locality&quot;, and &quot;populated place&quot;.
*Borough, burgh or &quot;boro&quot;
*City
*Hamlet
*Local service district
*Shire
*Town
*Township
*Village
*Ward

==== Indigenous ====
*Tribe
*Indian reservation
*Indian reserve
*Band
*Ranchería

== See also ==
*GADM, a high-resolution database of country administrative areas.
*ISO 3166-2, specifically &quot;Codes for the representation of names of countries and their subdivisions — Part 2&quot;.
*List of administrative division name changes
*List of etymologies of administrative divisions
*List of administrative divisions by country
== References ==
== External links ==

*SALB Second Administrative Level Boundaries (SALB) programme of the United Nations.
*Statoids, an international convention with standardized two-letter-based multi-level summaries of administrative divisions worldwide (e.g. GH.AH.AS represents Adansi South (AE) in the Accra Home (AH) region of Ghana (GH)).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="0" end="24" title="Administrative division" label="Administrative divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="31" end="51" title="Administrative division" label="administrative units"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="53" end="75" title="Administrative division" label="administrative regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="77" end="97" title="Administrative division" label="subnational entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q56061" start="102" end="120" title="Administrative division" label="constituent states"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="220" end="235" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938983" start="427" end="446" title="geospatial analysis" label="geospatial analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="476" end="491" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q107390" start="616" end="622" title="Federated state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="675" end="683" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="686" end="691" title="Land (disambiguation)#Division of a country" label="lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="693" end="699" title="oblast" label="oblast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="705" end="712" title="Region#Administrative regions" label="regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829" start="806" end="813" title="comarca" label="comarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688" start="816" end="821" title="raion" label="raion"/>
<link wikidata="Q149621" start="826" end="834" title="district" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="871" end="885" title="municipality" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="887" end="894" title="Commune (administrative division)" label="commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="963" end="979" title="local government" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q643589" start="1027" end="1038" title="Department (administrative division)" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311958" start="1040" end="1046" title="Canton (administrative division)" label="canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q515716" start="1049" end="1059" title="prefecture" label="prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="1062" end="1070" title="County" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798622" start="1074" end="1085" title="governorate" label="governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="1408" end="1420" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="1472" end="1478" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="1508" end="1519" title="city-states" label="city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1546" end="1552" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="1557" end="1565" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1593" end="1606" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q183366" start="1643" end="1654" title="Territory" label="territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q475050" start="1662" end="1678" title="federal district" label="federal district"/>
<link wikidata="Q193083" start="2117" end="2165" title="Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics" label="Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q161243" start="2289" end="2310" title="dependent territory" label="dependent territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302053" start="2574" end="2595" title="geographical database" label="geographical database"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="2624" end="2634" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107390" start="2693" end="2708" title="federated state" label="federated state"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="3010" end="3028" title="Autonomous administrative division" label="autonomous regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439978" start="3123" end="3131" title="federacy" label="federacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091398" start="3135" end="3156" title="asymmetric federalism" label="asymmetric federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484245" start="3199" end="3213" title="Karakalpakstan" label="Karakalpakstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="3221" end="3231" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730089" start="3654" end="3675" title="all politics is local" label="all politics is local"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="4064" end="4073" title="home rule" label="home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="4118" end="4129" title="statute law" label="statute law"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="4482" end="4493" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="4866" end="4875" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="4880" end="4886" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="4888" end="4901" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="5054" end="5058" title="Region" label="Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="5060" end="5080" title="Autonomous community" label="Autonomous community"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="5082" end="5087" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q806869" start="5089" end="5095" title="Banners of Inner Mongolia" label="Banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q61878" start="5097" end="5105" title="Barangay" label="Barangay"/>
<link wikidata="Q223573" start="5107" end="5113" title="Barony (county division)" label="Barony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="5115" end="5127" title="Capital city" label="Capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311958" start="5129" end="5135" title="Canton (administrative division)" label="Canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28575" start="5137" end="5143" title="County" label="County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630741" start="5145" end="5154" title="Community (Wales)" label="Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="5156" end="5168" title="Constituency" label="Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="5170" end="5186" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q643589" start="5188" end="5198" title="Department (administrative division)" label="Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q149621" start="5200" end="5208" title="District" label="District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284423" start="5210" end="5218" title="Division (political geography)" label="Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q154547" start="5220" end="5225" title="Duchy" label="Duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="5227" end="5243" title="Federal subjects" label="Federal subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798622" start="5245" end="5256" title="Governorate" label="Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="5258" end="5265" title="Hundred (county division)" label="Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q9017117" start="5267" end="5274" title="Kampong" label="Kampong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208952" start="5276" end="5283" title="Federal monarchy" label="Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664322" start="5300" end="5313" title="Local council (disambiguation)" label="Local council"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="5315" end="5327" title="Municipality" label="Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388464" start="5330" end="5338" title="Regional municipality" label="Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q204613" start="5341" end="5356" title="Regional county municipality" label="Regional county"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826981" start="5359" end="5364" title="Rural municipality" label="Rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q171308" start="5366" end="5372" title="Oblast" label="Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976993" start="5374" end="5380" title="Parish (administrative division)" label="Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q515716" start="5382" end="5392" title="Prefecture" label="Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="5394" end="5406" title="Principality" label="Principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="5408" end="5416" title="Province" label="Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648563" start="5418" end="5429" title="Public body (Netherlands)" label="Public body"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191695" start="5431" end="5438" title="Regency (Indonesia)" label="Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="5440" end="5446" title="Region (administrative)" label="Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977835" start="5448" end="5456" title="Autonomous republic" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316164" start="5458" end="5464" title="Riding (division)" label="Riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q107390" start="5466" end="5471" title="Federated state" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q24953176" start="5473" end="5502" title="Special administrative region (disambiguation)" label="Special administrative region"/>
<link wikidata="Q183366" start="5504" end="5513" title="Territory" label="Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q379817" start="5515" end="5520" title="Theme (Byzantine district)" label="Theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639312" start="5522" end="5533" title="Voivodeship" label="Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9283961" start="5591" end="5603" title="incorporated town" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="5625" end="5637" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q486972" start="5651" end="5661" title="human settlement" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="5725" end="5732" title="Borough" label="Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="5734" end="5739" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="5761" end="5765" title="City" label="City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="5767" end="5773" title="Hamlet (place)" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48834786" start="5775" end="5797" title="Local service district" label="Local service district"/>
<link wikidata="Q662296" start="5799" end="5804" title="Shire" label="Shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="5806" end="5810" title="Town" label="Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610511" start="5812" end="5820" title="Township" label="Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="5822" end="5829" title="Village" label="Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="5831" end="5835" title="Ward (electoral subdivision)" label="Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="5859" end="5864" title="Tribe" label="Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398059" start="5866" end="5884" title="Indian reservation" label="Indian reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q155239" start="5886" end="5900" title="Indian reserve" label="Indian reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285362" start="5902" end="5906" title="Band society" label="Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290796" start="5908" end="5917" title="Ranchería" label="Ranchería"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512808" start="5935" end="5939" title="GADM" label="GADM"/>
<link wikidata="Q133153" start="6002" end="6012" title="ISO 3166-2" label="ISO 3166-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011127" start="6124" end="6168" title="List of administrative division name changes" label="List of administrative division name changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243267" start="6170" end="6217" title="List of etymologies of administrative divisions" label="List of etymologies of administrative divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423994" start="6219" end="6262" title="List of administrative divisions by country" label="List of administrative divisions by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q352285" start="6547" end="6559" title="Adansi South District" label="Adansi South"/>
<link wikidata="Q431729" start="6572" end="6582" title="Greater Accra Region" label="Accra Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052743" start="6588" end="6597" title="Regions of Ghana" label="region of"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27054" wikidata="Q1421330" url="?curid=27054" title="Service mark">
<text>A service mark or servicemark is a trademark used in the United States and several other countries to identify a service rather than a product.

When a service mark is federally registered, the standard registration symbol or &quot;Reg U.S. Pat &amp; TM Off&quot; may be used (the same symbol is used to mark registered trademarks). Before it is registered, it is common practice (with some legal standing) to use the service mark symbol (a superscript SM).

== Usage ==
A service mark differs from a trademark in that the mark is used on the advertising of the service rather than on the packaging or delivery of the service, since there is generally no &quot;package&quot; to place the mark on, which is the practice for trademarks. For example, a private carrier can paint its service mark on its vehicles, such as on planes or buses. Personal service providers can place their service marks on their delivery vehicles, such as on the trucks of plumbers or on moving vans. However, if the service deals with communications, it is possible to use a service mark consisting of a sound (a sound trademark) in the process of delivering the service. This has been done in the case of AT&amp;T, which uses a tone sound followed by a woman speaking the company&#x27;s name to identify its long-distance service; MGM, which uses the sound of a tiger&#x27;s roar; and RKO Pictures, which used a Morse code signal for their motion pictures.

Under United States law, service marks have a different standard of use in order to count as a use in commerce, which is necessary to complete registration and to stop infringement by competitors. A trademark normally needs to be used on or directly in association with the sale of goods, such as on a store display. As services are not defined by a concrete product, use of a service mark on the uniforms or vehicles of service providers or in advertisements is instead accepted as a use in commerce. However, like trademarks, service marks must pass a test of distinctiveness for it to be qualified as a service mark. For example, Thrifty, Inc. attempted to submit a service mark application that described aspects of their business (uniforms, buildings, certain vehicles) as &quot;being blue&quot;. The application was rejected for not being specific enough, and the rejection was upheld on appeal.

==See also==
* Certification mark
* Marketing
* Service mark symbol

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1421330" start="2" end="14" title="Service mark" label="service mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421330" start="18" end="29" title="Service mark" label="servicemark"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="35" end="44" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="57" end="70" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="113" end="120" title="Service (economics)" label="service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="135" end="142" title="product (business)" label="product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455766" start="418" end="437" title="service mark symbol" label="service mark symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359501" start="441" end="452" title="subscript and superscript" label="superscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246188" start="750" end="765" title="private carrier" label="private carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q252924" start="948" end="956" title="plumbers" label="plumbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757263" start="963" end="973" title="moving van" label="moving van"/>
<link wikidata="Q466723" start="1089" end="1104" title="sound trademark" label="sound trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q35476" start="1182" end="1190" title="AT&amp;amp;T Inc." label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="1308" end="1311" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q19939" start="1339" end="1344" title="tiger" label="tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="1362" end="1374" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="1389" end="1399" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="1880" end="1893" title="advertisement" label="advertisement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235669" start="2068" end="2081" title="Dollar-Thrifty Automotive Group" label="Thrifty, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q908620" start="2353" end="2371" title="Certification mark" label="Certification mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="2374" end="2383" title="Marketing" label="Marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455766" start="2386" end="2405" title="Service mark symbol" label="Service mark symbol"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27057" wikidata="Q457923" url="?curid=27057" title="Scott Adams">
<text>Scott Raymond Adams (born June 8, 1957) is an American author and cartoonist. He is the creator of the &quot;Dilbert&quot; comic strip and the author of several nonfiction works of business, commentary, and satire. Adams worked in various clerical roles before he became a full-time cartoonist in 1995. While working at Pacific Bell in 1989, Adams created &quot;Dilbert&quot;; by the mid-1990s the strip had gained national prominence in America and began to reach a worldwide audience. &quot;Dilbert&quot; remained popular throughout the following decades, spawning several books written by Adams. 

Adams writes in a satirical way about the social and psychological landscape of white-collar workers in modern corporations. In addition, Adams has written books in various other areas, including the pandeistic spiritual novella &quot;God&#x27;s Debris&quot; and books on political and management topics, including &quot;Loserthink&quot;.

In February 2023, &quot;Dilbert&quot; was dropped by numerous newspapers and its distributor, Andrews McMeel Syndication, after Adams published a video in which he referred to black people as a &quot;hate group&quot; and advised white people to &quot;get the hell away from black people.&quot; Adams later said this was a use of hyperbole. Adams then relaunched the strip as a webcomic on his locals.com website.

==Early life and education==
Adams was born on June 8, 1957, in Windham, New York, the son of Paul and Virginia (née Vining) Adams. He has described himself as &quot;about half German&quot; and also has English, Irish, Welsh, Scottish, and Dutch ancestry. In 2016, Adams said he had a small amount of Native American ancestry, but later discovered via 23andme genetic testing that he does not have any detectable Native American genetic markers. He was a fan of &quot;Peanuts&quot; comics while growing up and started drawing comics at age 6. He won a drawing competition at age 11.

Adams graduated from Windham-Ashland-Jewett Central School in 1975 and was the valedictorian of his class of 39 students. He earned a BA in economics from Hartwick College in Oneonta, New York in 1979. He then moved to California and started work. In 1986, he earned an MBA from the University of California, Berkeley. Adams took Dale Carnegie Training and called it &quot;life changing&quot;.

==Career==

===Office worker===
Adams worked closely with telecommunications engineers at Crocker National Bank in San Francisco between 1979 and 1986. Upon joining the organization, he first worked as a teller. After four months in which he was twice held up at gunpoint, he entered a management training program. His positions included management trainee, computer programmer, budget analyst, commercial lender, product manager, and supervisor.

He later shifted to work at Pacific Bell. To devote time to developing a new career, he woke up every day at 4 a.m. and spent time at various endeavors; cartooning proved to be the most successful of them. Adams created &quot;Dilbert&quot; during this period of personal exploration. The &quot;Dilbert&quot; name was suggested by his former boss, Mike Goodwin. Dogbert, originally named Dildog, was loosely based on his family&#x27;s deceased pet beagle Lucy. His submissions of &quot;Dilbert&quot; and other comic panels to various publications, including &quot;The New Yorker&quot; and &quot;Playboy&quot;, were not published, but an inspirational letter from a fan persuaded Adams to keep trying. He worked at Pacific Bell between 1986 and June 30, 1995, and the personalities he encountered there inspired many of his &quot;Dilbert&quot; characters. In 1989, while still employed at Pacific Bell, Adams launched &quot;Dilbert&quot; with United Media. To maintain his income, he continued to draw his cartoons during the early morning hours. His first payment for &quot;Dilbert&quot; was a monthly royalty check of $368.62. &quot;Dilbert&quot; gradually became more popular. It was syndicated in 100 newspapers in 1991 and 400 by 1994. Adams attributed his success to his idea of including his email address in the panels, which resulted in feedback and suggestions from readers.

===Full-time cartoonist and author===
Adams&#x27; success grew, and he became a full-time cartoonist as &quot;Dilbert&quot; reached 800 newspapers. In 1996, his first business book, &quot;The Dilbert Principle&quot;, was released. It expounded on his concept of the Dilbert principle.

In 1997, Adams won the National Cartoonists Society&#x27;s Reuben Award for Outstanding Cartoonist and Best Newspaper Comic Strip. Logitech CEO Pierluigi Zappacosta invited Adams to impersonate a management consultant, which he did wearing a wig and false mustache. He tricked Logitech managers into adopting a mission statement that Adams described as &quot;so impossibly complicated that it has no real content whatsoever&quot;. His writing in &quot;San Jose Mercury News West Magazine&quot; regarding the incident earned him an Orwell Award. By 2000, the comic was in 2,000 newspapers in 57 countries and 19 languages.

His comic strips were adapted as a &quot;Dilbert&quot; TV series, which debuted in January 1999 and ran for two seasons on UPN. Adams served as executive producer and showrunner, along with &quot;Seinfeld&quot; writer Larry Charles. The show earned a Primetime Emmy Award in 1999. On June 28, 2020, Adams asserted to his followers on Twitter that the show had been canceled because he was white and UPN had made a decision to shift toward African-American viewers.

In addition to his cartoon work, Adams has written books in various other areas, including self-improvement and religion. His book &quot;God&#x27;s Debris&quot; (2001) lays out a theory of pandeism, in which God blows itself up to see what will happen, which becomes the cause of our universe. In &quot;The Religion War&quot; (2004), Adams suggests that followers of theistic religions such as Christianity and Islam are subconsciously aware that their religions are false, and that this awareness is reflected in their consistently acting as if these religions, and their threats of damnation for sinners, are false. In a 2017 interview, Adams said that his books on religion, not &quot;Dilbert&quot;, would be his ultimate legacy. In 2023, Adams announced in a pinned tweet that he had re-published &quot;God&#x27;s Debris&quot; for free for his subscribers, and would shortly publish an AI-voiced audiobook version.

===&quot;Real Coffee with Scott Adams&quot;===
In 2015, Adams wrote blog posts predicting that Donald Trump had a 98 percent chance of winning the presidency based on his persuasion skills, and he started writing about Trump&#x27;s persuasion techniques. His pieces on this topic grew popular, so he started writing about it regularly. Adams soon developed this as a daily video presentation called &quot;Real Coffee with Scott Adams&quot;, distributed to Periscope, YouTube, ScottAdamsSays.com, and Locals, where he covered topics such as current events, politics, persuasion, and routes to success.

&quot;Real Coffee with Scott Adams&quot; has featured guests such as Naval Ravikant, Ed Latimore, Dave Rubin, Erik Finman, Greg Gutfeld, Matt Gaetz, Ben Askren, Carpe Donktum, Mark Schneider, Steve Hsu, Michael Shellenberger, Carson Griffith, Shiva Ayyadurai, James Nortey, Clint Morgan, and Bjørn Lomborg. In 2018, Kanye West shared multiple clips on Twitter from a &quot;Coffee&quot; episode titled: &quot;Scott Adams tells you how Kanye showed the way to The Golden Age. With Coffee.&quot; In 2020, President Trump retweeted an episode where Adams mocked Joe Biden.

Adams offers paid subscriptions for exclusive content on Locals. In 2020, Adams said: &quot;For context, I expect my Dilbert income to largely disappear in the next year as newspapers close up forever. The coronavirus sped up that inevitable trend. Like many of you, I&#x27;m reinventing my life for a post-coronavirus world. The Locals platform is a big part of that.&quot;

===Other===
Adams started Scott Adams Foods, Inc. in 1999, which made the Dilberito and Protein Chef. He sold off his intellectual property in this venture when the product failed in the marketplace in 2003. He was a restaurateur starting in 1997, but exited that business.

Adams co-founded the service WhenHub, which has been described by Gizmodo as &quot;similar to Cameo ... except instead of pre-recorded messages from movie stars and rappers, it offers live chats with a range of subject-matter experts&quot;. In 2019, Adams briefly received negative media attention when during the Gilroy Garlic Festival shooting he posted a tweet suggesting that witnesses download the WhenHub app and &quot;set your price to take calls&quot;. He later apologized, saying the message was &quot;poorly worded&quot;. the WhenHub website is inactive.

Adams was a fan of the science fiction TV series &quot;Babylon 5&quot;. He appeared in the season 4 episode &quot;Moments of Transition&quot; as a character named &quot;Mr. Adams&quot; who hires former head of security Michael Garibaldi to locate his megalomaniacal dog and cat. He had a cameo in &quot;Review&quot;, a third-season episode of the TV series &quot;NewsRadio&quot;, in which Matthew Brock (played by Andy Dick) becomes an obsessed &quot;Dilbert&quot; fan. Adams is credited as &quot;Guy in line behind Dave and Joe in first scene&quot;.

Adams has been a guest on podcasts including &quot;Making Sense with Sam Harris, The Tim Ferriss Show, The James Altucher Show, The Ben Shapiro Show, The Rubin Report&quot;,&quot; Real Talk with Zuby&quot; and &quot;The David Pakman Show.&quot; He has appeared on &quot;Real Time with Bill Maher,&quot; Commonwealth Club of California, Fox News and Berkeley Haas. Adams was interviewed for Mike Cernovich&#x27;s documentaries &quot;Silenced&quot; (2016) and &quot;Hoaxed&quot; (2019). In 2016, Adams contributed a chapter of life advice to Tim Ferriss&#x27;s collection, &quot;Tools of Titans.&quot;

==Views==

===Politics and social issues===
Adams has often commented on political and social matters. In 2016, he wrote on his blog: &quot;I don&#x27;t vote and I am not a member of a political party.&quot; In 2007, he suggested that Michael Bloomberg would make a good presidential candidate. Before the 2008 presidential election, he said: &quot;On social issues, I lean libertarian, minus the crazy stuff.&quot; In December 2011, he said that if he were president, he would do whatever Bill Clinton advised him to do because that &quot;would lead to policies that are a sensible middle ground&quot;. On October 17, 2012, he wrote, &quot;While I don&#x27;t agree with Romney&#x27;s positions on most topics, I&#x27;m endorsing him for president.&quot; 
During the 2016 presidential election, Adams repeatedly praised Donald Trump&#x27;s persuasion skills, and extensively detailed what he called Trump&#x27;s &quot;talent stack&quot;, correctly predicting that Trump would win the Republican nomination and the general election. In 2018, Adams similarly praised the persuasion skills of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. In a blog post from September 2017, Adams described himself as being &quot;left of Bernie Sanders, but with a preference for plans that can work&quot;.

Of the 2016 Democratic National Convention, Adams said: &quot;If you&#x27;re an undecided voter, and male, you&#x27;re seeing ... a celebration that your role in society is permanently diminished. And it&#x27;s happening in an impressive venue that was, in all likelihood, designed and built mostly by men.&quot; Adams said that he temporarily endorsed Hillary Clinton out of fear for his own life, stating that he had received direct and indirect death threats (&quot;Where I live, in California, it is not safe to be seen as supportive of anything Trump says or does. So I fixed that.&quot;). In late September, Adams switched his endorsement from Clinton to Trump. Among his stated primary reasons were his respect for Trump&#x27;s persuasion skills, Clinton&#x27;s proposal to raise the inheritance tax, and his concerns over Clinton&#x27;s health. In mid-October, Adams predicted a Clinton victory would ensure that a male president would never again be elected. He has also stated that writing positively about Trump and supporting him ended his public speaking career and decreased his income by about 40% and number of friends by about 75%.

Adams predicted in March 2020 that Trump, Sanders, and Joe Biden would all contract COVID-19 and that one of them would die from it by the end of the year; in December 2020, when all three men remained alive (although Trump had caught the virus), &quot;Politico&quot; named Adams&#x27;s prediction one of &quot;the most audacious, confident and spectacularly incorrect prognostications about the year&quot;. Adams received further attention in December 2021, in reference to his July 2020 predictions that if Biden were to win the 2020 U.S. presidential election, &quot;there&#x27;s a good chance you will be dead within the year&quot;, &quot;Republicans will be hunted&quot;, and that &quot;[p]olice will stand down&quot;, none of which ultimately occurred. On September 30, 2021, Adams had also tweeted, &quot;My worst prediction of all time was &#x27;If Biden gets elected, there&#x27;s a good chance you will be dead in a year.&#x27; It was closer to two years. I missed it by 100%,&quot; which also did not occur. He also incorrectly predicted in 2024 that there would be a &quot;landslide&quot; of claims of a rigged election, and the Supreme Court would simply overturn the election result to award Trump a win if he lost. However, Trump did win in 2024, and no court cases were involved.

Adams has compared women asking for equal pay to children demanding candy. After a 2022 mass shooting, Adams tweeted that society leaves parents of troubled teenage boys with only two options: to either watch people die, or murder their own son. He said his comments were inspired by his own stepson, who became addicted to drugs at the age of 14 and later died of a fentanyl overdose. Adams&#x27;s comments were roundly criticized, including by James Gunn, who described himself as a former &quot;violent teenager addicted to drugs [who] entered recovery with the help &amp; love of his family&quot;.

=== COVID-19 vaccination ===
In January 2023, Adams announced that he was considering taking legal action against political cartoonist Ben Garrison for defamation, after Garrison published a cartoon that depicted Adams as pro-masking and pro-COVID-19 vaccines. Adams later suggested on a YouTube livestream that people unvaccinated against COVID-19 were less likely to contract the disease than vaccinated people, despite evidence to the contrary.

===Race===
In a 2006 blog post, Adams questioned the number of deaths in the Holocaust, writing, &quot;Is it the sort of number that is so well documented with actual names and perhaps a Nazi paper trail that no historian could doubt its accuracy, give or take ten thousand? Or is it like every other LRN (large round number) that someone pulled out of his ass and it became true by repetition?&quot;

In 2018, Adams said the idea that Trump had praised the white supremacists at the 2017 Unite the Right rally was &quot;fake news&quot;. In 2023, he falsely claimed the rally was &quot;an American intel op against Trump.&quot;

On June 28, 2020, Adams said on Twitter that the &quot;Dilbert&quot; TV show was cancelled because he was white and UPN had decided to focus on an African-American audience, and that he had been &quot;discriminated against&quot;. In a series of comic strips in September 2022, &quot;Dilbert&quot; parodied environmental, social, and corporate governance (ESG) strategies. Part of the plotline involved a black character who &quot;identif[ied] as white&quot; and the company management asking him if he could also identify as gay. According to Adams, the week of September 19, &quot;Dilbert&quot; was pulled from 77 newspapers owned by Lee Enterprises. Adams also claimed that the cancellation was coincidental.

On February 22, 2023, Adams responded to a poll by Rasmussen Reports that asked respondents if they agreed with the statement &quot;it&#x27;s okay to be white&quot;, a seemingly innocuous phrase that the Anti-Defamation League said was being used online in 2017 as part of an alt-right trolling campaign and is associated with the white supremacist movement. The poll showed 53% of black respondents agreed with the phrase, 26% disagreed, and 21% were not sure. On a YouTube livestream of his &quot;Real Coffee with Scott Adams&quot; program, Adams, who said he was upset that nearly half did not agree, characterized black people as a &quot;hate group&quot; and said &quot;the best advice I would give to white people is to get the hell away from black people; just get the fuck away.&quot; His comments were widely characterized as racist. In response to these and other related comments, &quot;Dilbert&quot; was dropped by numerous newspapers across the country, including the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, and &quot;USA Today&quot;-affiliated newspapers. Andrews McMeel Syndication, the distributor of &quot;Dilbert&quot;, announced on February 27, 2023 that it was severing all ties with Adams. Portfolio, his book publisher, announced it was dropping his non-&quot;Dilbert&quot; book that was scheduled for release in September 2023.

In response to the incident, Adams said his remarks were hyperbole and that the stories reported about them ignored the context; he conjectured that nobody would disagree with his main points and stated he disavowed racists. Adams announced that on March 13, 2023, the strip would return as &quot;Dilbert Reborn&quot; on the subscription website Locals.

==Personal life==
Since late 2004, Adams has had focal dystonia, which has affected his ability to draw for lengthy periods. He now draws on a graphics tablet. He also had spasmodic dysphonia, a condition that causes the vocal cords to behave abnormally. In July 2008, he underwent surgery to reroute the nerve connections to his vocal cords, and his voice is now completely functional.

Adams married Shelly Miles aboard a yacht, the &quot;Galaxy Commodore&quot;, on July 22, 2006, in San Francisco Bay, in a ceremony conducted by the ship&#x27;s captain. The two had met at a gym in Pleasanton, California, where Miles was an employee and Adams was a customer. Adams was stepfather to Miles&#x27; two children, Savannah and Justin, the latter of whom died of a fentanyl overdose in 2018 at age 18. Adams and Miles divorced in 2014, and Adams said the two remained friends, with Miles moving only one block away after their separation.

On Christmas Day in 2019, Adams announced on his podcast that he was engaged to Kristina Basham, and later revealed that they had married on July 11, 2020. Basham, a model and baker, has two daughters and is a vice president at WhenHub. On March 10, 2022, Adams announced on his YouTube podcast that he and Basham were getting divorced.

Adams trained as a hypnotist. He credits affirmations for many of his achievements, including scoring in the ninety-fourth percentile on a difficult qualification exam for business school and creating &quot;Dilbert&quot;″s success. He states that the affirmations give him focus. He has described a method he has used that he says gave him success: he pictured in his mind what he wanted and wrote it down 15 times a day on a piece of paper. (This technique is used by Dogbert in a 1989 &quot;Dilbert&quot; strip.)

Adams continues to live in Pleasanton, California and is active in the San Francisco Bay Area.

==Recognition==
Adams has received recognition for his work, including the National Cartoonists Society Reuben Award and Newspaper Comic Strip Award for 1997 for his work on &quot;Dilbert&quot;. He climbed the European Foundation for Management Development (EFMD) rankings of the 50 most influential management thinkers, placing 31st in 2001, 27th in 2003, 12th in 2005, and 21st in 2007. He received the Orwell Award in 1998 for his participation in &quot;Mission Impertinent&quot; for &quot;San Jose Mercury News West Magazine&quot;.

==In popular culture==
Adams has coined several words and phrases over the years, including Confusopoly (businesses that stay afloat only by intentionally misleading their customers), the Dilbert principle (a variant on the Peter principle), Elbonia as a term for non-specific overseas countries, and Pointy-Haired Boss (PHB) and Induhvidual as insults.

Adams is quoted in the book &quot;Steve Jobs&quot; by Walter Isaacson. Adams wrote a blog post in 2010 about Steve Jobs&#x27; response to Antennagate, in which he says &quot;Apple&#x27;s response to the iPhone 4 problem didn&#x27;t follow the public relations playbook, because Jobs decided to rewrite the playbook ... If you want to know what genius looks like, study Jobs&#x27; words.&quot; Jobs proudly emailed this around.

==Publications==

===&quot;Dilbert&quot; compilations===
* &quot;Always Postpone Meetings with Time-Wasting Morons&quot; (1992)
* &quot;Shave the Whales&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Bring Me the Head of Willy the Mailboy!&quot; (1995)
* &quot;It&#x27;s Obvious You Won&#x27;t Survive by Your Wits Alone&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Still Pumped from Using the Mouse&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Fugitive from the Cubicle Police&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Casual Day Has Gone Too Far&quot; (1997)
* &quot;I&#x27;m Not Anti-Business, I&#x27;m Anti-Idiot&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Journey to Cubeville&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Step in the Leadership&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Random Acts of Management&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Excuse Me While I Wag&quot; (2001)
* &quot;When Did Ignorance Become a Point of View?&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Another Day in Cubicle Paradise&quot; (2002)
* &quot;All Dressed Down and Nowhere to Go&quot; (2002) (&quot;Still Pumped from Using the Mouse&quot;, &quot;Casual Day Has Gone Too Far&quot;, and &quot;I&#x27;m Not Anti-Business, I&#x27;m Anti-Idiot&quot; combined)
* &quot;When Body Language Goes Bad&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Words You Don&#x27;t Want to Hear During Your Annual Performance Review&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Don&#x27;t Stand Where the Comet Is Assumed to Strike Oil&quot; (2004)
* &quot;The Fluorescent Light Glistens Off Your Head&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Thriving on Vague Objectives&quot; (2005)
* &quot;Try Rebooting Yourself&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Positive Attitude&quot; (2007)
* &quot;This Is the Part Where You Pretend to Add Value&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Dilbert 2.0: 20 Years of Dilbert&quot; (2008)
* &quot;Freedom&#x27;s Just Another Word for People Finding Out You&#x27;re Useless&quot; (2009)
* &quot;14 Years of Loyal Service in a Fabric-Covered Box&quot; (2009)
* &quot;I&#x27;m Tempted to Stop Acting Randomly&quot; (2010)
* &quot;How&#x27;s That Underling Thing Working Out for You?&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Teamwork Means You Can&#x27;t Pick the Side that&#x27;s Right&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Your New Job Title Is &quot;Accomplice&quot;&quot; (2013)
* &quot;I Sense a Coldness to Your Mentoring&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Go Add Value Someplace Else&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Optimism Sounds Exhausting&quot; (2015)
* &quot;I&#x27;m No Scientist, But I Think Feng Shui Is Part of the Answer&quot; (2016)
* &quot;Dilbert Gets Re-accommodated&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Cubicles That Make You Envy the Dead&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Dilbert Turns 30&quot; (2019)

===Special compilations (annotated, favorites, etc.)===
* &quot;Build a Better Life by Stealing Office Supplies: Dogbert&#x27;s Big Book of Business&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Dogbert&#x27;s Clues for the Clueless&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Seven Years of Highly Defective People&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Dilbert Gives You the Business&quot; (1999)
* &quot;A Treasury of Sunday Strips: Version 00&quot; (2000)
* &quot;What Do You Call a Sociopath in a Cubicle? Answer: A Coworker&quot; (2002)
* &quot;It&#x27;s Not Funny If I Have to Explain It&quot; (2004)
* &quot;What Would Wally Do?&quot; (2006)
* &quot;Cubes and Punishment&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Problem Identified: And You&#x27;re Probably Not Part of the Solution&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Your Accomplishments Are Suspiciously Hard to Verify&quot; (2011)
* &quot;I Can&#x27;t Remember If We&#x27;re Cheap or Smart&quot; (2012)

===Other &quot;Dilbert&quot; books===
* &quot;Telling It Like It Isn&#x27;t&quot; (1996)
* &quot;You Don&#x27;t Need Experience If You&#x27;ve Got Attitude&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Access Denied: Dilbert&#x27;s Quest for Love in the Nineties&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Conversations With Dogbert&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Work Is a Contact Sport&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Boss: Nameless, Blameless and Shameless&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Dilbert Bunch&quot; (1997)
* &quot;No You&#x27;d Better Watch Out&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Please Don&#x27;t Feed the Egos&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Random Acts of Catness&quot; (1998)
* &quot;You Can&#x27;t Schedule Stupidity&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Dilbert Meeting Book Exceeding Tech Limits&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Trapped in a Dilbert World: Book Of Days&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Work—The Wally Way&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Alice in Blunderland&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Dilbert Sudoku Comic Digest: 200 Puzzles Plus 50 Classic Dilbert Cartoons&quot; (2008)

===&quot;Dilbert&quot;-related business publications===
* &quot;Dilbert Newsletter&quot; (since 1994)
* &quot;The Dilbert Principle&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Dogbert&#x27;s Top Secret Management Handbook&quot; (1996)
* &quot;The Dilbert Future&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Joy of Work&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Dilbert and the Way of the Weasel&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Slapped Together: The Dilbert Business Anthology&quot; (2002) (&quot;The Dilbert Principle&quot;, &quot;The Dilbert Future&quot;, and &quot;The Joy of Work&quot;, published together in one book)
* &quot;Dilbert&#x27;s Guide to the Rest of Your Life: Dispatches from Cubicleland&quot; (2007)

===Non-&quot;Dilbert&quot; publications===
* &quot;God&#x27;s Debris&quot; (2001)
* &quot;The Religion War&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Stick to Drawing Comics, Monkey Brain!&quot; (2007)
* &quot;How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Win Bigly: Persuasion in a World Where Facts Don&#x27;t Matter&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Loserthink: How Untrained Brains Are Ruining America&quot; (2019)
* &quot;Reframe Your Brain: The User Interface for Happiness and Success&quot; (2023)
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Scott Adams Says at Periscope
* 
* PR efforts for the October 2013 release of &quot;How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big&quot;
** </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q457923" start="0" end="19" title="Scott Adams" label="Scott Raymond Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q726431" start="109" end="116" title="Dilbert" label="Dilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122309" start="320" end="332" title="Pacific Bell" label="Pacific Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="619" end="628" title="Satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q255274" start="681" end="700" title="white-collar worker" label="white-collar worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620224" start="801" end="811" title="Pandeism" label="pandeistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575683" start="836" end="853" title="God&amp;#x27;s Debris" label="God&amp;#x27;s Debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q105580682" start="922" end="932" title="Loserthink" label="Loserthink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894091" start="1035" end="1061" title="Andrews McMeel Syndication" label="Andrews McMeel Syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="1318" end="1326" title="webcomic" label="webcomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97159915" start="1334" end="1344" title="locals" label="locals.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q746326" start="1419" end="1436" title="Windham (town), New York" label="Windham, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1656" end="1671" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q216272" start="1707" end="1714" title="23andme" label="23andme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="1823" end="1830" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024182" start="1960" end="1997" title="Windham-Ashland-Jewett Central School" label="Windham-Ashland-Jewett Central School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416417" start="2018" end="2031" title="valedictorian" label="valedictorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="2073" end="2075" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653975" start="2094" end="2110" title="Hartwick College" label="Hartwick College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019805" start="2114" end="2131" title="Oneonta, New York" label="Oneonta, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="2209" end="2212" title="Master of Business Administration" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="2222" end="2256" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q230762" start="2269" end="2291" title="Dale Carnegie Training" label="Dale Carnegie Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187327" start="2424" end="2445" title="Crocker National Bank" label="Crocker National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q806805" start="2538" end="2544" title="Bank teller" label="teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122309" start="2810" end="2822" title="Pacific Bell" label="Pacific Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q21102" start="3229" end="3235" title="beagle" label="beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="3345" end="3359" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="3376" end="3383" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550700" start="3723" end="3735" title="United Media" label="United Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q585169" start="4432" end="4449" title="Dilbert principle" label="Dilbert principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571762" start="4475" end="4503" title="National Cartoonists Society" label="National Cartoonists Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q223127" start="4583" end="4591" title="Logitech" label="Logitech"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903138" start="4596" end="4616" title="Pierluigi Zappacosta" label="Pierluigi Zappacosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q942830" start="4763" end="4780" title="mission statement" label="mission statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414464" start="4904" end="4939" title="San Jose Mercury News West Magazine" label="San Jose Mercury News West Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032350" start="4983" end="4995" title="Orwell Award" label="Orwell Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027966" start="5110" end="5139" title="Dilbert (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Dilbert&amp;quot; TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="5198" end="5201" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q23733" start="5271" end="5279" title="Seinfeld" label="Seinfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q722115" start="5293" end="5306" title="Larry Charles" label="Larry Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="5326" end="5346" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="5409" end="5416" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="5464" end="5469" title="White people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="5514" end="5530" title="African Americans" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575683" start="5678" end="5695" title="God&amp;#x27;s Debris" label="God&amp;#x27;s Debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620224" start="5730" end="5738" title="pandeism" label="pandeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760112" start="5844" end="5860" title="The Religion War" label="The Religion War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="5935" end="5947" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="5952" end="5957" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="6556" end="6568" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q19687076" start="6917" end="6926" title="Periscope (service)" label="Periscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="6928" end="6935" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q97159915" start="6961" end="6967" title="Locals" label="Locals"/>
<link wikidata="Q84323677" start="7132" end="7146" title="Naval Ravikant" label="Naval Ravikant"/>
<link wikidata="Q86330941" start="7148" end="7159" title="Ed Latimore" label="Ed Latimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229737" start="7161" end="7171" title="Dave Rubin" label="Dave Rubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544916" start="7186" end="7198" title="Greg Gutfeld" label="Greg Gutfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221742" start="7200" end="7210" title="Matt Gaetz" label="Matt Gaetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q203633" start="7212" end="7222" title="Ben Askren" label="Ben Askren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612893" start="7255" end="7264" title="Steve Hsu" label="Steve Hsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834344" start="7266" end="7287" title="Michael Shellenberger" label="Michael Shellenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499234" start="7306" end="7321" title="Shiva Ayyadurai" label="Shiva Ayyadurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q318511" start="7355" end="7368" title="Bjørn Lomborg" label="Bjørn Lomborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="7379" end="7389" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q56119332" start="7581" end="7588" title="retweet" label="retweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="7621" end="7630" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q97159915" start="7690" end="7696" title="Locals" label="Locals"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="7839" end="7850" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="coronavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249012" start="8083" end="8092" title="Dilberito" label="Dilberito"/>
<link wikidata="Q64681756" start="8378" end="8383" title="Cameo (website)" label="Cameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q65966131" start="8598" end="8629" title="Gilroy Garlic Festival shooting" label="Gilroy Garlic Festival shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q210146" start="8905" end="8914" title="Babylon 5" label="Babylon 5"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8964" end="8985" title="List of Babylon 5 episodes#ep80" label="Moments of Transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622593" start="9069" end="9086" title="Michael Garibaldi" label="Michael Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9153" end="9159" title="List of NewsRadio episodes#Review" label="Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q427583" start="9213" end="9222" title="NewsRadio" label="NewsRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q367094" start="9264" end="9273" title="Andy Dick" label="Andy Dick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9453" end="9481" title="Sam Harris#Podcast" label="Making Sense with Sam Harris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9483" end="9503" title="Tim Ferriss#Podcast" label="The Tim Ferriss Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441200" start="9505" end="9528" title="The James Altucher Show" label="The James Altucher Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q66141312" start="9530" end="9550" title="The Ben Shapiro Show" label="The Ben Shapiro Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160144" start="9552" end="9568" title="The Rubin Report" label="The Rubin Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q16231637" start="9582" end="9601" title="Zuby (rapper)" label="Real Talk with Zuby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729118" start="9618" end="9639" title="The David Pakman Show" label="The David Pakman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030903" start="9672" end="9697" title="Real Time with Bill Maher" label="Real Time with Bill Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153714" start="9705" end="9736" title="Commonwealth Club of California" label="Commonwealth Club of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="9738" end="9746" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125258" start="9751" end="9764" title="Berkeley Haas" label="Berkeley Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877764" start="9792" end="9806" title="Mike Cernovich" label="Mike Cernovich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9814" end="9827" title="Mike Cernovich#Films" label="documentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q563672" start="9942" end="9953" title="Tim Ferriss" label="Tim Ferriss"/>
<link wikidata="Q105477428" start="9979" end="9994" title="Tools of Titans" label="Tools of Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="10238" end="10255" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="10377" end="10388" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="10493" end="10505" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="10674" end="10680" title="Mitt Romney" label="Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="10823" end="10835" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092711" start="10987" end="11008" title="2016 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="Republican nomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q55223040" start="11093" end="11117" title="Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez" label="Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="11202" end="11216" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156276" start="11279" end="11314" title="2016 Democratic National Convention" label="2016 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="11625" end="11640" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="12063" end="12078" title="inheritance tax" label="inheritance tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="12477" end="12486" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="12506" end="12514" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109740" start="12675" end="12683" title="Politico" label="Politico"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="12953" end="12984" title="2020 U.S. presidential election" label="2020 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q112898269" start="13800" end="13820" title="Highland Park parade shooting" label="a 2022 mass shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q407541" start="14086" end="14094" title="fentanyl" label="fentanyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q717015" start="14165" end="14175" title="James Gunn" label="James Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924895" start="14457" end="14469" title="Ben Garrison" label="Ben Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="14474" end="14484" title="defamation" label="defamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q90416196" start="14548" end="14555" title="Face masks during the COVID-19 pandemic" label="masking"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="14564" end="14581" title="COVID-19 vaccines" label="COVID-19 vaccines"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="14610" end="14617" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="14848" end="14857" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="15229" end="15247" title="white supremacists" label="white supremacists"/>
<link wikidata="Q36248530" start="15260" end="15281" title="Unite the Right rally" label="Unite the Right rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="15432" end="15439" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817465" start="15706" end="15753" title="environmental, social, and corporate governance" label="environmental, social, and corporate governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513538" start="16035" end="16050" title="Lee Enterprises" label="Lee Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295145" start="16163" end="16180" title="Rasmussen Reports" label="Rasmussen Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q47504984" start="16244" end="16270" title="it&amp;#x27;s okay to be white" label="it&amp;#x27;s okay to be white"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="16316" end="16338" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018230" start="16388" end="16397" title="alt-right" label="alt-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027665" start="16587" end="16597" title="livestream" label="livestream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233801" start="16754" end="16764" title="hate group" label="hate group"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="17098" end="17115" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="17129" end="17148" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="17166" end="17175" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894091" start="17205" end="17231" title="Andrews McMeel Syndication" label="Andrews McMeel Syndication"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630273" start="17346" end="17355" title="Portfolio (publisher)" label="Portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q181036" start="17544" end="17553" title="hyperbole" label="hyperbole"/>
<link wikidata="Q97159915" start="17833" end="17839" title="Locals" label="Locals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428695" start="17891" end="17905" title="focal dystonia" label="focal dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189414" start="17985" end="18000" title="graphics tablet" label="graphics tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782574" start="18014" end="18033" title="spasmodic dysphonia" label="spasmodic dysphonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215558" start="18063" end="18074" title="vocal cords" label="vocal cords"/>
<link wikidata="Q170173" start="18266" end="18271" title="yacht" label="yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="18328" end="18345" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q747444" start="18427" end="18449" title="Pleasanton, California" label="Pleasanton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q407541" start="18605" end="18613" title="fentanyl" label="fentanyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="19137" end="19146" title="Hypnosis" label="hypnotist"/>
<link wikidata="Q382812" start="19159" end="19171" title="Affirmations (New Age)" label="affirmations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571762" start="19805" end="19833" title="National Cartoonists Society" label="National Cartoonists Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571762" start="19834" end="19846" title="Reuben Award" label="Reuben Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376622" start="19940" end="19986" title="European Foundation for Management Development" label="European Foundation for Management Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032350" start="20135" end="20147" title="Orwell Award" label="Orwell Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414464" start="20223" end="20258" title="San Jose Mercury News West Magazine" label="San Jose Mercury News West Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084271" start="20359" end="20370" title="Confusopoly" label="Confusopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q585169" start="20455" end="20472" title="Dilbert principle" label="Dilbert principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q497359" start="20491" end="20506" title="Peter principle" label="Peter principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q726431" start="20509" end="20516" title="Elbonia" label="Elbonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568994" start="20568" end="20586" title="Pointy-Haired Boss" label="Pointy-Haired Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q726431" start="20597" end="20608" title="Induhvidual" label="Induhvidual"/>
<link wikidata="Q625645" start="20656" end="20666" title="Steve Jobs (book)" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q681012" start="20676" end="20691" title="Walter Isaacson" label="Walter Isaacson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="20731" end="20741" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q300890" start="20760" end="20771" title="Antennagate" label="Antennagate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743722" start="25574" end="25589" title="The Joy of Work" label="The Joy of Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575683" start="26009" end="26026" title="God&amp;#x27;s Debris" label="God&amp;#x27;s Debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760112" start="26048" end="26064" title="The Religion War" label="The Religion War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616245" start="26086" end="26124" title="Stick to Drawing Comics, Monkey Brain!" label="Stick to Drawing Comics, Monkey Brain!"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614017" start="26146" end="26196" title="How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big" label="How to Fail at Almost Everything and Still Win Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637785" start="26218" end="26280" title="Win Bigly" label="Win Bigly: Persuasion in a World Where Facts Don&amp;#x27;t Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q105580682" start="26302" end="26354" title="Loserthink" label="Loserthink: How Untrained Brains Are Ruining America"/>
<link wikidata="Q19687076" start="26513" end="26522" title="Periscope (app)" label="Periscope"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27058" wikidata="Q11427" url="?curid=27058" title="Steel">
<text>Steel is an alloy of iron and carbon with improved strength and fracture resistance compared to other forms of iron. Because of its high tensile strength and low cost, steel is one of the most commonly manufactured materials in the world. Steel is used in buildings, as concrete reinforcing rods, in bridges, infrastructure, tools, ships, trains, cars, bicycles, machines, electrical appliances, furniture, and weapons.

Iron is always the main element in steel, but many other elements may be present or added. Stainless steels, which are resistant to corrosion and oxidation, typically are 11% chromium.

Iron is the base metal of steel. Depending on the temperature, it can take two crystalline forms (allotropic forms): body-centred cubic and face-centred cubic. The interaction of the allotropes of iron with the alloying elements, primarily carbon, gives steel and cast iron their range of unique properties. In pure iron, the crystal structure has relatively little resistance to the iron atoms slipping past one another, and so pure iron is quite ductile, or soft and easily formed. In steel, small amounts of carbon, other elements, and inclusions within the iron act as hardening agents that prevent the movement of dislocations.

The carbon in typical steel alloys may contribute up to 2.14% of its weight. Varying the amount of carbon and many other alloying elements, as well as controlling their chemical and physical makeup in the final steel (either as solute elements, or as precipitated phases), impedes the movement of the dislocations that make pure iron ductile, and thus controls and enhances its qualities. These qualities include the hardness, quenching behaviour, need for annealing, tempering behaviour, yield strength, and tensile strength of the resulting steel. The increase in steel&#x27;s strength compared to pure iron is possible only by reducing iron&#x27;s ductility.

Steel was produced in bloomery furnaces for thousands of years, but its large-scale, industrial use began only after more efficient production methods were devised in the 17th century, with the introduction of the blast furnace and production of crucible steel. This was followed by the Bessemer process in England in the mid-19th century, and then by the open-hearth furnace. With the invention of the Bessemer process, a new era of mass-produced steel began. Mild steel replaced wrought iron. The German states were the major steel producers in Europe in the 19th century. American steel production was centred in Pittsburgh, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, and Cleveland until the late 20th century. Currently, world steel production is centered in China, which produced 54% of the world&#x27;s steel in 2023.

Further refinements in the process, such as basic oxygen steelmaking (BOS), largely replaced earlier methods by further lowering the cost of production and increasing the quality of the final product. Today more than 1.6 billion tons of steel is produced annually. Modern steel is generally identified by various grades defined by assorted standards organizations. The modern steel industry is one of the largest manufacturing industries in the world, but also one of the most energy and greenhouse gas emission intense industries, contributing 8% of global emissions. However, steel is also very reusable: it is one of the world&#x27;s most-recycled materials, with a recycling rate of over 60% globally.

==Definitions and related materials==
The noun &quot;steel&quot; originates from the Proto-Germanic adjective or &#x27;made of steel&#x27;, which is related to or &#x27;standing firm&#x27;.

The carbon content of steel is between 0.02% and 2.14% by weight for plain carbon steel (iron-carbon alloys). Too little carbon content leaves (pure) iron quite soft, ductile, and weak. Carbon contents higher than those of steel make a brittle alloy commonly called pig iron. Alloy steel is steel to which other alloying elements have been intentionally added to modify the characteristics of steel. Common alloying elements include: manganese, nickel, chromium, molybdenum, boron, titanium, vanadium, tungsten, cobalt, and niobium. Additional elements, most frequently considered undesirable, are also important in steel: phosphorus, sulphur, silicon, and traces of oxygen, nitrogen, and copper.

Plain carbon-iron alloys with a higher than 2.1% carbon content are known as cast iron. With modern steelmaking techniques such as powder metal forming, it is possible to make very high-carbon (and other alloy material) steels, but such are not common. Cast iron is not malleable even when hot, but it can be formed by casting as it has a lower melting point than steel and good castability properties. Certain compositions of cast iron, while retaining the economies of melting and casting, can be heat treated after casting to make malleable iron or ductile iron objects. Steel is distinguishable from wrought iron (now largely obsolete), which may contain a small amount of carbon but large amounts of slag.

==Material properties==
===Origins and production===
Iron is commonly found in the Earth&#x27;s crust in the form of an ore, usually an iron oxide, such as magnetite or hematite. Iron is extracted from iron ore by removing the oxygen through its combination with a preferred chemical partner such as carbon which is then lost to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. This process, known as smelting, was first applied to metals with lower melting points, such as tin, which melts at about , and copper, which melts at about , and the combination, bronze, which has a melting point lower than . In comparison, cast iron melts at about . Small quantities of iron were smelted in ancient times, in the solid-state, by heating the ore in a charcoal fire and then welding the clumps together with a hammer and in the process squeezing out the impurities. With care, the carbon content could be controlled by moving it around in the fire. Unlike copper and tin, liquid or solid iron dissolves carbon quite readily.

All of these temperatures could be reached with ancient methods used since the Bronze Age. Since the oxidation rate of iron increases rapidly beyond , it is important that smelting take place in a low-oxygen environment. Smelting, using carbon to reduce iron oxides, results in an alloy (pig iron) that retains too much carbon to be called steel. The excess carbon and other impurities are removed in a subsequent step.

Other materials are often added to the iron/carbon mixture to produce steel with the desired properties. Nickel and manganese in steel add to its tensile strength and make the austenite form of the iron-carbon solution more stable, chromium increases hardness and melting temperature, and vanadium also increases hardness while making it less prone to metal fatigue.

To inhibit corrosion, at least 11% chromium can be added to steel so that a hard oxide forms on the metal surface; this is known as stainless steel. Tungsten slows the formation of cementite, keeping carbon in the iron matrix and allowing martensite to preferentially form at slower quench rates, resulting in high-speed steel. The addition of lead and sulphur decrease grain size, thereby making the steel easier to turn, but also more brittle and prone to corrosion. Such alloys are nevertheless frequently used for components such as nuts, bolts, and washers in applications where toughness and corrosion resistance are not paramount. For the most part, however, p-block elements such as sulphur, nitrogen, phosphorus, and lead are considered contaminants that make steel more brittle and are therefore removed from steel during the melting processing.

===Properties===

The density of steel varies based on the alloying constituents but usually ranges between , or .

Even in a narrow range of concentrations of mixtures of carbon and iron that make steel, several different metallurgical structures, with very different properties can form. Understanding such properties is essential to making quality steel. At room temperature, the most stable form of pure iron is the body-centred cubic (BCC) structure called alpha iron or α-iron. It is a fairly soft metal that can dissolve only a small concentration of carbon, no more than 0.005% at and 0.021 wt% at . The inclusion of carbon in alpha iron is called ferrite. At 910 °C, pure iron transforms into a face-centred cubic (FCC) structure, called gamma iron or γ-iron. The inclusion of carbon in gamma iron is called austenite. The more open FCC structure of austenite can dissolve considerably more carbon, as much as 2.1%, (38 times that of ferrite) carbon at , which reflects the upper carbon content of steel, beyond which is cast iron. When carbon moves out of solution with iron, it forms a very hard, but brittle material called cementite (Fe3C).

When steels with exactly 0.8% carbon (known as a eutectoid steel), are cooled, the austenitic phase (FCC) of the mixture attempts to revert to the ferrite phase (BCC). The carbon no longer fits within the FCC austenite structure, resulting in an excess of carbon. One way for carbon to leave the austenite is for it to precipitate out of solution as cementite, leaving behind a surrounding phase of BCC iron called ferrite with a small percentage of carbon in solution. The two, cementite and ferrite, precipitate simultaneously producing a layered structure called pearlite, named for its resemblance to mother of pearl. In a hypereutectoid composition (greater than 0.8% carbon), the carbon will first precipitate out as large inclusions of cementite at the austenite grain boundaries until the percentage of carbon in the grains has decreased to the eutectoid composition (0.8% carbon), at which point the pearlite structure forms. For steels that have less than 0.8% carbon (hypoeutectoid), ferrite will first form within the grains until the remaining composition rises to 0.8% of carbon, at which point the pearlite structure will form. No large inclusions of cementite will form at the boundaries in hypoeutectoid steel. The above assumes that the cooling process is very slow, allowing enough time for the carbon to migrate.

As the rate of cooling is increased the carbon will have less time to migrate to form carbide at the grain boundaries but will have increasingly large amounts of pearlite of a finer and finer structure within the grains; hence the carbide is more widely dispersed and acts to prevent slip of defects within those grains, resulting in hardening of the steel. At the very high cooling rates produced by quenching, the carbon has no time to migrate but is locked within the face-centred austenite and forms martensite. Martensite is a highly strained and stressed, supersaturated form of carbon and iron and is exceedingly hard but brittle. Depending on the carbon content, the martensitic phase takes different forms. Below 0.2% carbon, it takes on a ferrite BCC crystal form, but at higher carbon content it takes a body-centred tetragonal (BCT) structure. There is no thermal activation energy for the transformation from austenite to martensite. There is no compositional change so the atoms generally retain their same neighbours.

Martensite has a lower density (it expands during the cooling) than does austenite, so that the transformation between them results in a change of volume. In this case, expansion occurs. Internal stresses from this expansion generally take the form of compression on the crystals of martensite and tension on the remaining ferrite, with a fair amount of shear on both constituents. If quenching is done improperly, the internal stresses can cause a part to shatter as it cools. At the very least, they cause internal work hardening and other microscopic imperfections. It is common for quench cracks to form when steel is water quenched, although they may not always be visible.

===Heat treatment===

There are many types of heat treating processes available to steel. The most common are annealing, quenching, and tempering.

Annealing is the process of heating the steel to a sufficiently high temperature to relieve local internal stresses. It does not create a general softening of the product but only locally relieves strains and stresses locked up within the material. Annealing goes through three phases: recovery, recrystallization, and grain growth. The temperature required to anneal a particular steel depends on the type of annealing to be achieved and the alloying constituents.

Quenching involves heating the steel to create the austenite phase then quenching it in water or oil. This rapid cooling results in a hard but brittle martensitic structure. The steel is then tempered, which is just a specialized type of annealing, to reduce brittleness. In this application the annealing (tempering) process transforms some of the martensite into cementite, or spheroidite and hence it reduces the internal stresses and defects. The result is a more ductile and fracture-resistant steel.

==Production==

When iron is smelted from its ore, it contains more carbon than is desirable. To become steel, it must be reprocessed to reduce the carbon to the correct amount, at which point other elements can be added. In the past, steel facilities would cast the raw steel product into ingots which would be stored until use in further refinement processes that resulted in the finished product. In modern facilities, the initial product is close to the final composition and is continuously cast into long slabs, cut and shaped into bars and extrusions and heat treated to produce a final product. Today, approximately 96% of steel is continuously cast, while only 4% is produced as ingots.

The ingots are then heated in a soaking pit and hot rolled into slabs, billets, or blooms. Slabs are hot or cold rolled into sheet metal or plates. Billets are hot or cold rolled into bars, rods, and wire. Blooms are hot or cold rolled into structural steel, such as I-beams and rails. In modern steel mills these processes often occur in one assembly line, with ore coming in and finished steel products coming out. Sometimes after a steel&#x27;s final rolling, it is heat treated for strength; however, this is relatively rare.

==History==

===Ancient===

Steel was known in antiquity and was produced in bloomeries and crucibles.

The earliest known production of steel is seen in pieces of ironware excavated from an archaeological site in Anatolia (Kaman-Kalehöyük) which are nearly 4,000 years old, dating from 1800 BC. 

Wootz steel was developed in Southern India and Sri Lanka in the 1st millennium BCE. Metal production sites in Sri Lanka employed wind furnaces driven by the monsoon winds, capable of producing high-carbon steel. Large-scale wootz steel production in India using crucibles occurred by the sixth century BC, the pioneering precursor to modern steel production and metallurgy.

High-carbon steel was produced in Britain at Broxmouth Hillfort from 490–375 BC, and ultrahigh-carbon steel was produced in the Netherlands from the 2nd-4th centuries AD. The Roman author Horace identifies steel weapons such as the &quot;falcata&quot; in the Iberian Peninsula, while Noric steel was used by the Roman military.

The Chinese of the Warring States period (403–221 BC) had quench-hardened steel, while Chinese of the Han dynasty (202 BC—AD 220) created steel by melting together wrought iron with cast iron, thus producing a carbon-intermediate steel by the 1st century AD.

There is evidence that carbon steel was made in Western Tanzania by the ancestors of the Haya people as early as 2,000 years ago by a complex process of &quot;pre-heating&quot; allowing temperatures inside a furnace to reach 1300 to 1400 °C.

===Wootz and Damascus===
Evidence of the earliest production of high carbon steel in South Asia is found in Kodumanal in Tamil Nadu, the Golconda area in Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, regions of India, as well as in Samanalawewa and Dehigaha Alakanda, regions of Sri Lanka. This came to be known as wootz steel, produced in South India by about the sixth century BC and exported globally. The steel technology existed prior to 326 BC in the region as they are mentioned in literature of Sangam Tamil, Arabic, and Latin as the finest steel in the world exported to the Roman, Egyptian, Chinese and Arab worlds at that time – what they called &quot;Seric Iron&quot;. A 200 BC Tamil trade guild in Tissamaharama, in the South East of Sri Lanka, brought with them some of the oldest iron and steel artifacts and production processes to the island from the classical period. The Chinese and locals in Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka had also adopted the production methods of creating wootz steel from the Chera Dynasty Tamils of South India by the 5th century AD. In Sri Lanka, this early steel-making method employed a unique wind furnace, driven by the monsoon winds, capable of producing high-carbon steel. Since the technology was acquired from the Tamilians from South India, the origin of steel technology in India can be conservatively estimated at 400–500 BC.

The manufacture of wootz steel and Damascus steel, famous for its durability and ability to hold an edge, may have been taken by the Arabs from Persia, who took it from India. In 327 BC, Alexander the Great was rewarded by the defeated King Porus, not with gold or silver but with 30 pounds of steel. A recent study has speculated that carbon nanotubes were included in its structure, which might explain some of its legendary qualities, though, given the technology of that time, such qualities were produced by chance rather than by design. Natural wind was used where the soil containing iron was heated by the use of wood. The ancient Sinhalese managed to extract a ton of steel for every 2 tons of soil, a remarkable feat at the time. One such furnace was found in Samanalawewa and archaeologists were able to produce steel as the ancients did.

Crucible steel, formed by slowly heating and cooling pure iron and carbon (typically in the form of charcoal) in a crucible, was produced in Merv by the 9th to 10th century AD. In the 11th century, there is evidence of the production of steel in Song China using two techniques: a &quot;berganesque&quot; method that produced inferior, inhomogeneous steel, and a precursor to the modern Bessemer process that used partial decarburization via repeated forging under a cold blast.

===Modern===

Since the 17th century, the first step in European steel production has been the smelting of iron ore into pig iron in a blast furnace. Originally employing charcoal, modern methods use coke, which has proven more economical.

====Processes starting from bar iron====

In these processes, pig iron made from raw iron ore was refined (fined) in a finery forge to produce bar iron, which was then used in steel-making.

The production of steel by the cementation process was described in a treatise published in Prague in 1574 and was in use in Nuremberg from 1601. A similar process for case hardening armour and files was described in a book published in Naples in 1589. The process was introduced to England in about 1614 and used to produce such steel by Sir Basil Brooke at Coalbrookdale during the 1610s.

The raw material for this process were bars of iron. During the 17th century, it was realized that the best steel came from oregrounds iron of a region north of Stockholm, Sweden. This was still the usual raw material source in the 19th century, almost as long as the process was used.

Crucible steel is steel that has been melted in a crucible rather than having been forged, with the result that it is more homogeneous. Most previous furnaces could not reach high enough temperatures to melt the steel. The early modern crucible steel industry resulted from the invention of Benjamin Huntsman in the 1740s. Blister steel (made as above) was melted in a crucible or in a furnace, and cast (usually) into ingots.

====Processes starting from pig iron====
The modern era in steelmaking began with the introduction of Henry Bessemer&#x27;s process in 1855, the raw material for which was pig iron. His method let him produce steel in large quantities cheaply, thus mild steel came to be used for most purposes for which wrought iron was formerly used. The Gilchrist-Thomas process (or &quot;basic Bessemer process&quot;) was an improvement to the Bessemer process, made by lining the converter with a basic material to remove phosphorus.

Another 19th-century steelmaking process was the Siemens-Martin process, which complemented the Bessemer process. It consisted of co-melting bar iron (or steel scrap) with pig iron.

These methods of steel production were rendered obsolete by the Linz-Donawitz process of basic oxygen steelmaking (BOS), developed in 1952, and other oxygen steel making methods. Basic oxygen steelmaking is superior to previous steelmaking methods because the oxygen pumped into the furnace limited impurities, primarily nitrogen, that previously had entered from the air used, and because, with respect to the open hearth process, the same quantity of steel from a BOS process is manufactured in one-twelfth the time. Today, electric arc furnaces (EAF) are a common method of reprocessing scrap metal to create new steel. They can also be used for converting pig iron to steel, but they use a lot of electrical energy (about 440 kWh per metric ton), and are thus generally only economical when there is a plentiful supply of cheap electricity.

==Industry==
The steel industry is often considered an indicator of economic progress, because of the critical role played by steel in infrastructural and overall economic development. In 1980, there were more than 500,000 U.S. steelworkers. By 2000, the number of steelworkers had fallen to 224,000.

The economic boom in China and India caused a massive increase in the demand for steel. Between 2000 and 2005, world steel demand increased by 6%. Since 2000, several Indian and Chinese steel firms have expanded to meet demand, such as Tata Steel (which bought Corus Group in 2007), Baosteel Group and Shagang Group. , though, ArcelorMittal is the world&#x27;s largest steel producer. 

In 2005, the British Geological Survey stated China was the top steel producer with about one-third of the world share; Japan, Russia, and the United States were second, third, and fourth, respectively, according to the survey. The large production capacity of steel results also in a significant amount of carbon dioxide emissions inherent related to the main production route. 

At the end of 2008, the steel industry faced a sharp downturn that led to many cut-backs.

In 2021, it was estimated that around 7% of the global greenhouse gas emissions resulted from the steel industry. Reduction of these emissions are expected to come from a shift in the main production route using cokes, more recycling of steel and the application of carbon capture and storage technology.

==Recycling==

Steel is one of the world&#x27;s most-recycled materials, with a recycling rate of over 60% globally; in the United States alone, over were recycled in the year 2008, for an overall recycling rate of 83%.

As more steel is produced than is scrapped, the amount of recycled raw materials is about 40% of the total of steel produced – in 2016, of crude steel was produced globally, with recycled.

==Contemporary==
===Carbon===

Modern steels are made with varying combinations of alloy metals to fulfil many purposes. Carbon steel, composed simply of iron and carbon, accounts for 90% of steel production. Low alloy steel is alloyed with other elements, usually molybdenum, manganese, chromium, or nickel, in amounts of up to 10% by weight to improve the hardenability of thick sections. High strength low alloy steel has small additions (usually &lt; 2% by weight) of other elements, typically 1.5% manganese, to provide additional strength for a modest price increase.

Recent corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) regulations have given rise to a new variety of steel known as Advanced High Strength Steel (AHSS). This material is both strong and ductile so that vehicle structures can maintain their current safety levels while using less material. There are several commercially available grades of AHSS, such as dual-phase steel, which is heat treated to contain both a ferritic and martensitic microstructure to produce a formable, high strength steel. Transformation Induced Plasticity (TRIP) steel involves special alloying and heat treatments to stabilize amounts of austenite at room temperature in normally austenite-free low-alloy ferritic steels. By applying strain, the austenite undergoes a phase transition to martensite without the addition of heat. Twinning Induced Plasticity (TWIP) steel uses a specific type of strain to increase the effectiveness of work hardening on the alloy.

Carbon Steels are often galvanized, through hot-dip or electroplating in zinc for protection against rust.

===Alloy===

Stainless steel contains a minimum of 11% chromium, often combined with nickel, to resist corrosion. Some stainless steels, such as the ferritic stainless steels are magnetic, while others, such as the austenitic, are nonmagnetic. Corrosion-resistant steels are abbreviated as CRES.

Alloy steels are plain-carbon steels in which small amounts of alloying elements like chromium and vanadium have been added. Some more modern steels include tool steels, which are alloyed with large amounts of tungsten and cobalt or other elements to maximize solution hardening. This also allows the use of precipitation hardening and improves the alloy&#x27;s temperature resistance. Tool steel is generally used in axes, drills, and other devices that need a sharp, long-lasting cutting edge. Other special-purpose alloys include weathering steels such as Cor-ten, which weather by acquiring a stable, rusted surface, and so can be used un-painted. Maraging steel is alloyed with nickel and other elements, but unlike most steel contains little carbon (0.01%). This creates a very strong but still malleable steel.

Eglin steel uses a combination of over a dozen different elements in varying amounts to create a relatively low-cost steel for use in bunker buster weapons. Hadfield steel, named after Robert Hadfield, or manganese steel, contains 12–14% manganese which, when abraded, strain-hardens to form a very hard skin which resists wearing. Uses of this particular alloy include tank tracks, bulldozer blade edges, and cutting blades on the jaws of life.

=== Standards ===
Most of the more commonly used steel alloys are categorized into various grades by standards organizations. For example, the Society of Automotive Engineers has a series of grades defining many types of steel. The American Society for Testing and Materials has a separate set of standards, which define alloys such as A36 steel, the most commonly used structural steel in the United States. The JIS also defines a series of steel grades that are being used extensively in Japan as well as in developing countries.

==Uses==

Iron and steel are used widely in the construction of roads, railways, other infrastructure, appliances, and buildings. Most large modern structures, such as stadiums and skyscrapers, bridges, and airports, are supported by a steel skeleton. Even those with a concrete structure employ steel for reinforcing. It sees widespread use in major appliances and cars. Despite the growth in usage of aluminium, steel is still the main material for car bodies. Steel is used in a variety of other construction materials, such as bolts, nails and screws, and other household products and cooking utensils.

Other common applications include shipbuilding, pipelines, mining, offshore construction, aerospace, white goods (e.g. washing machines), heavy equipment such as bulldozers, office furniture, steel wool, tool, and armour in the form of personal vests or vehicle armour (better known as rolled homogeneous armour in this role).

===Historical===

Before the introduction of the Bessemer process and other modern production techniques, steel was expensive and was only used where no cheaper alternative existed, particularly for the cutting edge of knives, razors, swords, and other items where a hard, sharp edge was needed. It was also used for springs, including those used in clocks and watches.

With the advent of faster and cheaper production methods, steel has become easier to obtain and much cheaper. It has replaced wrought iron for a multitude of purposes. However, the availability of plastics in the latter part of the 20th century allowed these materials to replace steel in some applications due to their lower fabrication cost and weight. Carbon fibre is replacing steel in some cost-insensitive applications such as sports equipment and high-end automobiles.

===Long===
* As reinforcing bars and mesh in reinforced concrete
* Railroad tracks
* Structural steel in modern buildings and bridges
* Wires
* Input to reforging applications

===Flat carbon===
* Major appliances
* Magnetic cores
* The inside and outside body of automobiles, trains, and ships.

===Weathering (COR-TEN)===

* Intermodal containers
* Outdoor sculptures
* Architecture
* Highliner train cars

===Stainless===

* Cutlery
* Rulers
* Surgical instruments
* Watches
* Guns
* Rail passenger vehicles
* Tablets
* Trash Cans
* Body piercing jewellery
* Inexpensive rings
* Components of spacecraft and space stations
===Low-background===
Steel manufactured after World War II became contaminated with radionuclides by nuclear weapons testing. Low-background steel, steel manufactured prior to 1945, is used for certain radiation-sensitive applications such as Geiger counters and radiation shielding.

==See also==
* Bulat steel
* Direct reduction
* Carbon steel
* Damascus steel
* Galvanizing
* History of the steel industry (1970–present)
* Iron in folklore
* List of blade materials
* Machinability
* Noric steel
* Pelletizing
* Rolling
* Rolling mill
* Rust Belt
* Second Industrial Revolution
* Silicon steel
* Steel abrasive
* Steel mill
* Tamahagane, used in Japanese swords
* Tinplate
* Toledo steel
* Wootz steel
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Official website of the World Steel Association (WorldSteel.org)
** SteelUniversity.org – online steel education resources, an initiative of World Steel Association
* MATDAT Database of Properties of Unalloyed, Low-Alloy and High-Alloy Steels – obtained from published results of materials testing</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="0" end="5" title="Steel" label="Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="12" end="17" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="21" end="25" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="30" end="36" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q240553" start="51" end="59" title="Strength of materials" label="strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q911969" start="64" end="83" title="Fracture toughness" label="fracture resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="137" end="153" title="Ultimate tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="512" end="527" title="Stainless steel" label="Stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="553" end="562" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="567" end="576" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="596" end="604" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="724" end="765" title="Cubic crystal system" label="body-centred cubic and face-centred cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q646981" start="790" end="808" title="allotropes of iron" label="allotropes of iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="871" end="880" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="933" end="950" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="1055" end="1062" title="Ductility" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q737571" start="1226" end="1237" title="dislocation" label="dislocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236003" start="1658" end="1666" title="hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q871335" start="1668" end="1687" title="Quenching" label="quenching behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q187360" start="1698" end="1707" title="Annealing (materials science)" label="annealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q685487" start="1709" end="1728" title="Tempering (metallurgy)" label="tempering behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q899301" start="1730" end="1744" title="Yield (engineering)" label="yield strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q964257" start="1926" end="1934" title="bloomery" label="bloomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="2118" end="2131" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823346" start="2150" end="2164" title="crucible steel" label="crucible steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q334055" start="2191" end="2207" title="Bessemer process" label="Bessemer process"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2211" end="2218" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q45728" start="2260" end="2279" title="open-hearth furnace" label="open-hearth furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="2338" end="2351" title="Mass production" label="mass-produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="2365" end="2375" title="Mild steel" label="Mild steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="2385" end="2397" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="2399" end="2416" title="German Empire" label="The German states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="2520" end="2530" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q164380" start="2532" end="2555" title="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania" label="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="2561" end="2570" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q377885" start="2611" end="2633" title="List of countries by steel production" label="world steel production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501437" start="2755" end="2779" title="basic oxygen steelmaking" label="basic oxygen steelmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328899" start="3051" end="3073" title="standards organization" label="standards organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="3199" end="3222" title="Greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378670" start="3380" end="3415" title="Ferrous metal recycling" label="recycling rate of over 60% globally"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="3503" end="3517" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="3698" end="3702" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="3703" end="3709" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="3710" end="3715" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q901785" start="3875" end="3883" title="pig iron" label="pig iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070521" start="3885" end="3896" title="Alloy steel" label="Alloy steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="4043" end="4052" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="4054" end="4060" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="4062" end="4070" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="4072" end="4082" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="4084" end="4089" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="4091" end="4099" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="4101" end="4109" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="4111" end="4119" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="4121" end="4127" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="4133" end="4140" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="4232" end="4242" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="4244" end="4251" title="sulphur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="4253" end="4260" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="4276" end="4282" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="4284" end="4292" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="4298" end="4304" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="4384" end="4393" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q482090" start="4407" end="4418" title="steelmaking" label="steelmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q496098" start="4626" end="4633" title="casting" label="casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="4652" end="4665" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998752" start="4686" end="4697" title="castability" label="castability"/>
<link wikidata="Q187406" start="4841" end="4855" title="malleable iron" label="malleable iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q122490" start="4859" end="4871" title="ductile iron" label="ductile iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="4911" end="4923" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q271768" start="5012" end="5016" title="slag" label="slag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="5115" end="5120" title="crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="5139" end="5142" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="5175" end="5184" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="5188" end="5196" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="5221" end="5229" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="5405" end="5413" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q106080" start="5454" end="5461" title="melting" label="melting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="5478" end="5481" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="5510" end="5516" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="5751" end="5759" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="5774" end="5781" title="welding" label="welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="6104" end="6114" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q901785" start="6313" end="6321" title="pig iron" label="pig iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="6551" end="6557" title="Nickel" label="Nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="6562" end="6571" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q487286" start="6622" end="6631" title="austenite" label="austenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="6678" end="6686" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="6735" end="6743" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q507234" start="6798" end="6811" title="metal fatigue" label="metal fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="6895" end="6900" title="Passivation (chemistry)" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="6946" end="6961" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189335" start="6995" end="7004" title="cementite" label="cementite"/>
<link wikidata="Q488950" start="7053" end="7063" title="martensite" label="martensite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127242" start="7124" end="7140" title="high-speed steel" label="high-speed steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="7158" end="7162" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="7167" end="7174" title="sulphur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q187833" start="7231" end="7235" title="lathe" label="turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q193099" start="7480" end="7487" title="Block (periodic table)" label="p-block"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="7514" end="7522" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="7524" end="7534" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="7693" end="7700" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="8032" end="8048" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="8091" end="8109" title="body-centred cubic" label="body-centred cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q646981" start="8327" end="8334" title="Allotropes of iron" label="ferrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="8375" end="8393" title="face-centred cubic" label="face-centred cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q487286" start="8909" end="8919" title="austenitic" label="austenitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="9145" end="9156" title="precipitate" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189335" start="9176" end="9185" title="cementite" label="cementite"/>
<link wikidata="Q387723" start="9392" end="9400" title="pearlite" label="pearlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q215865" start="9431" end="9446" title="mother of pearl" label="mother of pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q900515" start="9596" end="9612" title="grain boundaries" label="grain boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q899604" start="9651" end="9657" title="Grain (metal)" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q488950" start="10664" end="10674" title="martensite" label="martensite"/>
<link wikidata="Q503601" start="10975" end="10998" title="body-centred tetragonal" label="body-centred tetragonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190474" start="11036" end="11053" title="activation energy" label="activation energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712821" start="11446" end="11457" title="physical compression" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="11492" end="11499" title="tension (mechanics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q657936" start="11548" end="11553" title="shear stress" label="shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501203" start="11711" end="11725" title="work hardening" label="work hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458918" start="11920" end="11933" title="heat treatment" label="heat treating"/>
<link wikidata="Q187360" start="11984" end="11993" title="annealing (metallurgy)" label="annealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q871335" start="11995" end="12004" title="quenching" label="quenching"/>
<link wikidata="Q685487" start="12010" end="12019" title="tempering (metallurgy)" label="tempering"/>
<link wikidata="Q444184" start="12308" end="12316" title="recovery (metallurgy)" label="recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142517" start="12318" end="12335" title="recrystallization (metallurgy)" label="recrystallization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492573" start="12341" end="12353" title="grain growth" label="grain growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="12586" end="12589" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="12868" end="12879" title="spheroidite" label="spheroidite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="13025" end="13032" title="smelting" label="smelted"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268371" start="13254" end="13258" title="casting (metalworking)" label="cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q83893" start="13286" end="13291" title="ingot" label="ingot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506832" start="13479" end="13496" title="continuous casting" label="continuously cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q452648" start="13741" end="13751" title="hot rolling" label="hot rolled"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13764" end="13771" title="Billet (semi-finished product)#Billet" label="billets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13776" end="13782" title="Billet (semi-finished product)#Bloom" label="blooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q452648" start="13801" end="13812" title="cold rolling" label="cold rolled"/>
<link wikidata="Q211367" start="13818" end="13829" title="sheet metal" label="sheet metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q725158" start="13934" end="13950" title="structural steel" label="structural steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780087" start="13960" end="13966" title="I-beam" label="I-beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="13972" end="13977" title="rail tracks" label="rails"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="14036" end="14049" title="assembly line" label="assembly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q964257" start="14301" end="14311" title="Bloomery" label="bloomeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q390417" start="14316" end="14324" title="crucible" label="crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="14415" end="14434" title="archaeological site" label="archaeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="14438" end="14446" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237572" start="14448" end="14463" title="Kaman-Kalehöyük" label="Kaman-Kalehöyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144683" start="14522" end="14533" title="Wootz steel" label="Wootz steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="14551" end="14565" title="Southern India" label="Southern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="14570" end="14579" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="14633" end="14642" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="14773" end="14778" title="Ancient India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q277399" start="14932" end="14939" title="British Iron Age" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28000382" start="14943" end="14961" title="Broxmouth" label="Broxmouth Hillfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="15026" end="15037" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="15086" end="15092" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059687" start="15136" end="15143" title="falcata" label="falcata"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="15157" end="15174" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q698431" start="15182" end="15193" title="Noric steel" label="Noric steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q368460" start="15210" end="15224" title="Military of ancient Rome" label="Roman military"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15231" end="15238" title="History of China#Ancient China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="15246" end="15267" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q871335" start="15285" end="15300" title="quench" label="quench-hardened"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="15329" end="15340" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="15510" end="15522" title="carbon steel" label="carbon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="15543" end="15551" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824726" start="15576" end="15587" title="Haya people" label="Haya people"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="15815" end="15825" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425451" start="15838" end="15847" title="Kodumanal" label="Kodumanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="15851" end="15861" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141623" start="15867" end="15875" title="Golconda" label="Golconda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="15884" end="15898" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="15903" end="15912" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="15925" end="15930" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216749" start="15946" end="15958" title="Samanalawewa" label="Samanalawewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="15993" end="16002" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144683" start="16029" end="16040" title="wootz steel" label="wootz steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219940" start="16217" end="16229" title="Sangam literature" label="Sangam Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809642" start="16397" end="16438" title="Tissamaharama Tamil Brahmi inscription" label="200 BC Tamil trade guild in Tissamaharama"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="16582" end="16598" title="classical antiquity" label="classical period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724" start="16626" end="16638" title="Anuradhapura" label="Anuradhapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q877155" start="16723" end="16736" title="Chera Dynasty" label="Chera Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="16971" end="16980" title="Tamilians" label="Tamilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144683" start="17106" end="17117" title="wootz steel" label="wootz steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q475736" start="17122" end="17136" title="Damascus steel" label="Damascus steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="17274" end="17293" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935" start="17328" end="17333" title="Porus the Elder" label="Porus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="17423" end="17439" title="carbon nanotubes" label="carbon nanotubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q932244" start="17718" end="17735" title="ancient Sinhalese" label="ancient Sinhalese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823346" start="17938" end="17952" title="Crucible steel" label="Crucible steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193325" start="18079" end="18083" title="Merv" label="Merv"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="18184" end="18194" title="Song dynasty" label="Song China"/>
<link wikidata="Q334055" start="18325" end="18341" title="Bessemer process" label="Bessemer process"/>
<link wikidata="Q838577" start="18360" end="18375" title="decarburization" label="decarburization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142437" start="18405" end="18415" title="cold blast" label="cold blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q901785" start="18539" end="18547" title="pig iron" label="pig iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="18553" end="18566" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="18618" end="18622" title="coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q901785" start="18721" end="18729" title="pig iron" label="pig iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823342" start="18778" end="18790" title="finery forge" label="finery forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="18802" end="18810" title="bar iron" label="bar iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823339" start="18881" end="18900" title="cementation process" label="cementation process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="18975" end="18984" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205902" start="19018" end="19032" title="case hardening" label="case hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="19087" end="19093" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867126" start="19193" end="19205" title="Basil Brooke (metallurgist)" label="Basil Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104283" start="19209" end="19222" title="Coalbrookdale" label="Coalbrookdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101492" start="19366" end="19381" title="oregrounds iron" label="oregrounds iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="19403" end="19412" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q390417" start="19579" end="19587" title="crucible" label="crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q193057" start="19612" end="19618" title="forging" label="forged"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553963" start="19820" end="19837" title="Benjamin Huntsman" label="Benjamin Huntsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q482090" start="20016" end="20027" title="steelmaking" label="steelmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q310201" start="20059" end="20073" title="Henry Bessemer" label="Henry Bessemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q334055" start="20081" end="20088" title="Bessemer process" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="20206" end="20216" title="mild steel" label="mild steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="20442" end="20447" title="basic (chemistry)" label="basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45728" start="20529" end="20551" title="Siemens-Martin process" label="Siemens-Martin process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501437" start="20752" end="20776" title="basic oxygen steelmaking" label="basic oxygen steelmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q650993" start="21189" end="21209" title="electric arc furnace" label="electric arc furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378670" start="21253" end="21264" title="scrap" label="scrap metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="21672" end="21692" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q192311" start="21815" end="21828" title="boom and bust" label="economic boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q963101" start="22047" end="22057" title="Tata Steel" label="Tata Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105967436" start="22072" end="22083" title="Corus Group" label="Corus Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q249692" start="22094" end="22108" title="Baosteel Group" label="Baosteel Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138458" start="22113" end="22126" title="Shagang Group" label="Shagang Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q27893" start="22138" end="22151" title="ArcelorMittal" label="ArcelorMittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314657" start="22172" end="22194" title="List of steel producers" label="largest steel producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q919304" start="22211" end="22236" title="British Geological Survey" label="British Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="22244" end="22249" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="22318" end="22323" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="22325" end="22331" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="22341" end="22354" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q41491" start="22936" end="22962" title="carbon capture and storage" label="carbon capture and storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378670" start="23056" end="23070" title="Ferrous metal recycling" label="recycling rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="23508" end="23520" title="Carbon steel" label="Carbon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070521" start="23596" end="23611" title="Low alloy steel" label="Low alloy steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="23652" end="23662" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268600" start="23778" end="23807" title="HSLA steel" label="High strength low alloy steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q744139" start="23969" end="23999" title="corporate average fuel economy" label="corporate average fuel economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262666" start="24308" end="24324" title="dual-phase steel" label="dual-phase steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q487286" start="24567" end="24576" title="austenite" label="austenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="24697" end="24713" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094821" start="24917" end="24927" title="hot-dip galvanizing" label="galvanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="24966" end="24970" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="25014" end="25029" title="Stainless steel" label="Stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="25104" end="25113" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q646981" start="25150" end="25158" title="Allotropes of iron" label="ferritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="25180" end="25188" title="magnetic" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q487286" start="25216" end="25226" title="austenite" label="austenitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q537460" start="25455" end="25465" title="tool steel" label="tool steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="25521" end="25527" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424564" start="25558" end="25576" title="solution hardening" label="solution hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q779974" start="25606" end="25629" title="precipitation hardening" label="precipitation hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024124" start="25831" end="25847" title="weathering steel" label="weathering steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855903" start="25950" end="25964" title="Maraging steel" label="Maraging steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="26099" end="26108" title="malleability" label="malleable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348061" start="26117" end="26128" title="Eglin steel" label="Eglin steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009623" start="26251" end="26264" title="bunker buster" label="bunker buster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159176" start="26274" end="26288" title="Mangalloy" label="Hadfield steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435328" start="26302" end="26317" title="Robert Hadfield" label="Robert Hadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="26487" end="26498" title="Continuous track" label="tank tracks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26500" end="26515" title="bulldozer#Blade" label="bulldozer blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q611035" start="26549" end="26561" title="jaws of life" label="jaws of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427072" start="26707" end="26738" title="Society of Automotive Engineers" label="Society of Automotive Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149879" start="26755" end="26761" title="SAE steel grades" label="grades"/>
<link wikidata="Q621977" start="26796" end="26838" title="ASTM International" label="American Society for Testing and Materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247733" start="26900" end="26909" title="A36 steel" label="A36 steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q774901" start="26977" end="26980" title="Japanese Industrial Standards" label="JIS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27265" end="27273" title="stadium#The modern stadium" label="stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q12269769" start="27442" end="27458" title="major appliances" label="major appliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="27463" end="27467" title="automobile" label="cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="27500" end="27509" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37077" start="27635" end="27640" title="nail (engineering)" label="nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022" start="27645" end="27650" title="screw" label="screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="27739" end="27751" title="shipbuilding" label="shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="27753" end="27762" title="pipeline transport" label="pipelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="27764" end="27770" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016031" start="27772" end="27793" title="offshore construction" label="offshore construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876213" start="27795" end="27804" title="aerospace" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q12269769" start="27806" end="27817" title="white goods" label="white goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q124441" start="27824" end="27839" title="washing machine" label="washing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q874311" start="27843" end="27858" title="heavy equipment" label="heavy equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q925477" start="27897" end="27907" title="steel wool" label="steel wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="27909" end="27913" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="27919" end="27925" title="armour" label="armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="27959" end="27973" title="vehicle armour" label="vehicle armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q670061" start="27991" end="28016" title="rolled homogeneous armour" label="rolled homogeneous armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q334055" start="28082" end="28098" title="Bessemer process" label="Bessemer process"/>
<link wikidata="Q32489" start="28252" end="28258" title="knives" label="knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422881" start="28260" end="28266" title="razors" label="razors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791" start="28268" end="28273" title="sword" label="sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q102836" start="28350" end="28357" title="spring (device)" label="springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="28383" end="28401" title="clock" label="clocks and watches"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="28759" end="28771" title="Carbon-fiber reinforced polymer" label="Carbon fibre"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="28926" end="28945" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="28948" end="28963" title="Railroad tracks" label="Railroad tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q725158" start="28966" end="28982" title="Structural steel" label="Structural steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q551997" start="29017" end="29021" title="Wire" label="Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12269769" start="29078" end="29093" title="Major appliance" label="Major appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088161" start="29097" end="29110" title="Magnetic core" label="Magnetic core"/>
<link wikidata="Q187956" start="29208" end="29228" title="Intermodal container" label="Intermodal container"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="29253" end="29265" title="Architecture" label="Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975703" start="29268" end="29277" title="Highliner" label="Highliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q208502" start="29278" end="29287" title="train car" label="train car"/>
<link wikidata="Q81944" start="29309" end="29316" title="Cutlery" label="Cutlery"/>
<link wikidata="Q104555" start="29319" end="29324" title="Ruler" label="Ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074814" start="29328" end="29347" title="Surgical instrument" label="Surgical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="29351" end="29356" title="Watch" label="Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q110155210" start="29361" end="29364" title="Gun" label="Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q753779" start="29368" end="29391" title="passenger car (rail)" label="Rail passenger vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="29394" end="29401" title="Tablet computer" label="Tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q216530" start="29404" end="29414" title="Waste container" label="Trash Cans"/>
<link wikidata="Q474828" start="29417" end="29440" title="Body piercing jewellery" label="Body piercing jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q46847" start="29455" end="29460" title="Ring (jewellery)" label="rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="29477" end="29487" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="29492" end="29505" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="29553" end="29565" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q817114" start="29573" end="29585" title="radioactive contamination" label="contaminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="29591" end="29603" title="radionuclide" label="radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="29608" end="29631" title="nuclear weapons testing" label="nuclear weapons testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48171" start="29750" end="29764" title="Geiger counter" label="Geiger counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574099" start="29770" end="29789" title="radiation shielding" label="radiation shielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394424" start="29807" end="29818" title="Bulat steel" label="Bulat steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15583893" start="29821" end="29837" title="Direct reduction" label="Direct reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="29840" end="29852" title="Carbon steel" label="Carbon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q475736" start="29855" end="29869" title="Damascus steel" label="Damascus steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q690418" start="29872" end="29883" title="Galvanizing" label="Galvanizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870931" start="29886" end="29930" title="History of the steel industry (1970–present)" label="History of the steel industry (1970–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072973" start="29933" end="29949" title="Iron in folklore" label="Iron in folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607972" start="29952" end="29975" title="List of blade materials" label="List of blade materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q192034" start="29978" end="29991" title="Machinability" label="Machinability"/>
<link wikidata="Q698431" start="29994" end="30005" title="Noric steel" label="Noric steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q934258" start="30008" end="30019" title="Pelletizing" label="Pelletizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q452648" start="30022" end="30029" title="Rolling (metalworking)" label="Rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q452648" start="30032" end="30044" title="Rolling mill" label="Rolling mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q781973" start="30047" end="30056" title="Rust Belt" label="Rust Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q217200" start="30059" end="30087" title="Second Industrial Revolution" label="Second Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q528522" start="30090" end="30103" title="Silicon steel" label="Silicon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386592" start="30106" end="30120" title="Steel abrasive" label="Steel abrasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069494" start="30123" end="30133" title="Steel mill" label="Steel mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413573" start="30136" end="30146" title="Tamahagane" label="Tamahagane"/>
<link wikidata="Q272953" start="30174" end="30182" title="Tinning" label="Tinplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656518" start="30185" end="30197" title="Toledo steel" label="Toledo steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144683" start="30200" end="30211" title="Wootz steel" label="Wootz steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651277" start="30338" end="30361" title="World Steel Association" label="World Steel Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27059" wikidata="Q172587" url="?curid=27059" title="Stainless steel">
<text>Stainless steel, also known as inox, corrosion-resistant steel (CRES), or rustless steel, is an iron-based alloy containing a minimum level of chromium that is resistant to rusting and corrosion. Stainless steel&#x27;s resistance to corrosion results from the 10.5% or more chromium content, which forms a passive film that can protect the material and self-heal in the presence of oxygen. It can also be alloyed with other elements such as molybdenum, carbon, nickel and nitrogen to develop a range of different properties depending on its specific use. 

The alloy&#x27;s properties, such as luster and resistance to corrosion, are useful in many applications. Stainless steel can be rolled into sheets, plates, bars, wire, and tubing. These can be used in cookware, cutlery, surgical instruments, major appliances, vehicles, construction material in large buildings, industrial equipment (e.g., in paper mills, chemical plants, water treatment), and storage tanks and tankers for chemicals and food products. Some grades are also suitable for forging and casting.

The biological cleanability of stainless steel is superior to both aluminium and copper, and comparable to glass. Its cleanability, strength, and corrosion resistance have prompted the use of stainless steel in pharmaceutical and food processing plants.

Different types of stainless steel are labeled with an AISI three-digit number. The ISO 15510 standard lists the chemical compositions of stainless steels of the specifications in existing ISO, ASTM, EN, JIS, and GB standards in a useful interchange table.

== Properties ==

=== Corrosion resistance ===

Although stainless steel does rust, this only affects the outer few layers of atoms, its chromium content shielding deeper layers from oxidation.

The addition of nitrogen also improves resistance to pitting corrosion and increases mechanical strength. Thus, there are numerous grades of stainless steel with varying chromium and molybdenum contents to suit the environment the alloy must endure. Corrosion resistance can be increased further by the following means:
* increasing chromium content to more than 11%
* adding nickel to at least 8% 
* adding molybdenum (which also improves resistance to pitting corrosion)

=== Strength ===

The most common type of stainless steel, 304, has a tensile yield strength around in the annealed condition. It can be strengthened by cold working to a strength of in the full-hard condition.

The strongest commonly available stainless steels are precipitation hardening alloys such as 17-4 PH and Custom 465. These can be heat treated to have tensile yield strengths up to .

=== Melting point ===

Melting point of stainless steel is near that of ordinary steel, and much higher than the melting points of aluminium or copper.
As with most alloys, the melting point of stainless steel is expressed in the form of a range of temperatures, and not a single temperature. This temperature range goes from depending on the specific consistency of the alloy in question.

=== Conductivity ===

Like steel, stainless steels are relatively poor conductors of electricity, with significantly lower electrical conductivities than copper. In particular, the electrical contact resistance (ECR) of stainless steel arises as a result of the dense protective oxide layer and limits its functionality in applications as electrical connectors. Copper alloys and nickel-coated connectors tend to exhibit lower ECR values and are preferred materials for such applications. Nevertheless, stainless steel connectors are employed in situations where ECR poses a lower design criteria and corrosion resistance is required, for example in high temperatures and oxidizing environments.

=== Magnetism ===

Martensitic, duplex and ferritic stainless steels are magnetic, while austenitic stainless steel is usually non-magnetic. Ferritic steel owes its magnetism to its body-centered cubic crystal structure, in which iron atoms are arranged in cubes (with one iron atom at each corner) and an additional iron atom in the center. This central iron atom is responsible for ferritic steel&#x27;s magnetic properties. This arrangement also limits the amount of carbon the steel can absorb to around 0.025%. Grades with low coercive field have been developed for electro-valves used in household appliances and for injection systems in internal combustion engines. Some applications require non-magnetic materials, such as magnetic resonance imaging. Austenitic stainless steels, which are usually non-magnetic, can be made slightly magnetic through work hardening. Sometimes, if austenitic steel is bent or cut, magnetism occurs along the edge of the stainless steel because the crystal structure rearranges itself.
=== Wear ===

Galling, sometimes called cold welding, is a form of severe adhesive wear, which can occur when two metal surfaces are in relative motion to each other and under heavy pressure. Austenitic stainless steel fasteners are particularly susceptible to thread galling, though other alloys that self-generate a protective oxide surface film, such as aluminum and titanium, are also susceptible. Under high contact-force sliding, this oxide can be deformed, broken, and removed from parts of the component, exposing the bare reactive metal. When the two surfaces are of the same material, these exposed surfaces can easily fuse. Separation of the two surfaces can result in surface tearing and even complete seizure of metal components or fasteners. Galling can be mitigated by the use of dissimilar materials (bronze against stainless steel) or using different stainless steels (martensitic against austenitic). Additionally, threaded joints may be lubricated to provide a film between the two parts and prevent galling. Nitronic 60, made by selective alloying with manganese, silicon, and nitrogen, has demonstrated a reduced tendency to gall.

=== Density ===
The density of stainless steel ranges from depending on the alloy.

== History ==
The invention of stainless steel followed a series of scientific developments, starting in 1798 when chromium was first shown to the French Academy by Louis Vauquelin. In the early 1800s, British scientists James Stoddart, Michael Faraday, and Robert Mallet observed the resistance of chromium-iron alloys (&quot;chromium steels&quot;) to oxidizing agents. Robert Bunsen discovered chromium&#x27;s resistance to strong acids. The corrosion resistance of iron-chromium alloys may have been first recognized in 1821 by Pierre Berthier, who noted their resistance against attack by some acids and suggested their use in cutlery.

In the 1840s, both Britain&#x27;s Sheffield steelmakers and then Krupp of Germany were producing chromium steel with the latter employing it for cannons in the 1850s. In 1861, Robert Forester Mushet took out a patent on chromium steel in Britain.

These events led to the first American production of chromium-containing steel by J. Baur of the Chrome Steel Works of Brooklyn for the construction of bridges. A US patent for the product was issued in 1869. This was followed with recognition of the corrosion resistance of chromium alloys by Englishmen John T. Woods and John Clark, who noted ranges of chromium from 5–30%, with added tungsten and &quot;medium carbon&quot;. They pursued the commercial value of the innovation via a British patent for &quot;Weather-Resistant Alloys&quot;.

Scientists researching steel corrosion in the second half of the 19th century didn&#x27;t pay attention to the amount of carbon in the alloyed steels they were testing until in 1898 Adolphe Carnot and E. Goutal noted that chromium steels better resist to oxidation with acids the less carbon they contain.

Also in the late 1890s, German chemist Hans Goldschmidt developed an aluminothermic (thermite) process for producing carbon-free chromium. Between 1904 and 1911, several researchers, particularly Leon Guillet of France, prepared alloys that would be considered stainless steel today.

In 1908, the Essen firm Friedrich Krupp Germaniawerft built the 366-ton sailing yacht &quot;Germania&quot; featuring a chrome-nickel steel hull, in Germany. In 1911, Philip Monnartz reported on the relationship between chromium content and corrosion resistance. On 17 October 1912, Krupp engineers Benno Strauss and Eduard Maurer patented as Nirosta the austenitic stainless steel known today as 18/8 or AISI type 304.

Similar developments were taking place in the United States, where Christian Dantsizen of General Electric and Frederick Becket (1875–1942) at Union Carbide were industrializing ferritic stainless steel. In 1912, Elwood Haynes applied for a US patent on a martensitic stainless steel alloy, which was not granted until 1919.

===Harry Brearley===

While seeking a corrosion-resistant alloy for gun barrels in 1913, Harry Brearley of the Brown-Firth research laboratory in Sheffield, England, discovered and subsequently industrialized a martensitic stainless steel alloy, today known as AISI type 420. The discovery was announced two years later in a January 1915 newspaper article in &quot;The New York Times&quot;.

The metal was later marketed under the &quot;Staybrite&quot; brand by Firth Vickers in England and was used for the new entrance canopy for the Savoy Hotel in London in 1929. Brearley applied for a US patent during 1915 only to find that Haynes had already registered one. Brearley and Haynes pooled their funding and, with a group of investors, formed the American Stainless Steel Corporation, with headquarters in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

===Rustless steel===
Brearley initially called his new alloy &quot;rustless steel&quot;. The alloy was sold in the US under different brand names like &quot;Allegheny metal&quot; and &quot;Nirosta steel&quot;. Even within the metallurgy industry, the name remained unsettled; in 1921, one trade journal called it &quot;unstainable steel&quot;. 

Brearley worked with a local cutlery manufacturer, who gave it the name &quot;stainless steel&quot;. As late as 1932, Ford Motor Company continued calling the alloy &quot;rustless steel&quot; in automobile promotional materials. However, stainless tended to predominate worldwide, and even in present-day Japan, Western cutlery is simply referred to as &quot;stainless (without the steel) spoon/fork&quot; etc. [ステンレス: sutenresu].

In 1929, before the Great Depression, over 25,000 tons of stainless steel were manufactured and sold in the US annually.

Major technological advances in the 1950s and 1960s allowed the production of large tonnages at an affordable cost:
* AOD process (argon oxygen decarburization), for the removal of carbon and sulfur
*Continuous casting and hot strip rolling
* The Z-Mill, or Sendzimir cold rolling mill
* The Creusot-Loire Uddeholm (CLU) and related processes which use steam instead of some or all of the argon

== Families ==

Stainless steel is classified into five different &quot;families&quot; of alloys, each having a distinct set of attributes. Four of the families are defined by their predominant crystalline structure - the austenitic, ferritic, martensitic, and duplex alloys. The fifth family, precipitation hardening, is defined by the type of heat treatment used to develop its properties. 

=== Austenitic ===
Austenitic stainless steel is the largest family of stainless steels, making up about two-thirds of all stainless steel production. They have a face-centered cubic crystal structure. This microstructure is achieved by alloying steel with sufficient nickel, manganese, or nitrogen to maintain an austenitic microstructure at all temperatures, ranging from the cryogenic region to the melting point. Thus, austenitic stainless steels are not hardenable by heat treatment since they possess the same microstructure at all temperatures.

Austenitic stainless steels consist of two subfamilies: 

* 200 series are chromium-manganese-nickel alloys that maximize the use of manganese and nitrogen to minimize the use of nickel. Due to their nitrogen addition, they possess approximately 50% higher yield strength than 300-series stainless sheets of steel. Representative alloys include Type 201 and Type 202. 
* 300 series are chromium-nickel alloys that achieve their austenitic microstructure almost exclusively by nickel alloying; some very highly alloyed grades include some nitrogen to reduce nickel requirements. 300 series is the largest group and the most widely used. Representative alloys include Type 304 and Type 316.

=== Ferritic ===
Ferritic stainless steels have a body-centered cubic crystal structure, are magnetic, and are hardenable by cold working, but not by heat treating. They contain between 10.5% and 27% chromium with very little or no nickel. Due to the near-absence of nickel, they are less expensive than austenitic stainless steels. Representative alloys include Type 409, Type 429, Type 430, and Type 446. Ferritic stainless steels are present in many products, which include:

* Automobile exhaust pipes
*Architectural and structural applications
*Building components, such as slate hooks, roofing, and chimney ducts
*Power plates in solid oxide fuel cells operating at temperatures around 

=== Martensitic ===
Martensitic stainless steels have a body-centered tetragonal crystal structure, are magnetic, and are hardenable by heat treating and by cold working. They offer a wide range of properties and are used as stainless engineering steels, stainless tool steels, and creep-resistant steels. They are not as corrosion-resistant as ferritic and austenitic stainless steels due to their low chromium content. They fall into four categories (with some overlap):

* Fe-Cr-C grades. These were the first grades used and are still widely used in engineering and wear-resistant applications. Representative grades include Type 410, Type 420, and Type 440C. 
* Fe-Cr-Ni-C grades. Some carbon is replaced by nickel. They offer higher toughness and higher corrosion resistance. Representative grades include Type 431. 
* Martensitic precipitation hardening grades. 17-4 PH (UNS S17400), the best-known grade, combines martensitic hardening and precipitation hardening to increase strength and toughness. 
* Creep-resisting grades. Small additions of niobium, vanadium, boron, and cobalt increase the strength and creep resistance up to about .

Martensitic stainless steels can be heat treated to provide better mechanical properties. The heat treatment typically involves three steps:

# Austenitizing, in which the steel is heated to a temperature in the range , depending on grade. The resulting austenite has a face-centered cubic crystal structure.
# Quenching. The austenite is transformed into martensite, a hard body-centered tetragonal crystal structure. The quenched martensite is very hard and too brittle for most applications. Some residual austenite may remain.
# Tempering. Martensite is heated to around , held at temperature, then air-cooled. Higher tempering temperatures decrease yield strength and ultimate tensile strength but increase the elongation and impact resistance.

=== Duplex ===
Duplex stainless steels have a mixed microstructure of austenite and ferrite, the ideal ratio being a 50:50 mix, though commercial alloys may have ratios of 40:60. They are characterized by higher chromium (19–32%) and molybdenum (up to 5%) and lower nickel contents than austenitic stainless steels. Duplex stainless steels have roughly twice the yield strength of austenitic stainless steel. Their mixed microstructure provides improved resistance to chloride stress corrosion cracking in comparison to austenitic stainless steel types 304 and 316. Duplex grades are usually divided into three sub-groups based on their corrosion resistance: lean duplex, standard duplex, and super duplex. The properties of duplex stainless steels are achieved with an overall lower alloy content than similar-performing super-austenitic grades, making their use cost-effective for many applications. The pulp and paper industry was one of the first to extensively use duplex stainless steel. Today, the oil and gas industry is the largest user and has pushed for more corrosion resistant grades, leading to the development of super duplex and hyper duplex grades. More recently, the less expensive (and slightly less corrosion-resistant) lean duplex has been developed, chiefly for structural applications in building and construction (concrete reinforcing bars, plates for bridges, coastal works) and in the water industry.

=== Precipitation hardening ===
Precipitation hardening stainless steels are characterized by the ability to be precipitation hardened to higher strength. There are three types of precipitation hardening stainless steels which are classified according to their crystalline structure:

* Martensitic precipitation hardenable stainless steels are martensitic at room temperature in both the solution annealed and precipitation hardened conditions. Representative alloys include 17-4 PH (UNS S17400), 15-5 PH (UNS S15500), Custom 450 (UNS S45000) and Custom 465 (UNS S46500). 

* Semi-austenitic precipitation hardenable stainless steels are initially austenitic in the solution annealed condition for ease of fabrication, but are subsequently transformed to martensite to provide higher strength and to be precipitation hardened. Representative alloys include 17-7 PH (UNS S17700), 15-7 PH (UNS S15700), AM-350 (UNS S35000), and AM-355 (UNS S35500). 

* Austenitic precipitation hardenable stainless steels are austenitic at room temperature in both the solution annealed and precipitation hardened conditions. Representative alloys include A-286 (UNS S66286) and Discalloy (UNS S66220).

== Classification systems ==
Several different classification systems have been developed for designating stainless steels. The main system used in the United States has been the SAE steel grades numbering system. The SAE numbering system designates stainless steels by &quot;Type&quot; followed by a three-digit number and sometimes a letter suffix. A newer system that was jointly developed by ASTM and SAE in 1974 is The Unified Numbering System for Metals and Alloys (UNS). The Unified Numbering System classifies stainless steels using an alpha-numeric identifier consisting of &quot;S&quot; followed by five digits, although some austenitic stainless steels with high nickel content may fall into the nickel-base designation which uses &quot;N&quot; as the alpha identifer. The UNS designations incorporate previously used designations, whether from the SAE numbering system or proprietary alloy designations. Europe has adopted EN 10088 for classification of stainless steels.

==Corrosion resistance==
Unlike carbon steel, stainless steels do not suffer uniform corrosion when exposed to wet environments. Unprotected carbon steel rusts readily when exposed to a combination of air and moisture. The resulting iron oxide surface layer is porous and fragile. In addition, as iron oxide occupies a larger volume than the original steel, this layer expands and tends to flake and fall away, exposing the underlying steel to further attack. In comparison, stainless steels contain sufficient chromium to undergo passivation, spontaneously forming a microscopically thin inert surface film of chromium oxide by reaction with the oxygen in the air and even the small amount of dissolved oxygen in the water. This passive film prevents further corrosion by blocking oxygen diffusion to the steel surface and thus prevents corrosion from spreading into the bulk of the metal. This film is self-repairing, even when scratched or temporarily disturbed by conditions that exceed the inherent corrosion resistance of that grade.

The resistance of this film to corrosion depends upon the chemical composition of the stainless steel, chiefly the chromium content. It is customary to distinguish between four forms of corrosion: uniform, localized (pitting), galvanic, and SCC (stress corrosion cracking). Any of these forms of corrosion can occur when the grade of stainless steel is not suited for the working environment.

=== Uniform ===

Uniform corrosion takes place in very aggressive environments, typically where chemicals are produced or heavily used, such as in the pulp and paper industries. The entire surface of the steel is attacked, and the corrosion is expressed as corrosion rate in mm/year (usually less than 0.1 mm/year is acceptable for such cases). Corrosion tables provide guidelines.

This is typically the case when stainless steels are exposed to acidic or basic solutions. Whether stainless steel corrodes depends on the kind and concentration of acid or base and the solution temperature. Uniform corrosion is typically easy to avoid because of extensive published corrosion data or easily performed laboratory corrosion testing.

Acidic solutions can be put into two general categories: reducing acids, such as hydrochloric acid and dilute sulfuric acid, and oxidizing acids, such as nitric acid and concentrated sulfuric acid. Increasing chromium and molybdenum content provides increased resistance to reducing acids while increasing chromium and silicon content provides increased resistance to oxidizing acids. Sulfuric acid is one of the most-produced industrial chemicals. At room temperature, type 304 stainless steel is only resistant to 3% acid, while type 316 is resistant to 3% acid up to and 20% acid at room temperature. Thus type 304 SS is rarely used in contact with sulfuric acid. Type 904L and Alloy 20 are resistant to sulfuric acid at even higher concentrations above room temperature. Concentrated sulfuric acid possesses oxidizing characteristics like nitric acid, and thus silicon-bearing stainless steels are also useful. Hydrochloric acid damages any kind of stainless steel and should be avoided. All types of stainless steel resist attack from phosphoric acid and nitric acid at room temperature. At high concentrations and elevated temperatures, attack will occur, and higher-alloy stainless steels are required. In general, organic acids are less corrosive than mineral acids such as hydrochloric and sulfuric acid.

Type 304 and type 316 stainless steels are unaffected by weak bases such as ammonium hydroxide, even in high concentrations and at high temperatures. The same grades exposed to stronger bases such as sodium hydroxide at high concentrations and high temperatures will likely experience some etching and cracking. Increasing chromium and nickel contents provide increased resistance.

All grades resist damage from aldehydes and amines, though in the latter case type 316 is preferable to type 304; cellulose acetate damages type 304 unless the temperature is kept low. Fats and fatty acids only affect type 304 at temperatures above and type 316 SS above , while type 317 SS is unaffected at all temperatures. Type 316L is required for the processing of urea.

=== Localized ===

Localized corrosion can occur in several ways, e.g. pitting corrosion and crevice corrosion. These localized attacks are most common in the presence of chloride ions. Higher chloride levels require more highly alloyed stainless steels.

Localized corrosion can be difficult to predict because it is dependent on many factors, including:
* Chloride ion concentration. Even when chloride solution concentration is known, it is still possible for localized corrosion to occur unexpectedly. Chloride ions can become unevenly concentrated in certain areas, such as in crevices (e.g. under gaskets) or on surfaces in vapor spaces due to evaporation and condensation.
* Temperature: increasing temperature increases susceptibility.
* Acidity: increasing acidity increases susceptibility.
* Stagnation: stagnant conditions increase susceptibility.
* Oxidizing species: the presence of oxidizing species, such as ferric and cupric ions, increases susceptibility.

Pitting corrosion is considered the most common form of localized corrosion. The corrosion resistance of stainless steels to pitting corrosion is often expressed by the PREN, obtained through the formula:

:formula_1,

where the terms correspond to the proportion of the contents by mass of chromium, molybdenum, and nitrogen in the steel. For example, if the steel consisted of 15% chromium %Cr would be equal to 15.

The higher the PREN, the higher the pitting corrosion resistance. Thus, increasing chromium, molybdenum, and nitrogen contents provide better resistance to pitting corrosion.

Though the PREN of certain steel may be theoretically sufficient to resist pitting corrosion, crevice corrosion can still occur when the poor design has created confined areas (overlapping plates, washer-plate interfaces, etc.) or when deposits form on the material. In these select areas, the PREN may not be high enough for the service conditions. Good design, fabrication techniques, alloy selection, proper operating conditions based on the concentration of active compounds present in the solution causing corrosion, pH, etc. can prevent such corrosion.

=== Stress ===
Stress corrosion cracking (SCC) is caused by combination of tensile stress and a corrosive environment and can lead to unexpected and sudden failure of a stainless steel component. It may occur when three conditions are met:

* The part contains either applied or residual tensile stresses.
* The part is in a corrosive environment.
* The stainless steel is susceptible to SCC.

SCC can be prevented by eliminating one of these three conditions. 

The SCC mechanism results from the following sequence of events:

# Pitting occurs
# Cracks start from a pit initiation site
# Cracks then propagate through the metal in a transgranular or intergranular mode
# Failure occurs

=== Galvanic ===
Galvanic corrosion (also called &quot;dissimilar-metal corrosion&quot;) refers to corrosion damage induced when two dissimilar materials are coupled in a corrosive electrolyte. The most common electrolyte is water, ranging from freshwater to seawater. When a galvanic couple forms, one of the metals in the couple becomes the anode and corrodes faster than it would alone, while the other becomes the cathode and corrodes slower than it would alone. Stainless steel, due to having a more positive electrode potential than for example carbon steel and aluminium, becomes the cathode, accelerating the corrosion of the anodic metal. An example is the corrosion of aluminium rivets fastening stainless steel sheets in contact with water. The relative surface areas of the anode and the cathode are important in determining the rate of corrosion. In the above example, the surface area of the rivets is small compared to that of the stainless steel sheet, resulting in rapid corrosion. However, if stainless steel fasteners are used to assemble aluminium sheets, galvanic corrosion will be much slower because the galvanic current density on the aluminium surface will be many orders of magnitude smaller. A frequent mistake is to assemble stainless steel plates with carbon steel fasteners; whereas using stainless steel to fasten carbon-steel plates is usually acceptable, the reverse is not. Providing electrical insulation between the dissimilar metals, where possible, is effective at preventing this type of corrosion.

=== High-temperature ===

At elevated temperatures, all metals react with hot gases. The most common high-temperature gaseous mixture is air, of which oxygen is the most reactive component. To avoid corrosion in air, carbon steel is limited to approximately . Oxidation resistance in stainless steels increases with additions of chromium, silicon, and aluminium. Small additions of cerium and yttrium increase the adhesion of the oxide layer on the surface. The addition of chromium remains the most common method to increase high-temperature corrosion resistance in stainless steels; chromium reacts with oxygen to form a chromium oxide scale, which reduces oxygen diffusion into the material. The minimum 10.5% chromium in stainless steels provides resistance to approximately , while 16% chromium provides resistance up to approximately . Type 304, the most common grade of stainless steel with 18% chromium, is resistant to approximately . Other gases, such as sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, carbon monoxide, chlorine, also attack stainless steel. Resistance to other gases is dependent on the type of gas, the temperature, and the alloying content of the stainless steel. With the addition of up to 5% aluminium, ferritic grades Fe-Cr-Al are designed for electrical resistance and oxidation resistance at elevated temperatures. Such alloys include Kanthal, produced in the form of wire or ribbons.

==Standard finishes==
Standard mill finishes can be applied to flat rolled stainless steel directly by the rollers and by mechanical abrasives. Steel is first rolled to size and thickness and then annealed to change the properties of the final material. Any oxidation that forms on the surface (mill scale) is removed by pickling, and a passivation layer is created on the surface. A final finish can then be applied to achieve the desired aesthetic appearance.

The following designations are used in the U.S. to describe stainless steel finishes by ASTM A480/A480M-18 (DIN):

* No. 0: Hot-rolled, annealed, thicker plates
* No. 1 (1D): Hot-rolled, annealed and passivated
* No. 2D (2D): Cold rolled, annealed, pickled and passivated
* No. 2B (2B): Same as above with additional pass through highly polished rollers
* No. 2BA (2R): Bright annealed (BA or 2R) same as above then bright annealed under oxygen-free atmospheric condition
* No. 3 (G-2G:) Coarse abrasive finish applied mechanically
* No. 4 (1J-2J): Brushed finish
* No. 5: Satin finish
* No. 6 (1K-2K): Matte finish (brushed but smoother than #4)
* No. 7 (1P-2P): Reflective finish
* No. 8: Mirror finish
* No. 9: Bead blast finish
* No. 10: Heat colored finish – offering a wide range of electropolished and heat colored surfaces

== Joining ==

A wide range of joining processes are available for stainless steels, though welding is by far the most common.

The ease of welding largely depends on the type of stainless steel used. Austenitic stainless steels are the easiest to weld by electric arc, with weld properties similar to those of the base metal (not cold-worked). Martensitic stainless steels can also be welded by electric-arc but, as the heat-affected zone (HAZ) and the fusion zone (FZ) form martensite upon cooling, precautions must be taken to avoid cracking of the weld. Improper welding practices can additionally cause sugaring (oxide scaling) and heat tint on the backside of the weld. This can be prevented with the use of back-purging gases, backing plates, and fluxes. Post-weld heat treatment is almost always required while preheating before welding is also necessary in some cases. Electric arc welding of type 430 ferritic stainless steel results in grain growth in the HAZ, which leads to brittleness. This has largely been overcome with stabilized ferritic grades, where niobium, titanium, and zirconium form precipitates that prevent grain growth. Duplex stainless steel welding by electric arc is a common practice but requires careful control of the process parameters. Otherwise, the precipitation of unwanted intermetallic phases occurs, which reduces the toughness of the welds.

Electric arc welding processes include:

*Gas metal arc welding, also known as MIG/MAG welding
*Gas tungsten arc welding, also known as tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding
*Plasma arc welding
*Flux-cored arc welding
*Shielded metal arc welding (covered electrode)
*Submerged arc welding

MIG, MAG and TIG welding are the most common methods.

Other welding processes include:

*Stud welding
*Resistance spot welding
*Resistance seam welding
*Flash welding
*Laser beam welding
*Oxy-acetylene welding

Stainless steel may be bonded with adhesives such as silicone, silyl modified polymers, and epoxies. Acrylic and polyurethane adhesives are also used in some situations.

== Production ==

Most of the world&#x27;s stainless steel production is produced by the following processes:

* Electric arc furnace (EAF): stainless steel scrap, other ferrous scrap, and ferrous alloys (Fe Cr, Fe Ni, Fe Mo, Fe Si) are melted together. The molten metal is then poured into a ladle and transferred into the AOD process (see below).
* Argon oxygen decarburization (AOD): carbon in the molten steel is removed (by turning it into carbon monoxide gas) and other compositional adjustments are made to achieve the desired chemical composition.
* Continuous casting (CC): the molten metal is solidified into slabs for flat products (a typical section is thick and wide) or blooms (sections vary widely but is the average size). 
* Hot rolling (HR): slabs and blooms are reheated in a furnace and hot-rolled. Hot rolling reduces the thickness of the slabs to produce about -thick coils. Blooms, on the other hand, are hot-rolled into bars, which are cut into lengths at the exit of the rolling mill, or wire rod, which is coiled.
* Cold finishing (CF) depends on the type of product being finished:
**Hot-rolled coils are pickled in acid solutions to remove the oxide scale on the surface, then subsequently cold rolled in Sendzimir rolling mills and annealed in a protective atmosphere until the desired thickness and surface finish is obtained. Further operations such as slitting and tube forming can be performed in downstream facilities.
**Hot-rolled bars are straightened, then machined to the required tolerance and finish.
**Wire rod coils are subsequently processed to produce cold-finished bars on drawing benches, fasteners on boltmaking machines, and wire on single or multipass drawing machines.

World stainless steel production figures are published yearly by the International Stainless Steel Forum. Of the EU production figures, Italy, Belgium, and Spain were notable, while Canada and Mexico produced none. China, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, India, the US, and Indonesia were large producers while Russia reported little production.
Breakdown of production by stainless steels families in 2017:

* Austenitic stainless steels Cr-Ni (also called 300-series, see &quot;Grades&quot; section above): 54%
* Austenitic stainless steels Cr-Mn (also called 200-series): 21%
* Ferritic and martensitic stainless steels (also called 400-series): 23%

== Applications ==
Stainless steel is used in a multitude of fields including architecture, art, chemical engineering, food and beverage manufacture, vehicles, medicine, energy and firearms.

== Life cycle cost==

Life cycle cost (LCC) calculations are used to select the design and the materials that will lead to the lowest cost over the whole life of a project, such as a building or a bridge.

The formula, in a simple form, is the following:

: formula_2

where LCC is the overall life cycle cost, AC is the acquisition cost, IC the installation cost, OC the operating and maintenance costs, LP the cost of lost production due to downtime, and RC the replacement materials cost.

In addition, &quot;N&quot; is the planned life of the project, &quot;i&quot; the interest rate, and &quot;n&quot; the year in which a particular OC or LP or RC is taking place. The interest rate (&quot;i&quot;) is used to convert expenses from different years to their present value (a method widely used by banks and insurance companies) so they can be added and compared fairly. The usage of the sum formula (formula_3) captures the fact that expenses over the lifetime of a project must be cumulated (added together) after they are corrected for interest rate.

Application of LCC in materials selection

Stainless steel used in projects often results in lower LCC values compared to other materials. The higher acquisition cost (AC) of stainless steel components are often offset by improvements in operating and maintenance costs, reduced loss of production (LP) costs, and the higher resale value of stainless steel components.

LCC calculations are usually limited to the project itself. However, there may be other costs that a project stakeholder may wish to consider:
* Utilities, such as power plants, water supply &amp; wastewater treatment, and hospitals, cannot be shut down. Any maintenance will require extra costs associated with continuing service.
* Indirect societal costs (with possible political fallout) may be incurred in some situations such as closing or reducing traffic on bridges, creating queues, delays, loss of working hours to the people, and increased pollution by idling vehicles.

== Sustainability – recycling and reuse ==

The average carbon footprint of stainless steel (all grades, all countries) is estimated to be 2.90 kg of CO2 per kg of stainless steel produced, of which 1.92 kg are emissions from raw materials (Cr, Ni, Mo); 0.54 kg from electricity and steam, and 0.44 kg are direct emissions (i.e., by the stainless steel plant). Note that stainless steel produced in countries that use cleaner sources of electricity (such as France, which uses nuclear energy) will have a lower carbon footprint. Ferritics without Ni will have a lower CO2 footprint than austenitics with 8% Ni or more. Carbon footprint must not be the only sustainability-related factor for deciding the choice of materials:

* Over any product life, maintenance, repairs or early end of life (planned obsolescence) can increase its overall footprint far beyond initial material differences. In addition, loss of service (typically for bridges) may induce large hidden costs, such as queues, wasted fuel, and loss of man-hours.
* How much material is used to provide a given service varies with the performance, particularly the strength level, which allows lighter structures and components.

Stainless steel is 100% recyclable. An average stainless steel object is composed of about 60% recycled material of which approximately 40% originates from end-of-life products, while the remaining 60% comes from manufacturing processes. What prevents a higher recycling content is the availability of stainless steel scrap, in spite of a very high recycling rate. According to the International Resource Panel&#x27;s Metal Stocks in Society report, the per capita stock of stainless steel in use in society is in more developed countries and in less-developed countries. There is a secondary market that recycles usable scrap for many stainless steel markets. The product is mostly coil, sheet, and blanks. This material is purchased at a less-than-prime price and sold to commercial quality stampers and sheet metal houses. The material may have scratches, pits, and dents but is made to the current specifications.

The stainless steel cycle starts with carbon steel scrap, primary metals, and slag. The next step is the production of hot-rolled and cold-finished steel products in steel mills. Some scrap is produced, which is directly reused in the melting shop. The manufacturing of components is the third step. Some scrap is produced and enters the recycling loop. Assembly of final goods and their use does not generate any material loss. The fourth step is the collection of stainless steel for recycling at the end of life of the goods (such as kitchenware, pulp and paper plants, or automotive parts). This is where it is most difficult to get stainless steel to enter the recycling loop, as shown in the table below:

== Nanoscale stainless steel ==

Stainless steel nanoparticles have been produced in the laboratory. These may have applications as additives for high-performance applications. For example, sulfurization, phosphorization, and nitridation treatments to produce nanoscale stainless steel based catalysts could enhance the electrocatalytic performance of stainless steel for water splitting.

== Health effects ==

There is extensive research indicating some probable increased risk of cancer (particularly lung cancer) from inhaling fumes while welding stainless steel. Stainless steel welding is suspected of producing carcinogenic fumes from cadmium oxides, nickel, and chromium. According to Cancer Council Australia, &quot;In 2017, all types of welding fumes were classified as a Group 1 carcinogen.&quot;

Stainless steel is generally considered to be biologically inert. However, during cooking, small amounts of nickel and chromium leach out of new stainless steel cookware into highly acidic food. Nickel can contribute to cancer risks—particularly lung cancer and nasal cancer. However, no connection between stainless steel cookware and cancer has been established.

== See also ==
* Cobalt-chrome
* Corrosion engineering
* Corrugated stainless steel tubing
* List of blade materials
* List of steel producers
* Metallic fiber
* Pilling–Bedworth ratio
* Rouging
* Weathering steel

== Notes ==

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* International Standard ISO15510:2014 
* 

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="0" end="15" title="Stainless steel" label="Stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="31" end="35" title="Stainless steel" label="inox"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="37" end="62" title="Stainless steel" label="corrosion-resistant steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="64" end="68" title="Stainless steel" label="CRES"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="74" end="88" title="Stainless steel" label="rustless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="96" end="100" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="107" end="112" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="143" end="151" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184197" start="173" end="177" title="rust" label="rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="185" end="194" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="219" end="242" title="corrosion resistance" label="resistance to corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="306" end="318" title="Passivation (chemistry)" label="passive film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448105" start="353" end="362" title="self-healing material" label="self-heal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="441" end="451" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="453" end="459" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="461" end="467" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="472" end="480" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211367" start="698" end="704" title="Sheet metal" label="sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q154038" start="759" end="767" title="cookware" label="cookware"/>
<link wikidata="Q81944" start="769" end="776" title="cutlery" label="cutlery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074814" start="778" end="797" title="surgical instrument" label="surgical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q12269769" start="800" end="815" title="major appliance" label="major appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q918088" start="901" end="911" title="paper mill" label="paper mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q905286" start="914" end="928" title="chemical plant" label="chemical plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058719" start="931" end="946" title="water treatment" label="water treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q193057" start="1046" end="1053" title="forging" label="forging"/>
<link wikidata="Q496098" start="1058" end="1065" title="casting" label="casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q39045305" start="1083" end="1095" title="cleanability" label="cleanability"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="1135" end="1144" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q465254" start="1378" end="1382" title="American Iron and Steel Institute" label="AISI"/>
<link wikidata="Q621977" start="1517" end="1521" title="ASTM" label="ASTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377447" start="1523" end="1525" title="European Norm" label="EN"/>
<link wikidata="Q774901" start="1527" end="1530" title="Japanese Industrial Standards" label="JIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q834575" start="1536" end="1538" title="Guobiao standards" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780822" start="2230" end="2247" title="pitting corrosion" label="pitting corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883840" start="2555" end="2562" title="17-4 stainless steel" label="17-4 PH"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="2823" end="2836" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="3064" end="3069" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3160" end="3185" title="Resistivity#Resistivity of various materials" label="electrical conductivities"/>
<link wikidata="Q332329" start="3218" end="3247" title="Contact resistance" label="electrical contact resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704771" start="3753" end="3764" title="Martensitic stainless steel" label="Martensitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266528" start="3766" end="3772" title="Duplex stainless steel" label="duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q51160853" start="3777" end="3801" title="ferritic stainless steel" label="ferritic stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3807" end="3815" title="Permeability (electromagnetism)#Values for some common materials" label="magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604146" start="3823" end="3849" title="austenitic stainless steel" label="austenitic stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="3916" end="3935" title="Cubic crystal system" label="body-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="3936" end="3953" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="4465" end="4491" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604146" start="4493" end="4503" title="austenitic stainless steel" label="Austenitic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4540" end="4552" title="Permeability (electromagnetism)#Values for some common materials" label="non-magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501203" start="4592" end="4606" title="work hardening" label="work hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q630468" start="4773" end="4780" title="Galling" label="Galling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455803" start="5715" end="5725" title="Lubrication" label="lubricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q29018011" start="5787" end="5795" title="Nitronic" label="Nitronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="5832" end="5841" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="5843" end="5850" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="6143" end="6157" title="Académie française" label="French Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333438" start="6161" end="6176" title="Louis Vauquelin" label="Louis Vauquelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8750" start="6233" end="6248" title="Michael Faraday" label="Michael Faraday"/>
<link wikidata="Q983172" start="6254" end="6267" title="Robert Mallet" label="Robert Mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="6349" end="6365" title="oxidizing agents" label="oxidizing agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q71031" start="6367" end="6380" title="Robert Bunsen" label="Robert Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q776164" start="6527" end="6542" title="Pierre Berthier" label="Pierre Berthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="6671" end="6680" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q679201" start="6702" end="6707" title="Krupp" label="Krupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244219" start="6813" end="6835" title="Robert Forester Mushet" label="Robert Forester Mushet"/>
<link wikidata="Q905471" start="7610" end="7624" title="Adolphe Carnot" label="Adolphe Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q77748" start="7774" end="7790" title="Hans Goldschmidt" label="Hans Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q337192" start="7820" end="7828" title="thermite" label="thermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q959114" start="7931" end="7943" title="Leon Guillet" label="Leon Guillet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="8033" end="8038" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q703194" start="8044" end="8073" title="Friedrich Krupp Germaniawerft" label="Friedrich Krupp Germaniawerft"/>
<link wikidata="Q880543" start="8112" end="8120" title="Germania (yacht)" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8186" end="8201" title="Philip Monnartz" label="Philip Monnartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q679201" start="8302" end="8307" title="Krupp" label="Krupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q676919" start="8362" end="8369" title="Nirosta" label="Nirosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604146" start="8374" end="8400" title="austenitic stainless steel" label="austenitic stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8507" end="8526" title="Christian Dantsizen" label="Christian Dantsizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="8530" end="8546" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8551" end="8567" title="Frederick Mark Becket" label="Frederick Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q908553" start="8583" end="8596" title="Union Carbide" label="Union Carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q942451" start="8653" end="8666" title="Elwood Haynes" label="Elwood Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q470651" start="8855" end="8869" title="Harry Brearley" label="Harry Brearley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454298" start="8877" end="8888" title="Firth Brown Steels" label="Brown-Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704771" start="8977" end="9004" title="martensitic stainless steel" label="martensitic stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220673" start="9228" end="9241" title="Vickers" label="Firth Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q746639" start="9302" end="9313" title="Savoy Hotel" label="Savoy Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="9574" end="9584" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="10065" end="10083" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q295905" start="10632" end="10660" title="argon oxygen decarburization" label="argon oxygen decarburization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506832" start="10701" end="10719" title="Continuous casting" label="Continuous casting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10724" end="10741" title="Rolling (metalworking)#Hot rolling" label="hot strip rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270830" start="10748" end="10754" title="Z-mill" label="Z-Mill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10793" end="10815" title="Creusot-Loire Uddeholm" label="Creusot-Loire Uddeholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="11091" end="11112" title="crystalline structure" label="crystalline structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="11454" end="11473" title="face-centered cubic" label="face-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="11669" end="11678" title="cryogenic" label="cryogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600978" start="12515" end="12518" title="SAE 304 stainless steel" label="304"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600980" start="12528" end="12531" title="Marine grade stainless" label="316"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="12584" end="12603" title="body-centered cubic" label="body-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q899633" start="13170" end="13191" title="solid oxide fuel cell" label="solid oxide fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q462188" start="13510" end="13515" title="Creep (deformation)" label="creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q779974" start="14176" end="14199" title="precipitation hardening" label="precipitation hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="14291" end="14299" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="14301" end="14306" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="14312" end="14318" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q871335" start="14688" end="14697" title="Quenching" label="Quenching"/>
<link wikidata="Q503601" start="14752" end="14776" title="body-centered tetragonal" label="body-centered tetragonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q899301" start="15031" end="15045" title="yield strength" label="yield strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="15050" end="15075" title="ultimate tensile strength" label="ultimate tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q899301" start="15491" end="15505" title="yield strength" label="yield strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q474883" start="16539" end="16553" title="water industry" label="water industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q779974" start="16588" end="16611" title="Precipitation hardening" label="Precipitation hardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149879" start="17922" end="17938" title="SAE steel grades" label="SAE steel grades"/>
<link wikidata="Q621977" start="18139" end="18143" title="ASTM" label="ASTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q428822" start="18167" end="18213" title="Unified Numbering System for Metals and Alloys" label="Unified Numbering System for Metals and Alloys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18678" end="18686" title="EN 10088" label="EN 10088"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="18760" end="18772" title="carbon steel" label="carbon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="18813" end="18822" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="18961" end="18971" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210881" start="19118" end="19123" title="Hammerscale" label="flake"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="19259" end="19270" title="Passivation (chemistry)" label="passivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="20711" end="20715" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="20719" end="20723" title="Base (chemistry)" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="20977" end="20994" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="21006" end="21019" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115647" start="21025" end="21039" title="oxidizing acid" label="oxidizing acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="21050" end="21061" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600978" start="21366" end="21374" title="SAE 304 stainless steel" label="type 304"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453931" start="21427" end="21435" title="SAE 316L stainless steel" label="type 316"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454031" start="21563" end="21572" title="SAE 904L stainless steel" label="Type 904L"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733259" start="21577" end="21585" title="Alloy 20" label="Alloy 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="21811" end="21828" title="Hydrochloric acid" label="Hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184782" start="21936" end="21951" title="phosphoric acid" label="phosphoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="21956" end="21967" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q421948" start="22118" end="22130" title="organic acid" label="organic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q421888" start="22287" end="22305" title="ammonium hydroxide" label="ammonium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="22411" end="22427" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="22624" end="22632" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="22638" end="22643" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124686" start="22708" end="22725" title="cellulose acetate" label="cellulose acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="22788" end="22798" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="22964" end="22968" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780822" start="23042" end="23059" title="pitting corrosion" label="pitting corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759493" start="23064" end="23081" title="crevice corrosion" label="crevice corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44791900" start="23142" end="23155" title="Chloride" label="chloride ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044562" start="24114" end="24118" title="Pitting resistance equivalent number" label="PREN"/>
<link wikidata="Q585977" start="25115" end="25140" title="Stress corrosion cracking" label="Stress corrosion cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367906" start="25806" end="25824" title="Galvanic corrosion" label="Galvanic corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385" start="27710" end="27716" title="cerium" label="cerium"/>
<link wikidata="Q941" start="27721" end="27728" title="yttrium" label="yttrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="28293" end="28307" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="28309" end="28325" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="28327" end="28342" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="28344" end="28352" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496669" start="28684" end="28691" title="Kanthal (alloy)" label="Kanthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009662" start="28766" end="28779" title="surface finishing" label="mill finishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187360" start="28932" end="28940" title="Annealing (metallurgy)" label="annealed"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="28993" end="29002" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844333" start="29030" end="29040" title="mill scale" label="mill scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q577889" start="29056" end="29064" title="Pickling (metal)" label="pickling"/>
<link wikidata="Q621977" start="29286" end="29290" title="ASTM International" label="ASTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327527" start="29987" end="30002" title="Electropolishing" label="electropolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="30122" end="30129" title="welding" label="welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="30286" end="30298" title="electric arc" label="electric arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765723" start="31457" end="31478" title="Gas metal arc welding" label="Gas metal arc welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627310" start="31511" end="31535" title="Gas tungsten arc welding" label="Gas tungsten arc welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188001" start="31585" end="31603" title="Plasma arc welding" label="Plasma arc welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180429" start="31605" end="31627" title="Flux-cored arc welding" label="Flux-cored arc welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992360" start="31629" end="31655" title="Shielded metal arc welding" label="Shielded metal arc welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999649" start="31677" end="31698" title="Submerged arc welding" label="Submerged arc welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823301" start="31790" end="31802" title="Stud welding" label="Stud welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327972" start="31804" end="31827" title="Resistance spot welding" label="Resistance spot welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q968702" start="31829" end="31852" title="Resistance seam welding" label="Resistance seam welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q306823" start="31854" end="31867" title="Flash welding" label="Flash welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q937468" start="31869" end="31887" title="Laser beam welding" label="Laser beam welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q118568" start="31889" end="31910" title="Oxy-fuel welding and cutting" label="Oxy-acetylene welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517192" start="31975" end="31998" title="silyl modified polymers" label="silyl modified polymers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32004" end="32011" title="Epoxy#Adhesivese" label="epoxies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32025" end="32037" title="List of polyurethane applications#Adhesives" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q650993" start="32196" end="32216" title="Electric arc furnace" label="Electric arc furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q295905" start="32434" end="32462" title="Argon oxygen decarburization" label="Argon oxygen decarburization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="32528" end="32543" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32641" end="32659" title="Continuous casting#Steel" label="Continuous casting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32767" end="32773" title="Semi-finished casting products#Bloom" label="blooms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32825" end="32836" title="Rolling (metalworking)#Hot rolling" label="Hot rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333961" start="33316" end="33325" title="Tadeusz Sendzimir" label="Sendzimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q283198" start="34666" end="34681" title="Whole-life cost" label="Life cycle cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q310667" start="36710" end="36726" title="carbon footprint" label="carbon footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="37872" end="37882" title="recyclable" label="recyclable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052735" start="38230" end="38258" title="International Resource Panel" label="International Resource Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822707" start="38266" end="38296" title="Metal Stocks in Society report" label="Metal Stocks in Society report"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697332" start="39851" end="39866" title="water splitting" label="water splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031404" start="40172" end="40196" title="Cancer Council Australia" label="Cancer Council Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983535" start="40261" end="40279" title="List of IARC Group 1 Agents - Carcinogenic to humans" label="Group 1 carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="40534" end="40545" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q72099476" start="40550" end="40562" title="Paranasal sinus and nasal cavity cancer" label="nasal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138700" start="40671" end="40684" title="Cobalt-chrome" label="Cobalt-chrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511129" start="40687" end="40708" title="Corrosion engineering" label="Corrosion engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173040" start="40711" end="40744" title="Corrugated stainless steel tubing" label="Corrugated stainless steel tubing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607972" start="40747" end="40770" title="List of blade materials" label="List of blade materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314657" start="40773" end="40796" title="List of steel producers" label="List of steel producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510770" start="40799" end="40813" title="Metallic fiber" label="Metallic fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095082" start="40816" end="40838" title="Pilling–Bedworth ratio" label="Pilling–Bedworth ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370922" start="40841" end="40848" title="Rouging" label="Rouging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024124" start="40851" end="40867" title="Weathering steel" label="Weathering steel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27060" wikidata="Q449763" url="?curid=27060" title="Stig Anderson">
<text>Stig Erik Leopold &quot;Stikkan&quot; Anderson (25 January 1931 – 12 September 1997) was a Swedish music manager, lyricist and music publisher. He was the co-founder of Polar Music, and is best known for managing the Swedish pop band ABBA.

==Early life==
Stikkan Erik Leopold Anderson was born on 25 January 1931 in Hova, Sweden, the son of a single mother named Ester. Anderson began his career as a chemistry and mathematics teacher at a primary school, by taking night classes after leaving school at the age of 15. Having written his first song at age 16, Anderson soon entered the Swedish popular music scene, becoming a music producer, manager and occasional performer.
Anderson began writing songs as early as 1951, and in 1959 gained his breakthrough with the song &quot;Är du kär i mig ännu, Klas-Göran?&quot; (&quot;Are You Still in Love With Me, Klas-Göran?&quot;), written for Swedish singer Lill-Babs. During the 1960s, he was one of Sweden&#x27;s most prolific songwriters. According to Anton Stimm in the Swedish SVT documentary &#x27;Stikkan&#x27; Stig Anderson wrote 767 published titles. Anderson also founded Sweden Music in 1960, as well as several other companies. Three years later, Anderson co-founded Polar Music with Bengt Bernhag.

==Management before ABBA==

By the late 1960s, Anderson was the manager and producer of Björn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson, who would become the two main songwriters of ABBA. He joined the careers of these two, after previously managing the Hootenanny Singers, of which Ulvaeus was a member. Later, in 1972, he began managing Anni-Frid Lyngstad, and finally in 1976 Agnetha Fältskog (until December 1975, Fältskog was still bound to Cupol/CBS Records under a contract).

Before his time with ABBA, Anderson managed some of the biggest Swedish artists at that time, and had a huge number of hits on the Swedish charts. His success earned him the nickname &quot;The Business&quot; since he often had several artists in the Top 10 at any time with whom he had written, published, and recorded the songs. When requiring fresh ideas, Anderson would travel to New York City, buy songs that had been American hits, and then translate or transcribe the lyrics on the return journey ready for a recording session shortly after and then have the record on the shelves within a few days. Some songs were sent to IFPI/ASCAP for copyright infringement. 

== ABBA ==
In the early years of ABBA&#x27;s existence, Anderson co-wrote many of the songs&#x27; lyrics, among them some of the band&#x27;s biggest hits, such as &quot;Ring Ring&quot; (1973), &quot;Waterloo&quot; (1974), &quot;Honey, Honey&quot; (1974), &quot;I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do&quot; (1975), &quot;Mamma Mia&quot; (1975), &quot;S.O.S&quot; (1975), &quot;Dancing Queen&quot; (1976), &quot;Knowing Me, Knowing You&quot; (1977) and &quot;The Name of the Game&quot; (1977).

Sometimes referred to as the &quot;fifth member&quot; of ABBA, Anderson also owned the band&#x27;s record label and publishing company. He shared the ownership with Benny Andersson, Björn Ulvaeus and Michael B. Tretow, the main sound engineer for the company.

Anderson was one of the dominant figures behind ABBA, representing their commercial interests and global success through successful record deals. At the same time, he also managed the investment of funds and the enormous financial incomes of Polar Music, holding the majority of stocks. This was an agreement dating back to 1974, and a great deal of the money came from individual record deals he struck for the group, including a ground-breaking agreement for record sales in the Soviet Union in which ABBA recordings were released in exchange for barrels of oil. In the mid-1980s, a considerable part of ABBA&#x27;s fortune was lost by mismanagement, bad investments, high demands for tax and the rise of credit rates.

=== Legal disputes ===

The contract with the performers, as well as the international distribution, ran from a standard publishing and recording deal involving identical contracts, rather than from one written specifically with the performers of the band. This led to problems later, when three of the four ABBA members terminated their relationship with Anderson when it was revealed that Anderson had used this contract to take a percentage of profits at a value of 4.5 million euros over the course of many years. A complaint against Anderson was submitted to the Stockholm District Court in June 1990 by Agnetha Fältskog&#x27;s company &quot;Agnetha Fältskog Produktion AB&quot;, Benny Andersson&#x27;s company &quot;Mono Music AB&quot;, as well as a Dutch company holding Björn Ulvaeus&#x27;s rights. The dispute was eventually settled out of court in July 1991; the terms of the settlement remain undisclosed.

In 1982, Anni-Frid Lyngstad had sold all the shares in the Polar Music company given to her by Anderson, as she moved abroad. She remains the only member of the band never to seek legal recourse for past royalty fees and was not involved with the legal proceedings against Anderson.

== Polar Music Prize ==
In 1989, Anderson made a substantial financial endowment to found the Polar Music Prize from money he made when he sold the multimillion-dollar record company Polar Records. In this deal nearly all utilisation and license rights, and the registered ABBA trademark, were sold for an unknown sum of money to PolyGram shortly before the ABBA members took him to court over royalty back payments. Previously, Anderson had licensed ABBA and the members&#x27; solo releases to labels internationally as a means to increase royalties. In 1998, PolyGram was in turn sold to Seagram and merged into what is now one of the Big Three record labels, the Universal Music Group, the company that holds the rights to the entire ABBA back catalogue.

== Personal life and death ==
Stig Anderson was married to Gudrun Anderson (née Rystedt, 1931–2010), and had two sons, Anders and Lasse, and a daughter Marie. His daughter, Marie Ledin (born in 1957, wife of Swedish star and ABBA concert backing vocalist Tomas Ledin) was also involved in the music industry. In the mid-1980s she started a new, highly successful record label called &quot;Record Station&quot; (sold to German BMG in the early 1990s), followed by &quot;Anderson Records&quot;. &quot;Anderson Records&quot; released Anni-Frid Lyngstad&#x27;s Swedish comeback album &quot;Djupa andetag&quot; in 1996, as well as Michael B. Tretow&#x27;s &quot;Greatest Hits&quot; in 1999.

On 12 September 1997, at the age of 66, Stig Anderson died of a heart attack. His funeral was broadcast live by Sveriges Television.

== References ==
== Sources ==
* Carl Magnus Palm: &quot;Bright Lights — Dark Shadows&quot;, Omnibus Press UK 2001, </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q449763" start="0" end="17" title="Stig Anderson" label="Stig Erik Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q449763" start="24" end="31" title="Stig Anderson" label="Stikkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q449763" start="38" end="46" title="Stig Anderson" label="Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320883" start="99" end="112" title="music manager" label="music manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917775" start="127" end="142" title="music publisher (popular music)" label="music publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q78512988" start="169" end="180" title="Polar Music" label="Polar Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="234" end="238" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631543" start="317" end="321" title="Hova, Sweden" label="Hova"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="323" end="329" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10684890" start="587" end="608" title="Swedish popular music" label="Swedish popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320883" start="643" end="650" title="Talent manager" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q285351" start="905" end="914" title="Lill-Babs" label="Lill-Babs"/>
<link wikidata="Q78512988" start="1226" end="1237" title="Polar Music" label="Polar Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q179682" start="1347" end="1360" title="Björn Ulvaeus" label="Björn Ulvaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214582" start="1365" end="1380" title="Benny Andersson" label="Benny Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627509" start="1499" end="1517" title="Hootenanny Singers" label="Hootenanny Singers"/>
<link wikidata="Q201908" start="1584" end="1602" title="Anni-Frid Lyngstad" label="Anni-Frid Lyngstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q173144" start="1624" end="1640" title="Agnetha Fältskog" label="Agnetha Fältskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1697" end="1700" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="1868" end="1874" title="Record chart" label="charts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="2175" end="2184" title="Translation" label="translate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249643" start="2188" end="2198" title="Transcription (service)" label="transcribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q602446" start="2203" end="2209" title="lyrics" label="lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975575" start="2244" end="2261" title="Studio recording" label="recording session"/>
<link wikidata="Q826858" start="2359" end="2363" title="IFPI" label="IFPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="2364" end="2369" title="ASCAP" label="ASCAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="2374" end="2396" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q965398" start="2569" end="2578" title="Ring Ring (ABBA song)" label="Ring Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q32503" start="2599" end="2607" title="Waterloo (ABBA song)" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626845" start="2628" end="2640" title="Honey, Honey" label="Honey, Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522046" start="2661" end="2689" title="I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do" label="I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do, I Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131308" start="2710" end="2719" title="Mamma Mia (ABBA song)" label="Mamma Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585621" start="2740" end="2745" title="SOS (ABBA song)" label="S.O.S"/>
<link wikidata="Q870786" start="2766" end="2779" title="Dancing Queen" label="Dancing Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513140" start="2800" end="2823" title="Knowing Me, Knowing You" label="Knowing Me, Knowing You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808429" start="2847" end="2867" title="The Name of the Game (ABBA song)" label="The Name of the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384731" start="3083" end="3100" title="Michael B. Tretow" label="Michael B. Tretow"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="3111" end="3125" title="Audio engineering" label="sound engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3625" end="3637" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3693" end="3707" title="Barrel (unit)#Oil barrel" label="barrels of oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="3831" end="3834" title="taxation" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="4347" end="4351" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="4988" end="5000" title="Royalties" label="royalty fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q754841" start="5162" end="5179" title="Polar Music Prize" label="Polar Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="5398" end="5406" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969696" start="5658" end="5665" title="Seagram" label="Seagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="5734" end="5755" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q955209" start="6082" end="6093" title="Tomas Ledin" label="Tomas Ledin"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="6253" end="6256" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756967" start="6413" end="6426" title="Djupa andetag" label="Djupa andetag"/>
<link wikidata="Q215363" start="6626" end="6645" title="Sveriges Television" label="Sveriges Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033165" start="6681" end="6697" title="Carl Magnus Palm" label="Carl Magnus Palm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27061" wikidata="Q147538" url="?curid=27061" title="Soft drink">
<text>A soft drink (see § Terminology for other names) is any water-based flavored drink, usually but not necessarily carbonated, and typically including added sweetener. Flavors used can be natural or artificial. The sweetener may be a sugar, high-fructose corn syrup, fruit juice, a sugar substitute (in the case of diet sodas), or some combination of these. Soft drinks may also contain caffeine, colorings, preservatives and other ingredients.

Soft drinks are called &quot;soft&quot; in contrast with &quot;hard&quot; alcoholic drinks. Small amounts of alcohol may be present in a soft drink, but the alcohol content must be less than 0.5% of the total volume of the drink in many countries and localities if the drink is to be considered non-alcoholic. Types of soft drinks include lemon-lime drinks, orange soda, cola, grape soda, cream soda, ginger ale and root beer.

Soft drinks may be served cold, over ice cubes, or at room temperature. They are available in many container formats, including cans, glass bottles, and plastic bottles. Containers come in a variety of sizes, ranging from small bottles to large multi-liter containers. Soft drinks are widely available at fast food restaurants, movie theaters, convenience stores, casual-dining restaurants, dedicated soda stores, vending machines and bars from soda fountain machines.

Within a decade of the invention of carbonated water by Joseph Priestley in 1767, inventors in Europe had used his concept to produce the drink in greater quantities. One such inventor, J. J. Schweppe, formed Schweppes in 1783 and began selling the world&#x27;s first bottled soft drink. Soft drink brands founded in the 19th century include R. White&#x27;s Lemonade in 1845, Dr Pepper in 1885 and Coca-Cola in 1886. Subsequent brands include Pepsi, Irn-Bru, Sprite, Fanta, 7 Up and RC Cola.
==Terminology==
The term &quot;soft drink&quot; is a category in the beverage industry, and is broadly used in product labeling and on restaurant menus, generally a euphemistic term meaning non-alcoholic. However, in many countries such drinks are more commonly referred to by regional names, including &quot;pop&quot;, &quot;cool drink&quot;, &quot;fizzy drink, cola, soda, or soda pop&quot;. Other less-used terms include &quot;carbonated drink&quot;, &quot;fizzy juice&quot;, &quot;lolly water&quot;, &quot;seltzer&quot;, &quot;coke&quot;, &quot;tonic&quot;, and &quot;mineral&quot;. Due to the high sugar content in typical soft drinks, they may also be called &quot;sugary drinks&quot;.

In the United States, the 2003 Harvard Dialect Survey tracked the usage of the nine most common names. Over half of the survey respondents preferred the term &quot;soda&quot;, which was dominant in the Northeastern United States, California, and the areas surrounding Milwaukee and St. Louis. The term &quot;pop&quot;, which was preferred by 25% of the respondents, was most popular in the Midwest and Pacific Northwest, while the genericized trademark &quot;coke&quot;, used by 12% of the respondents, was most popular in the Southern United States. The term &quot;tonic&quot; is distinctive to eastern Massachusetts, although its use is declining.

In the English-speaking parts of Canada, the term &quot;pop&quot; is prevalent, but &quot;soft drink&quot; is the most common English term used in Montreal.

In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the term &quot;fizzy drink&quot; is common. &quot;Pop&quot; and &quot;fizzy pop&quot; are used in Northern England, South Wales, and the Midlands while &quot;mineral&quot; is used in Ireland. In Scotland, &quot;fizzy juice&quot; or even simply &quot;juice&quot; is colloquially encountered, as is &quot;ginger&quot;. In Australia and New Zealand, &quot;soft drink&quot; or &quot;fizzy drink&quot; is typically used. In South African English, &quot;cool drink&quot; is any soft drink. 

In other languages, various names are used: descriptive names as &quot;non-alcoholic beverages&quot;, equivalents of &quot;soda water&quot;, or generalized names. For example, the Bohemian variant of the Czech language (but not Moravian dialects) uses &quot;limonáda&quot; for all such beverages, not only those made from lemons. Similarly, the Slovak language uses &quot;malinovka&quot; (&quot;raspberry water&quot;) for all such beverages, not only for raspberry ones.

==History==
The origins of soft drinks lie in the development of fruit-flavored drinks. In the medieval Middle East, a variety of fruit-flavored soft drinks were widely drunk, such as sharbat, and were often sweetened with ingredients such as sugar, syrup and honey. Other common ingredients included lemon, apple, pomegranate, tamarind, jujube, sumac, musk, mint and ice. Middle Eastern drinks later became popular in medieval Europe, where the word &quot;syrup&quot; was derived from Arabic. In Tudor England, &#x27;water imperial&#x27; was widely drunk; it was a sweetened drink with lemon flavor and containing cream of tartar. &#x27;Manays Cryste&#x27; was a sweetened cordial flavored with rosewater, violets or cinnamon.

Another early type of soft drink was lemonade, made of water and lemon juice sweetened with honey, but without carbonated water. The &quot;Compagnie des Limonadiers&quot; of Paris was granted a monopoly for the sale of lemonade soft drinks in 1676. Vendors carried tanks of lemonade on their backs and dispensed cups of the soft drink to Parisians.

===Carbonated drinks===

Carbonated drinks or fizzy drinks are beverages that consist mainly of carbonated water. The dissolution of carbon dioxide () in a liquid, gives rise to &quot;effervescence&quot; or &quot;fizz&quot;. Carbon dioxide is only weakly soluble in water; therefore, it separates into a gas when the pressure is released. The process usually involves injecting carbon dioxide under high pressure. When the pressure is removed, the carbon dioxide is released from the solution as small bubbles, which causes the solution to become effervescent, or fizzy.

Carbonated beverages are prepared by mixing flavored syrup with carbonated water. Carbonation levels range up to 5 volumes of per liquid volume. Ginger ale, colas, and related drinks are carbonated with 3.5 volumes. Other drinks, often fruity ones, are carbonated less.

In the late 18th century, scientists made important progress in replicating naturally carbonated mineral waters. In 1767, Englishman Joseph Priestley first discovered a method of infusing water with carbon dioxide to make carbonated water when he suspended a bowl of distilled water above a beer vat at a local brewery in Leeds, England. His invention of carbonated water (later known as &quot;soda water&quot;, for the use of soda powders in its commercial manufacture) is the major and defining component of most soft drinks.

Priestley found that water treated in this manner had a pleasant taste, and he offered it to his friends as a refreshing drink. In 1772, Priestley published a paper entitled &quot;Impregnating Water with Fixed Air&quot; in which he describes dripping &quot;oil of vitriol&quot; (or sulfuric acid as it is now called) onto chalk to produce carbon dioxide gas and encouraging the gas to dissolve into an agitated bowl of water.
Another Englishman, John Mervin Nooth, improved Priestley&#x27;s design and sold his apparatus for commercial use in pharmacies. Swedish chemist Torbern Bergman invented a generating apparatus that made carbonated water from chalk by the use of sulfuric acid. Bergman&#x27;s apparatus allowed imitation mineral water to be produced in large amounts. Swedish chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius started to add flavors (spices, juices, and wine) to carbonated water in the late eighteenth century. Thomas Henry, an apothecary from Manchester, was the first to sell artificial mineral water to the general public for medicinal purposes, beginning in the 1770s. His recipe for &#x27;Bewley&#x27;s Mephitic Julep&#x27; consisted of 3 drachms of fossil alkali to a quart of water, and the manufacture had to &#x27;throw in streams of fixed air until all the alkaline taste is destroyed&#x27;.

Johann Jacob Schweppe developed a process to manufacture bottled carbonated mineral water. He founded the Schweppes Company in Geneva in 1783 to sell carbonated water, and relocated his business to London in 1792. His drink soon gained in popularity; among his newfound patrons was Erasmus Darwin. In 1843, the Schweppes company commercialized Malvern Water at the Holywell Spring in the Malvern Hills, and received a royal warrant from King William IV.

It was not long before flavoring was combined with carbonated water. The earliest reference to carbonated ginger beer is in a &quot;Practical Treatise on Brewing&quot;. published in 1809. The drinking of either natural or artificial mineral water was considered at the time to be a healthy practice, and was promoted by advocates of temperance. Pharmacists selling mineral waters began to add herbs and chemicals to unflavored mineral water. They used birch bark (see birch beer), dandelion, sarsaparilla root, fruit extracts, and other substances.

===Phosphate soda===
A variant of soda in the United States called &quot;phosphate soda&quot; appeared in the late 1870s. It became one of the most popular soda fountain drinks from 1900 until the 1930s, with the lemon or orange phosphate being the most basic. The drink consists of fruit syrup, 1/2 teaspoon of phosphoric acid, and enough carbonated water and ice to fill a glass. This drink was commonly served in pharmacies.

===Mass market and industrialization===
Soft drinks soon outgrew their origins in the medical world and became a widely consumed product, available cheaply for the masses. By the 1840s, there were more than fifty soft drink manufacturers in London, an increase from just ten in the 1820s. Carbonated lemonade was widely available in British refreshment stalls in 1833, and in 1845, R. White&#x27;s Lemonade went on sale in the UK. For the Great Exhibition of 1851 held at Hyde Park in London, Schweppes was designated the official drink supplier and sold over a million bottles of lemonade, ginger beer, Seltzer water and soda-water. There was a Schweppes soda water fountain, situated directly at the entrance to the exhibition.

Mixer drinks became popular in the second half of the century. Tonic water was originally quinine added to water as a prophylactic against malaria and was consumed by British officials stationed in the tropical areas of South Asia and Africa. As the quinine powder was so bitter people began mixing the powder with soda and sugar, and a basic tonic water was created. The first commercial tonic water was produced in 1858. The mixed drink gin and tonic also originated in British colonial India, when the British population would mix their medicinal quinine tonic with gin.
A persistent problem in the soft drinks industry was the lack of an effective sealing of the bottles. Carbonated drink bottles are under great pressure from the gas, so inventors tried to find the best way to prevent the carbon dioxide or bubbles from escaping. The bottles could also explode if the pressure was too great. Hiram Codd devised a patented bottling machine while working at a small mineral water works in the Caledonian Road, Islington, in London in 1870. His Codd-neck bottle was designed to enclose a marble and a rubber washer in the neck. The bottles were filled upside down, and pressure of the gas in the bottle forced the marble against the washer, sealing in the carbonation. The bottle was pinched into a special shape to provide a chamber into which the marble was pushed to open the bottle. This prevented the marble from blocking the neck as the drink was poured. R. White&#x27;s, by now the biggest soft drinks company in London and south-east England, featured a wide range of drinks on their price list in 1887, all of which were sold in Codd&#x27;s glass bottles, with choices including strawberry soda, raspberry soda, cherryade and cream soda.
In 1892, the &quot;Crown Cork Bottle Seal&quot; was patented by William Painter, a Baltimore, Maryland machine shop operator. It was the first bottle top to successfully keep the bubbles in the bottle. In 1899, the first patent was issued for a glass-blowing machine for the automatic production of glass bottles. Earlier glass bottles had all been hand-blown. Four years later, the new bottle-blowing machine was in operation. It was first operated by Michael Owens, an employee of Libby Glass Company. Within a few years, glass bottle production increased from 1,400 bottles a day to about 58,000 bottles a day.

In America, soda fountains were initially more popular, and many Americans would frequent the soda fountain daily. Beginning in 1806, Yale University chemistry professor Benjamin Silliman sold soda waters in New Haven, Connecticut. He used a Nooth apparatus to produce his waters. Businessmen in Philadelphia and New York City also began selling soda water in the early 19th century. In the 1830s, John Matthews of New York City and John Lippincott of Philadelphia began manufacturing soda fountains. Both men were successful and built large factories for fabricating fountains. Due to problems in the U.S. glass industry, bottled drinks remained a small portion of the market throughout much of the 19th century. (However, they were known in England. In &quot;The Tenant of Wildfell Hall&quot;, published in 1848, the caddish Huntingdon, recovering from months of debauchery, wakes at noon and gulps a bottle of soda-water.)

In the early 20th century, sales of bottled soda increased greatly around the world, and in the second half of the 20th century, canned soft drinks became an important share of the market. During the 1920s, &quot;Home-Paks&quot; were invented. &quot;Home-Paks&quot; are the familiar six-pack cartons made from cardboard. Vending machines also began to appear in the 1920s. Since then, soft drink vending machines have become increasingly popular. Both hot and cold drinks are sold in these self-service machines throughout the world.

==Consumption==
Per capita consumption of soda varies considerably around the world. As of 2014, the top consuming countries per capita were Argentina, the United States, Chile, and Mexico. Developed countries in Europe and elsewhere in the Americas had considerably lower consumption. Annual average consumption in the United States, at 153.5 liters, was about twice that in the United Kingdom (77.7) or Canada (85.3).

In recent years, soda consumption has generally declined in the West. According to one estimate, per capita consumption in the United States reached its peak in 1998 and has continually fallen since. A study in the journal &quot;Obesity&quot; found that from 2003 to 2014 the proportion of Americans who drank a sugary beverage on a given day fell from approximately 62% to 50% for adults, and from 80% to 61% for children. The decrease has been attributed to, among other factors, an increased awareness of the dangers of obesity, and government efforts to improve diets.

At the same time, soda consumption has increased in some low- or middle-income countries such as Cameroon, Georgia, India and Vietnam as soda manufacturers increasingly target these markets and consumers have increasing discretionary income.

==Production==
Soft drinks are made by mixing dry or fresh ingredients with water. Production of soft drinks can be done at factories or at home. Soft drinks can be made at home by mixing a syrup or dry ingredients with carbonated water, or by Lacto-fermentation. Syrups are commercially sold by companies such as Soda-Club; dry ingredients are often sold in pouches, in a style of the popular U.S. drink mix Kool-Aid. Carbonated water is made using a soda siphon or a home carbonation system or by dropping dry ice into water. Food-grade carbon dioxide, used for carbonating drinks, often comes from ammonia plants.

Drinks like ginger ale and root beer are often brewed using yeast to cause carbonation.

Of most importance is that the ingredient meets the agreed specification on all major parameters. This is not only the functional parameter (in other words, the level of the major constituent), but the level of impurities, the microbiological status, and physical parameters such as color, particle size, etc.

Some soft drinks contain measurable amounts of alcohol. In some older preparations, this resulted from natural fermentation used to build the carbonation. In the United States, soft drinks (as well as other products such as non-alcoholic beer) are allowed by law to contain up to 0.5% alcohol by volume. Modern drinks introduce carbon dioxide for carbonation, but there is some speculation that alcohol might result from fermentation of sugars in a non-sterile environment. A small amount of alcohol is introduced in some soft drinks where alcohol is used in the preparation of the flavoring extracts such as vanilla extract.

==Producers==
Market control of the soft drink industry varies on a country-by-country basis. However, PepsiCo and the Coca-Cola Company remain the two largest producers of soft drinks in most regions of the world. In North America, Keurig Dr Pepper and Jones Soda also hold a significant amount of market share.

==Health concerns==

The over-consumption of sugar-sweetened soft drinks is associated with obesity, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, dental caries, and low nutrient levels. A few experimental studies reported the role sugar-sweetened soft drinks potentially contribute to these ailments, though other studies show conflicting information. According to a 2013 systematic review of systematic reviews, 83.3% of the systematic reviews without reported conflict of interest concluded that sugar-sweetened soft drinks consumption could be a potential risk factor for weight gain.

===Obesity and weight-related diseases===

From 1977 to 2002, Americans doubled their consumption of sweetened beverages—a trend that was paralleled by doubling the prevalence of obesity. The consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages is associated with weight and obesity, and changes in consumption can help predict changes in weight.

The consumption of sugar-sweetened soft drinks can also be associated with many weight-related diseases, including diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular risk factors.

===Dental decay===

Most soft drinks contain high concentrations of simple carbohydrates: glucose, fructose, sucrose and other simple sugars. If oral bacteria ferment carbohydrates and produce acids that may dissolve tooth enamel and induce dental decay, then sweetened drinks may increase the risk of dental caries. The risk would be greater if the frequency of consumption is high.

A large number of soda pops are acidic as are many fruits, sauces, and other foods. Drinking acidic drinks over a long period and continuous sipping may erode the tooth enamel. A 2007 study determined that some flavored sparkling waters are as erosive or more so than orange juice.

Using a drinking straw is often advised by dentists as the drink does not come into as much contact with the teeth. It has also been suggested that brushing teeth right after drinking soft drinks should be avoided as this can result in additional erosion to the teeth due to mechanical action of the toothbrush on weakened enamel.

===Bone density and bone loss===
A 2006 study of several thousand men and women, found that women who regularly drank cola-based sodas (three or more a day) had significantly lower bone mineral density (BMD) of about 4% in the hip compared to women who did not consume colas. The study found that the effect of regular consumption of cola sodas was not significant on men&#x27;s BMD.

===Benzene===

In 2006, the United Kingdom Food Standards Agency published the results of its survey of benzene levels in soft drinks, which tested 150 products and found that four contained benzene levels above the World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines for drinking water.

The United States Food and Drug Administration released its own test results of several soft drinks containing benzoates and ascorbic or erythorbic acid. Five tested drinks contained benzene levels above the Environmental Protection Agency&#x27;s recommended standard of 5 ppb. As of 2006, the FDA stated its belief that &quot;the levels of benzene found in soft drinks and other beverages to date do not pose a safety concern for consumers&quot;.

===Kidney stones===
A study published in the &quot;Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology&quot; in 2013 concluded that consumption of soft drinks was associated with a 23% higher risk of developing kidney stones.

=== Mortality, circulatory and digestive diseases ===
In a 2019 study of 451,743 Europeans, those who had a consumption of soft drinks of two or more a day, had a greater chance of all-cause mortality than those who drank less than one per month. People who drank artificially sweetened drinks had a higher risk of cardiovascular diseases, and people who drank sugar-sweetened drinks with digestive diseases.

==Government regulation==
===Schools===
Since at least 2006, debate on whether high-calorie soft drink vending machines should be allowed in schools has been on the rise. Opponents of the soft drink vending machines believe that soft drinks are a significant contributor to childhood obesity and tooth decay, and that allowing soft drink sales in schools encourages children to believe they are safe to consume in moderate to large quantities. Opponents also argue that schools have a responsibility to look after the health of the children in their care, and that allowing children easy access to soft drinks violates that responsibility. Vending machine proponents believe that obesity is a complex issue and soft drinks are not the only cause. A 2011 bill to tax soft drinks in California failed, with some opposing lawmakers arguing that parents—not the government—should be responsible for children&#x27;s drink choices.

On May 3, 2006, the Alliance for a Healthier Generation, Cadbury Schweppes, the Coca-Cola Company, PepsiCo, and the American Beverage Association announced new guidelines that will voluntarily remove high-calorie soft drinks from all U.S. schools.

On May 19, 2006, the British education secretary, Alan Johnson, announced new minimum nutrition standards for school food. Among a wide range of measures, from September 2006, school lunches will be free from carbonated drinks. Schools will also end the sale of junk food (including carbonated drinks) in vending machines and tuck shops.

In 2008, Samantha K Graff published an article in the &quot;Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science&quot; regarding the &quot;First Amendment Implications of Restricting Food and Beverages Marketing in Schools&quot;. The article examines a school district&#x27;s policy regarding limiting the sale and marketing of soda in public schools, and how certain policies can invoke a violation of the First Amendment. Due to district budget cuts and loss in state funding, many school districts allow commercial businesses to market and advertise their product (including junk food and soda) to public school students for additional revenue. Junk food and soda companies have acquired exclusive rights to vending machines throughout many public school campuses. Opponents of corporate marketing and advertising on school grounds urge school officials to restrict or limit a corporation&#x27;s power to promote, market, and sell their product to school students. In the 1970s, the Supreme Court ruled that advertising was not a form of free expression, but a form of business practices which should be regulated by the government. In the 1976 case of &quot;Virginia State Board of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council&quot;, the Supreme Court ruled that advertising, or &quot;commercial speech&quot;, to some degree is protected under the First Amendment. To avoid a First Amendment challenge by corporations, public schools could create contracts that restrict the sale of certain product and advertising. Public schools can also ban the selling of all food and drink products on campus, while not infringing on a corporation&#x27;s right to free speech.

On December 13, 2010, President Obama signed the Healthy Hunger Free Kids Act of 2010 (effective in 2014) that mandates schools that receive federal funding must offer healthy snacks and drinks to students. The act bans the selling of soft drinks to students and requires schools to provide healthier options such as water, unflavored low-fat milk, 100% fruit and vegetable drinks or sugar-free carbonated drinks. The portion sizes available to students will be based on age: eight ounces for elementary schools, twelve ounces for middle and high schools. Proponents of the act predict the new mandate it will make it easier for students to make healthy drink choices while at school.

In 2015, Terry-McElarth and colleagues published a study in the &quot;American Journal of Preventive Medicine&quot; on regular soda policies and their effect on school drink availability and student consumption. The purpose of the study was to determine the effectiveness of a program beginning in the 2014–2015 school year that requires schools participating in federally reimbursable meal programs to remove all competitive venues (a la carte cafeteria sales, vending machines, and stores/snack bars/carts), on the availability of unhealthy drinks at schools and student consumption. The study analyzed state- and school district-level policies mandating soda bans and found that state bans were associated with significantly lower school soda availability but district bans showed no significant associations. In addition, no significant correlation was observed between state policies and student consumption. Among student populations, state policy was directly associated with significantly lower school soda availability and indirectly associated with lower student consumption. The same was not observed for other student populations.

===Taxation===
In the United States, legislators, health experts and consumer advocates are considering levying higher taxes on the sale of soft drinks and other sweetened products to help curb the epidemic of obesity among Americans, and its harmful impact on overall health. Some speculate that higher taxes could help reduce soda consumption. Others say that taxes should help fund education to increase consumer awareness of the unhealthy effects of excessive soft drink consumption, and also help cover costs of caring for conditions resulting from overconsumption. The food and drink industry holds considerable clout in Washington, DC, as it has contributed more than $50 million to legislators since 2000.

In January 2013, a British lobby group called for the price of sugary fizzy drinks to be increased, with the money raised (an estimated £1 billion at 20p per litre) to be put towards a &quot;Children&#x27;s Future Fund&quot;, overseen by an independent body, which would encourage children to eat healthily in school.

In 2017, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain imposed a 50% tax on soft drinks and a 100% tax on energy drinks to curb excess consumption of the commodity and for additional revenue.

===Attempted ban===
In March 2013, New York City&#x27;s mayor Michael Bloomberg proposed to ban the sale of non-diet soft drinks larger than 16 ounces, except in convenience stores and supermarkets. A lawsuit against the ban was upheld by a state judge, who voiced concerns that the ban was &quot;fraught with arbitrary and capricious consequences&quot;. Bloomberg announced that he would be appealing the verdict. The state appellate courts upheld the trial court decision, and the ban remains unenforceable as of 2021.

In 2022, amidst soaring rates of obesity and diabetes, the Mexican state of Oaxaca enacted a ban on sugary drinks, including notably Coca-Cola, but it was poorly enforced.

==See also==
* Ade
* Craft soda
* Diet Coke and Mentos eruption
* Diet soda
* Energy drink
* Phosphate soda
* Fizz-Keeper
* Hard soda
* Industrial gas
* Kombucha
* List of brand name soft drink products
* List of soft drink flavors
* List of soft drinks by country
* List of drinks
* Low-alcohol beer
* Nitrogenation
* Nucleation
* Premix and postmix
* Soda fountain
* Squash (drink)
==References==
==Further reading==
* &quot;Beverage group: Pull soda from primary schools&quot;, &quot;USA Today&quot;, August 17, 2005
* &quot;After soda ban nutritionists say more can be done&quot;, &quot;The Boston Globe&quot;, May 4, 2006
* &quot;Critics Say Soda Policy for Schools Lacks Teeth&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot;, August 22, 2006

==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="2" end="12" title="Soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18" end="31" title="#Terminology" label="§ Terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40050" start="77" end="82" title="drink" label="drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="112" end="122" title="Carbonated water" label="carbonated"/>
<link wikidata="Q460453" start="154" end="163" title="Sweetness" label="sweetener"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173974" start="196" end="206" title="Artificial Flavoring" label="artificial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="231" end="236" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="238" end="262" title="high-fructose corn syrup" label="high-fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8492" start="264" end="275" title="fruit juice" label="fruit juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q626292" start="279" end="295" title="sugar substitute" label="sugar substitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246353" start="312" end="321" title="diet soda" label="diet soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="384" end="392" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="394" end="403" title="Food coloring" label="colorings"/>
<link wikidata="Q274579" start="405" end="417" title="preservative" label="preservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="517" end="533" title="alcoholic beverages" label="alcoholic drinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="552" end="559" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q721237" start="600" end="615" title="Alcohol by volume" label="alcohol content"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647467" start="738" end="751" title="Non-alcoholic drink" label="non-alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130245" start="782" end="798" title="lemon-lime drink" label="lemon-lime drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q604712" start="801" end="812" title="orange soda" label="orange soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="814" end="818" title="cola" label="cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597006" start="820" end="830" title="grape soda" label="grape soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304229" start="832" end="842" title="cream soda" label="cream soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162763" start="844" end="854" title="ginger ale" label="ginger ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q36275" start="859" end="868" title="root beer" label="root beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q488463" start="908" end="916" title="ice cube" label="ice cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="930" end="941" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121690" start="999" end="1003" title="Soda can" label="cans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567094" start="1005" end="1018" title="glass bottles" label="glass bottles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757946" start="1024" end="1039" title="plastic bottles" label="plastic bottles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751429" start="1176" end="1196" title="fast food restaurant" label="fast food restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="1199" end="1212" title="movie theater" label="movie theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="1215" end="1232" title="convenience store" label="convenience store"/>
<link wikidata="Q128656629" start="1235" end="1260" title="casual-dining restaurants" label="casual-dining restaurants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553208" start="1272" end="1282" title="soda store" label="soda store"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="1285" end="1300" title="vending machine" label="vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187456" start="1306" end="1309" title="Bar (establishment)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419253" start="1316" end="1329" title="soda fountain" label="soda fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="1397" end="1413" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q62147" start="1527" end="1541" title="Johann Jacob Schweppe" label="J. J. Schweppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q838651" start="1550" end="1559" title="Schweppes" label="Schweppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274118" start="1683" end="1707" title="R. White&amp;#x27;s Lemonade" label="R. White&amp;#x27;s Lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q623561" start="1717" end="1726" title="Dr Pepper" label="Dr Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="1739" end="1748" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="1784" end="1789" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q938806" start="1791" end="1798" title="Irn-Bru" label="Irn-Bru"/>
<link wikidata="Q206978" start="1800" end="1806" title="Sprite (drink)" label="Sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9935" start="1808" end="1813" title="Fanta" label="Fanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q270059" start="1815" end="1819" title="7 Up" label="7 Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342742" start="1824" end="1831" title="RC Cola" label="RC Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q83464" start="1998" end="2014" title="euphemism" label="euphemistic term"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647467" start="2023" end="2036" title="Non-alcoholic drink" label="non-alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="2196" end="2200" title="cola" label="cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2557" end="2564" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q765270" start="2957" end="2978" title="genericized trademark" label="genericized trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="3130" end="3143" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156228" start="3789" end="3810" title="South African English" label="South African English"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="4036" end="4043" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="4060" end="4074" title="Czech language" label="Czech language"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="4084" end="4091" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="4201" end="4216" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak language"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="4423" end="4443" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="medieval Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206969" start="4512" end="4519" title="Sharbat (beverage)" label="sharbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="4571" end="4576" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584340" start="4578" end="4583" title="syrup" label="syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="4588" end="4593" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="4629" end="4634" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="4636" end="4641" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13188" start="4643" end="4654" title="pomegranate" label="pomegranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80235" start="4656" end="4664" title="tamarind" label="tamarind"/>
<link wikidata="Q11181633" start="4666" end="4672" title="jujube" label="jujube"/>
<link wikidata="Q157649" start="4674" end="4679" title="sumac" label="sumac"/>
<link wikidata="Q323461" start="4681" end="4685" title="musk" label="musk"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="4687" end="4691" title="Mentha" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="4696" end="4699" title="ice" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115173" start="4736" end="4762" title="Islamic contributions to Medieval Europe" label="popular in medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="4814" end="4820" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="4825" end="4838" title="Tudor England" label="Tudor England"/>
<link wikidata="Q18745" start="4943" end="4958" title="cream of tartar" label="cream of tartar"/>
<link wikidata="Q893" start="5094" end="5102" title="lemonade" label="lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="5503" end="5519" title="carbonated water" label="carbonated water"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="5525" end="5536" title="dissolution (chemistry)" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="5540" end="5554" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="5563" end="5569" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797526" start="5591" end="5604" title="effervescence" label="effervescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="5711" end="5714" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162763" start="6124" end="6134" title="Ginger ale" label="Ginger ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="6136" end="6140" title="cola" label="cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q178921" start="6347" end="6360" title="mineral water" label="mineral water"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="6383" end="6399" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="6572" end="6577" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262538" start="6677" end="6688" title="soda powder" label="soda powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="7061" end="7074" title="Sulphuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="7101" end="7106" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q21166048" start="7225" end="7242" title="John Mervin Nooth" label="John Mervin Nooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201347" start="7350" end="7365" title="Torbern Bergman" label="Torbern Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="7571" end="7591" title="Jöns Jacob Berzelius" label="Jöns Jacob Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424681" start="7694" end="7706" title="Thomas Henry (apothecary)" label="Thomas Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131236" start="7711" end="7721" title="apothecary" label="apothecary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255620" start="7927" end="7933" title="dram (unit)" label="drachm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058120" start="7957" end="7962" title="quart" label="quart"/>
<link wikidata="Q62147" start="8086" end="8107" title="Johann Jacob Schweppe" label="Johann Jacob Schweppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q838651" start="8192" end="8201" title="Schweppes" label="Schweppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="8213" end="8219" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q234050" start="8368" end="8382" title="Erasmus Darwin" label="Erasmus Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745098" start="8430" end="8443" title="Malvern Water" label="Malvern Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942078" start="8504" end="8517" title="Royal warrant of appointment (United Kingdom)" label="royal warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448819" start="8647" end="8658" title="ginger beer" label="ginger beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="8874" end="8884" title="temperance movement" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024027" start="9009" end="9019" title="birch beer" label="birch beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30024" start="9022" end="9031" title="dandelion" label="dandelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117102" start="9033" end="9050" title="Smilax regelii" label="sarsaparilla root"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187435" start="9164" end="9178" title="phosphate soda" label="phosphate soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q184782" start="9403" end="9418" title="phosphoric acid" label="phosphoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q893" start="9820" end="9828" title="lemonade" label="lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7274118" start="9902" end="9926" title="R. White&amp;#x27;s Lemonade" label="R. White&amp;#x27;s Lemonade"/>
<link wikidata="Q273095" start="9959" end="9975" title="Great Exhibition" label="Great Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="9992" end="10001" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="10124" end="10137" title="Seltzer water" label="Seltzer water"/>
<link wikidata="Q237315" start="10314" end="10325" title="Tonic water" label="Tonic water"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="10341" end="10348" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="10369" end="10381" title="prophylaxis" label="prophylactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="10390" end="10397" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="10471" end="10481" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246609" start="10678" end="10689" title="mixed drink" label="mixed drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q704357" start="10690" end="10703" title="gin and tonic" label="gin and tonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="10723" end="10745" title="British India" label="British colonial India"/>
<link wikidata="Q959362" start="10820" end="10823" title="gin" label="gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80228" start="10944" end="10950" title="bottle" label="bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062763" start="11149" end="11159" title="Hiram Codd" label="Hiram Codd"/>
<link wikidata="Q63774115" start="11179" end="11187" title="bottling" label="bottling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019452" start="11248" end="11263" title="Caledonian Road (London)" label="Caledonian Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="11265" end="11274" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573777" start="11299" end="11315" title="Codd-neck bottle" label="Codd-neck bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="11342" end="11348" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="11355" end="11361" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q637321" start="11362" end="11368" title="washer (mechanical)" label="washer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13845007" start="12020" end="12042" title="Crown cork" label="Crown Cork Bottle Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q947004" start="12065" end="12080" title="William Painter (inventor)" label="William Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185286" start="12246" end="12259" title="glass-blowing" label="glass-blowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928076" start="12454" end="12467" title="Michael Joseph Owens" label="Michael Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419253" start="12628" end="12641" title="soda fountain" label="soda fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="12750" end="12765" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q817692" start="12786" end="12803" title="Benjamin Silliman" label="Benjamin Silliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="12824" end="12846" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2804215" start="13014" end="13027" title="John Matthews (soda water manufacturer)" label="John Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q44701" start="13377" end="13404" title="The Tenant of Wildfell Hall" label="The Tenant of Wildfell Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444710" start="13826" end="13842" title="Carton" label="six-pack cartons"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="13864" end="13879" title="Vending machine" label="Vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763232" start="14728" end="14735" title="Obesity (journal)" label="Obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="15170" end="15178" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="15180" end="15187" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="15189" end="15194" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="15199" end="15206" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584340" start="15506" end="15511" title="syrup" label="syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q683006" start="15630" end="15639" title="Soda-Club" label="Soda-Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531983" start="15725" end="15733" title="Kool-Aid" label="Kool-Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061094" start="15768" end="15779" title="soda siphon" label="soda siphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q683006" start="15785" end="15808" title="home carbonation system" label="home carbonation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="15917" end="15924" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162763" start="15946" end="15956" title="ginger ale" label="ginger ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q36275" start="15961" end="15970" title="root beer" label="root beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="15994" end="15999" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="16009" end="16020" title="carbonation" label="carbonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q524679" start="16558" end="16576" title="Low-alcohol beer" label="non-alcoholic beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q721237" start="16619" end="16636" title="alcohol by volume" label="alcohol by volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q10749869" start="16943" end="16958" title="vanilla extract" label="vanilla extract"/>
<link wikidata="Q334800" start="17064" end="17071" title="PepsiCo" label="PepsiCo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="17076" end="17097" title="the Coca-Cola Company" label="the Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116111" start="17194" end="17210" title="Keurig Dr Pepper" label="Keurig Dr Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060899" start="17215" end="17225" title="Jones Soda" label="Jones Soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="17367" end="17374" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="17376" end="17388" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="17390" end="17405" title="diabetes mellitus type 2" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="17407" end="17420" title="dental caries" label="dental caries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="17426" end="17445" title="malnutrition" label="low nutrient levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="17633" end="17650" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608295" start="17723" end="17743" title="Conflicts of interest in academic publishing" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084188" start="17951" end="17969" title="sweetened beverage" label="sweetened beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q657193" start="18311" end="18329" title="metabolic syndrome" label="metabolic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="18440" end="18452" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="18455" end="18462" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q122043" start="18464" end="18472" title="fructose" label="fructose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="18474" end="18481" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="18532" end="18544" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="18667" end="18680" title="dental caries" label="dental caries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="18782" end="18786" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361346" start="18903" end="18925" title="acid erosion" label="erode the tooth enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189211" start="19041" end="19055" title="drinking straw" label="drinking straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q12128" start="19076" end="19084" title="dentistry" label="dentists"/>
<link wikidata="Q13445028" start="19181" end="19195" title="Oral hygiene" label="brushing teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741994" start="19793" end="19814" title="Food Standards Agency" label="Food Standards Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="19854" end="19861" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="19966" end="19991" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="20048" end="20076" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890784" start="20141" end="20150" title="benzoates" label="benzoates"/>
<link wikidata="Q193598" start="20155" end="20163" title="ascorbic acid" label="ascorbic"/>
<link wikidata="Q424531" start="20167" end="20182" title="erythorbic acid" label="erythorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="20238" end="20276" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="20303" end="20306" title="parts per billion" label="ppb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745096" start="20554" end="20584" title="American Society of Nephrology" label="American Society of Nephrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="20693" end="20706" title="kidney stones" label="kidney stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="20890" end="20909" title="Mortality rate" label="all-cause mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="21024" end="21046" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300099" start="21098" end="21116" title="Digestive Diseases" label="digestive diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="21222" end="21237" title="vending machine" label="vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241451" start="21393" end="21410" title="childhood obesity" label="childhood obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="21415" end="21426" title="tooth decay" label="tooth decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="22103" end="22120" title="Cadbury Schweppes" label="Cadbury Schweppes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="22122" end="22143" title="the Coca-Cola Company" label="the Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q334800" start="22145" end="22152" title="PepsiCo" label="PepsiCo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743169" start="22162" end="22191" title="American Beverage Association" label="American Beverage Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477306" start="22324" end="22343" title="Secretary of State for Education and Skills" label="education secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q332336" start="22345" end="22357" title="Alan Johnson" label="Alan Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851015" start="22621" end="22630" title="tuck shop" label="tuck shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="23051" end="23066" title="First Amendment" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="23655" end="23666" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="23685" end="23700" title="free expression" label="free expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q873451" start="23716" end="23734" title="business practices" label="business practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152584" start="23935" end="23952" title="commercial speech" label="commercial speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691376" start="24365" end="24401" title="Healthy, Hunger-Free Kids Act of 2010" label="Healthy Hunger Free Kids Act of 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="26265" end="26268" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908457" start="26356" end="26379" title="Obesity in the United States" label="obesity among Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q540912" start="26721" end="26725" title="food industry" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899370" start="26730" end="26744" title="drink industry" label="drink industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="26888" end="26899" title="lobby group" label="lobby group"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="27413" end="27426" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q607" start="27440" end="27457" title="Michael Bloomberg" label="Michael Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="27976" end="27982" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681443" start="28088" end="28091" title="-ade (suffix)" label="Ade"/>
<link wikidata="Q59185742" start="28094" end="28104" title="Craft soda" label="Craft soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q128450" start="28107" end="28136" title="Diet Coke and Mentos eruption" label="Diet Coke and Mentos eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246353" start="28139" end="28148" title="Diet drink" label="Diet soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q215754" start="28151" end="28163" title="Energy drink" label="Energy drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187435" start="28166" end="28180" title="Phosphate soda" label="Phosphate soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456450" start="28183" end="28194" title="Fizz-Keeper" label="Fizz-Keeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q24648524" start="28197" end="28206" title="Hard soda" label="Hard soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456821" start="28209" end="28223" title="Industrial gas" label="Industrial gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q657032" start="28226" end="28234" title="Kombucha" label="Kombucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608137" start="28237" end="28275" title="List of brand name soft drink products" label="List of brand name soft drink products"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099143" start="28278" end="28304" title="List of soft drink flavors" label="List of soft drink flavors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639708" start="28307" end="28337" title="List of soft drinks by country" label="List of soft drinks by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q17065192" start="28340" end="28354" title="List of drinks" label="List of drinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q524679" start="28357" end="28373" title="Low-alcohol beer" label="Low-alcohol beer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28376" end="28389" title="Nitrogen#Nitrogen gas" label="Nitrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q909022" start="28392" end="28402" title="Nucleation" label="Nucleation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603322" start="28405" end="28423" title="Premix and postmix" label="Premix and postmix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419253" start="28426" end="28439" title="Soda fountain" label="Soda fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190923" start="28442" end="28456" title="Squash (drink)" label="Squash (drink)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="28560" end="28569" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="28664" end="28680" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="28769" end="28787" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27062" wikidata="Q254987" url="?curid=27062" title="Sockerdricka">
<text>Sockerdricka (Swedish for: &quot;sugar drink&quot;) is a soft drink dating from the 19th century. Originally it was brewed and also contained ginger, but nowadays it consists of carbonated water, sugar, citric acid, and flavorants. It is quite similar to Fruktsoda. It is still sold, despite strong competition from more modern soft drinks such as 7 Up and Sprite. Sockerdricka is a popular base for many cocktails.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q254987" start="0" end="12" title="Sockerdricka" label="Sockerdricka"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="57" end="67" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="178" end="194" title="carbonated water" label="carbonated water"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="196" end="201" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="203" end="214" title="citric acid" label="citric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173974" start="220" end="229" title="flavorant" label="flavorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506490" start="255" end="264" title="Fruktsoda" label="Fruktsoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q270059" start="348" end="352" title="7 Up" label="7 Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q206978" start="357" end="363" title="Sprite (soft drink)" label="Sprite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27064" wikidata="Q3178997" url="?curid=27064" title="Steve Crocker">
<text>Stephen D. Crocker (born October 15, 1944) is an American Internet pioneer. In 1969, he created the ARPA &quot;Network Working Group&quot; and the Request for Comments series. He served as chair of the board of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) from 2011 through 2017.

== Education ==
Steve Crocker attended Van Nuys High School, as did Vint Cerf and Jon Postel. Crocker received his bachelor&#x27;s degree (1968) and PhD (1977) from the University of California, Los Angeles. 

== Career ==
As a graduate student at the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) in the 1960s, he was part of the team that developed the protocols for the ARPANET which were the foundation for today&#x27;s Internet. He said &quot;While much of the development proceeded according to a grand plan, the design of the protocols and the creation of the RFCs was largely accidental.&quot; He was instrumental in forming a Network Working Group (NWG) in 1969 and was the instigator of the Request for Comment (RFC) series, authoring the first RFC and many more. Crocker led other graduate students, including Jon Postel and Vint Cerf, in designing a host-host protocol known as the Network Control Program (NCP). They planned to use separate protocols, Telnet and the File Transfer Protocol (FTP), to run functions across the ARPANET. NCP codified the ARPANET network interface, making it easier to establish, and enabling more sites to join the network.

He formed the International Network Working Group (INWG) in 1972, then his research interests shifted to artificial intelligence. He was acknowledged by Cerf and Kahn in their seminal 1974 paper on internetworking&quot;.&quot; 

While at UCLA Crocker taught an extension course on computer programming (for the IBM 7094 mainframe computer). The class was intended to teach digital processing and assembly language programming to high school teachers, so that they could offer such courses in their high schools. A number of high school students were also admitted to the course, to ensure that they would be able to understand this new discipline. Crocker was also active in the newly formed UCLA Computer Club.

Crocker has been a program manager at Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), a senior researcher at USC&#x27;s Information Sciences Institute, founder and director of the Computer Science Laboratory at The Aerospace Corporation and a vice president at Trusted Information Systems. In 1994, Crocker was one of the founders and chief technology officer of CyberCash, Inc. In 1998, he founded and ran Executive DSL, a DSL-based ISP. In 1999 he cofounded and was CEO of Longitude Systems. He is currently CEO of Shinkuro, a research and development company.

The Networking Working Group RFC&#x27;s provided the context in which the IETF was created in 1986. He has been an IETF security area director, a member of the Internet Architecture Board, chair of the ICANN Security and Stability Advisory Committee, board member and chairman of ICANN, a board member of the Internet Society and numerous other Internet-related volunteer positions.

== Awards ==
He has worked in the Internet community since its inception. For his work on the Internet, Crocker was awarded the 2002 IEEE Internet Award. In 2012, Crocker was inducted into the Internet Hall of Fame by the Internet Society.

On November 6th, 2024 Dr. Crocker received the Jonathan B. Postel Award during the 121th IETF meeting in Dublin, Ireland. He was named as an ACM Fellow, in the 2024 class of fellows, &quot;for pioneering leadership in the design of the Arpanet Host-Host Protocols and applications&quot;.

== See also ==

* List of Internet pioneers

== Notes ==
==References==
==Sources==

==External links==
*
* Shinkuro.com executive team info
* Oral history interview with Stephen Crocker, Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Crocker discusses computer networks, artificial intelligence research, and his work at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA); interactions with other DARPA personnel including Cordell Green, Barry Wessler, Larry Roberts, Bob Kahn, and David Russell. He discusses his work as a program manager in the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3178997" start="0" end="18" title="Steve Crocker" label="Stephen D. Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574347" start="58" end="74" title="List of Internet pioneers" label="Internet pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="147" end="167" title="Request for Comments" label="Request for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="215" end="274" title="ICANN" label="Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008476" start="339" end="359" title="Van Nuys High School" label="Van Nuys High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q92743" start="368" end="377" title="Vint Cerf" label="Vint Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q92623" start="382" end="392" title="Jon Postel" label="Jon Postel"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="415" end="437" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="449" end="452" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="469" end="506" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="552" end="588" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="671" end="678" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="722" end="730" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="999" end="1018" title="Request for Comments" label="Request for Comment"/>
<link wikidata="Q92623" start="1119" end="1129" title="Jon Postel" label="Jon Postel"/>
<link wikidata="Q92743" start="1134" end="1143" title="Vint Cerf" label="Vint Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582530" start="1192" end="1215" title="Network Control Program (ARPANET)" label="Network Control Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q160470" start="1263" end="1269" title="Telnet" label="Telnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="1278" end="1300" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="File Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q16643941" start="1480" end="1515" title="International Network Working Group" label="International Network Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="1571" end="1594" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701019" start="1777" end="1785" title="IBM 7094" label="IBM 7094"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="1786" end="1804" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="2217" end="2258" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="2291" end="2294" title="University of Southern California" label="USC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030821" start="2302" end="2332" title="Information Sciences Institute" label="Information Sciences Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712741" start="2393" end="2418" title="The Aerospace Corporation" label="The Aerospace Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848182" start="2443" end="2470" title="Trusted Information Systems" label="Trusted Information Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197675" start="2545" end="2554" title="CyberCash" label="CyberCash"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="2606" end="2615" title="Digital subscriber line" label="DSL-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="2820" end="2824" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="2861" end="2865" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667943" start="2906" end="2933" title="Internet Architecture Board" label="Internet Architecture Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="2948" end="2953" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="3055" end="3071" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146631" start="3263" end="3282" title="IEEE Internet Award" label="IEEE Internet Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055547" start="3323" end="3344" title="Internet Hall of Fame" label="Internet Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="3352" end="3368" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q18748039" start="3512" end="3522" title="ACM Fellow" label="ACM Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574347" start="3678" end="3703" title="List of Internet pioneers" label="List of Internet pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="3848" end="3873" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="3991" end="4032" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q31271080" start="4092" end="4105" title="Cordell Green" label="Cordell Green"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4107" end="4120" title="Barry Wessler" label="Barry Wessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q92935" start="4122" end="4135" title="Lawrence Roberts (scientist)" label="Larry Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q62843" start="4137" end="4145" title="Bob Kahn" label="Bob Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030770" start="4216" end="4256" title="Information Processing Techniques Office" label="Information Processing Techniques Office"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27065" wikidata="Q369577" url="?curid=27065" title="Standardization">
<text>Standardization (American English) or standardisation (British English) is the process of implementing and developing technical standards based on the consensus of different parties that include firms, users, interest groups, standards organizations and governments. Standardization can help maximize compatibility, interoperability, safety, repeatability, efficiency, and quality. It can also facilitate a normalization of formerly custom processes. 

In social sciences, including economics, the idea of &quot;standardization&quot; is close to the solution for a coordination problem, a situation in which all parties can realize mutual gains, but only by making mutually consistent decisions. Divergent national standards impose costs on consumers and can be a form of non-tariff trade barrier.

==History==
===Early examples===
Standard weights and measures were developed by the Indus Valley civilization. The centralized weight and measure system served the commercial interest of Indus merchants as smaller weight measures were used to measure luxury goods while larger weights were employed for buying bulkier items, such as food grains etc. Weights existed in multiples of a standard weight and in categories. Technical standardisation enabled gauging devices to be effectively used in angular measurement and measurement for construction. Uniform units of length were used in the planning of towns such as Lothal, Surkotada, Kalibangan, Dolavira, Harappa, and Mohenjo-daro. The weights and measures of the Indus civilization also reached Persia and Central Asia, where they were further modified. Shigeo Iwata describes the excavated weights unearthed from the Indus civilization:

===18th century attempts===
The implementation of standards in industry and commerce became highly important with the onset of the Industrial Revolution and the need for high-precision machine tools and interchangeable parts.

Henry Maudslay developed the first industrially practical screw-cutting lathe in 1800. This allowed for the standardization of screw thread sizes for the first time and paved the way for the practical application of interchangeability (an idea that was already taking hold) to nuts and bolts.

Before this, screw threads were usually made by chipping and filing (that is, with skilled freehand use of chisels and files). Nuts were rare; metal screws, when made at all, were usually for use in wood. Metal bolts passing through wood framing to a metal fastening on the other side were usually fastened in non-threaded ways (such as clinching or upsetting against a washer). Maudslay standardized the screw threads used in his workshop and produced sets of taps and dies that would make nuts and bolts consistently to those standards, so that any bolt of the appropriate size would fit any nut of the same size. This was a major advance in workshop technology.

===National standard===
Maudslay&#x27;s work, as well as the contributions of other engineers, accomplished a modest amount of industry standardization; some companies&#x27; in-house standards spread a bit within their industries.
Joseph Whitworth&#x27;s screw thread measurements were adopted as the first (unofficial) national standard by companies around the country in 1841. It came to be known as the British Standard Whitworth, and was widely adopted in other countries.

This new standard specified a 55° thread angle and a thread depth of 0.640327&quot;p&quot; and a radius of 0.137329&quot;p&quot;, where &quot;p&quot; is the pitch. The thread pitch increased with diameter in steps specified on a chart. An example of the use of the Whitworth thread is the Royal Navy&#x27;s Crimean War gunboats. These were the first instance of &quot;mass-production&quot; techniques being applied to marine engineering.

With the adoption of BSW by British railway lines, many of which had previously used their own standard both for threads and for bolt head and nut profiles, and improving manufacturing techniques, it came to dominate British manufacturing.

American Unified Coarse was originally based on almost the same imperial fractions. The Unified thread angle is 60° and has flattened crests (Whitworth crests are rounded). Thread pitch is the same in both systems except that the thread pitch for the  in. (inch) bolt is 12 threads per inch (tpi) in BSW versus 13 tpi in the UNC.

===National standards body===
By the end of the 19th century, differences in standards between companies were making trade increasingly difficult and strained. For instance, an iron and steel dealer recorded his displeasure in &quot;The Times&quot;: &quot;Architects and engineers generally specify such unnecessarily diverse types of sectional material or given work that anything like economical and continuous manufacture becomes impossible. In this country no two professional men are agreed upon the size and weight of a girder to employ for given work.&quot;

The Engineering Standards Committee was established in London in 1901 as the world&#x27;s first national standards body. It subsequently extended its standardization work and became the British Engineering Standards Association in 1918, adopting the name British Standards Institution in 1931 after receiving its Royal Charter in 1929. The national standards were adopted universally throughout the country, and enabled the markets to act more rationally and efficiently, with an increased level of cooperation.

After the First World War, similar national bodies were established in other countries. The was set up in Germany in 1917, followed by its counterparts, the American National Standard Institute and the French Commission Permanente de Standardisation, both in 1918.

=== Regional standards organization ===
At a regional level (e.g. Europa, the Americas, Africa, etc) or at subregional level (e.g. Mercosur, Andean Community, South East Asia, South East Africa, etc), several Regional Standardization Organizations exist (see also Standards Organization).

The three regional standards organizations in Europe – European Standardization Organizations (ESOs), recognised by the EU Regulation on Standardization (Regulation (EU) 1025/2012) – are CEN, CENELEC and ETSI. CEN develops standards for numerous kinds of products, materials, services and processes. Some sectors covered by CEN include transport equipment and services, chemicals, construction, consumer products, defence and security, energy, food and feed, health and safety, healthcare, digital sector, machinery or services. The European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC) is the European Standardization organization developing standards in the electrotechnical area and corresponding to the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) in Europe.

===International standards===

The first modern International Organization (Intergovernmental Organization) the International Telegraph Union (now International Telecommunication Union) was created in 1865 to set international standards in order to connect national telegraph networks, as a merger of two predecessor organizations (Bern and Paris treaties) that had similar objectives, but in more limited territories. With the advent of radiocommunication soon after the creation, the work of the ITU quickly expanded from the standardization of Telegraph communications, to developing standards for telecommunications in general.

===International Standards Associations===
By the mid to late 19th century, efforts were being made to standardize electrical measurement. Lord Kelvin was an important figure in this process, introducing accurate methods and apparatus for measuring electricity. In 1857, he introduced a series of effective instruments, including the quadrant electrometer, which cover the entire field of electrostatic measurement. He invented the current balance, also known as the &quot;Kelvin balance&quot; or &quot;Ampere balance&quot; (&quot;SiC&quot;), for the precise specification of the ampere, the standard unit of electric current.

R. E. B. Crompton became concerned by the large range of different standards and systems used by electrical engineering companies and scientists in the early 20th century. Many companies had entered the market in the 1890s and all chose their own settings for voltage, frequency, current and even the symbols used on circuit diagrams. Adjacent buildings would have totally incompatible electrical systems simply because they had been fitted out by different companies. Crompton could see the lack of efficiency in this system and began to consider proposals for an international standard for electric engineering.

In 1904, Crompton represented Britain at the International Electrical Congress, held in connection with Louisiana Purchase Exposition in Saint Louis as part of a delegation by the Institute of Electrical Engineers. He presented a paper on standardisation, which was so well received that he was asked to look into the formation of a commission to oversee the process. By 1906 his work was complete and he drew up a permanent constitution for the International Electrotechnical Commission. The body held its first meeting that year in London, with representatives from 14 countries. In honour of his contribution to electrical standardisation, Lord Kelvin was elected as the body&#x27;s first President.
The International Federation of the National Standardizing Associations (ISA) was founded in 1926 with a broader remit to enhance international cooperation for all technical standards and specifications. The body was suspended in 1942 during World War II.

After the war, ISA was approached by the recently formed United Nations Standards Coordinating Committee (UNSCC) with a proposal to form a new global standards body. In October 1946, ISA and UNSCC delegates from 25 countries met in London and agreed to join forces to create the new International Organization for Standardization (ISO); the new organization officially began operations in February 1947.

In general, each country or economy has a single recognized National Standards Body (NSB). Examples include ABNT, AENOR (now called UNE, &quot;Spanish Association for Standardization&quot;), AFNOR, ANSI, BSI, DGN, DIN, IRAM, JISC, KATS, SABS, SAC, SCC, SIS. An NSB is likely the sole member from that economy in ISO.

NSBs may be either public or private sector organizations, or combinations of the two. For example, the three NSBs of Canada, Mexico and the United States are respectively the Standards Council of Canada (SCC), the General Bureau of Standards (, DGN), and the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). SCC is a Canadian Crown Corporation, DGN is a governmental agency within the Mexican Ministry of Economy, and ANSI and AENOR are a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization with members from both the private and public sectors. The determinants of whether an NSB for a particular economy is a public or private sector body may include the historical and traditional roles that the private sector fills in public affairs in that economy or the development stage of that economy.

==Usage==
Standards can be:
* de facto standards which means they are followed by informal convention or dominant usage.
* de jure standards which are part of legally binding contracts, laws or regulations.
* Voluntary standards which are published and available for people to consider for use.

The existence of a published standard does not necessarily imply that it is useful or correct. Just because an item is stamped with a standard number does not, by itself, indicate that the item is fit for any particular use. The people who use the item or service (engineers, trade unions, etc.) or specify it (building codes, government, industry, etc.) have the responsibility to consider the available standards, specify the correct one, enforce compliance, and use the item correctly: validation and verification.

To avoid the proliferation of industry standards, also referred to as private standards, regulators in the United States are instructed by their government offices to adopt &quot;voluntary consensus standards&quot; before relying upon &quot;industry standards&quot; or developing &quot;government standards&quot;. Regulatory authorities can reference voluntary consensus standards to translate internationally accepted criteria into public policy.

===Information exchange===
In the context of information exchange, standardization refers to the process of developing standards for specific business processes using specific formal languages. These standards are usually developed in voluntary consensus standards bodies such as the United Nations Center for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business (UN/CEFACT), the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA), and the Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS).

There are many specifications that govern the operation and interaction of devices and software on the Internet, which do not use the term &quot;standard&quot; in their names. The W3C, for example, publishes &quot;Recommendations&quot;, and the IETF publishes &quot;Requests for Comments&quot; (RFCs). Nevertheless, these publications are often referred to as &quot;standards&quot;, because they are the products of regular standardization processes.

===Environmental protection===

Standardized product certifications such as of organic food, buildings or possibly sustainable seafood as well as standardized product safety evaluation and dis/approval procedures (e.g. regulation of chemicals, cosmetics and food safety) can protect the environment. This effect may depend on associated modified consumer choices, strategic product support/obstruction, requirements and bans as well as their accordance with a scientific basis, the robustness and applicability of a scientific basis, whether adoption of the certifications is voluntary, and the socioeconomic context (systems of governance and the economy), with possibly most certifications being so far mostly largely ineffective.

Moreover, standardized scientific frameworks can enable evaluation of levels of environmental protection, such as of marine protected areas, and serve as, potentially evolving, guides for improving, planning and monitoring the protection-quality, -scopes and -extents. 

Moreover, technical standards could decrease electronic waste and reduce resource-needs such as by thereby requiring (or enabling) products to be interoperable, compatible (with other products, infrastructures, environments, etc), durable, energy-efficient, modular, upgradeable/repairable and recyclable and conform to versatile, optimal standards and protocols.

Such standardization is not limited to the domain of electronic devices like smartphones and phone chargers but could also be applied to e.g. the energy infrastructure. Policy-makers could develop policies &quot;fostering standard design and interfaces, and promoting the re-use of modules and components across plants to develop more sustainable energy infrastructure&quot;. Computers and the Internet are some of the tools that could be used to increase practicability and reduce suboptimal results, detrimental standards and bureaucracy, which is often associated with traditional processes and results of standardization. Taxes and subsidies, and funding of research and development could be used complementarily. Standardized measurement is used in monitoring, reporting and verification frameworks of environmental impacts, usually of companies, for example to prevent underreporting of greenhouse gas emissions by firms.

===Product testing and analysis===

In routine product testing and product analysis results can be reported using official or informal standards. It can be done to increase consumer protection, to ensure safety or healthiness or efficiency or performance or sustainability of products. It can be carried out by the manufacturer, an independent laboratory, a government agency, a magazine or others on a voluntary or commissioned/mandated basis.

Estimating the environmental impacts of food products in a standardized way – as has been done with a dataset of &gt;57,000 food products in supermarkets – could e.g. be used to inform consumers or in policy. For example, such may be useful for approaches using personal carbon allowances (or similar quota) or for targeted alteration of (ultimate overall) costs.

===Safety===
====Public information symbols====

Public information symbols (e.g. hazard symbols), especially when related to safety, are often standardized, sometimes on the international level.&lt;ref name=&quot;10.1007/978-3-319-60582-1&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

====Biosafety====

Standardization is also used to ensure safe design and operation of laboratories and similar potentially dangerous workplaces, e.g. to ensure biosafety levels. There is research into microbiology safety standards used in clinical and research laboratories.

====Defense====
In the context of defense, standardization has been defined by NATO as &quot;The development and implementation of concepts, doctrines, procedures and designs to achieve and maintain the required levels of compatibility, interchangeability or commonality in the operational, procedural, material, technical and administrative fields to attain interoperability.&quot;

===Ergonomics, workplace and health===

In some cases, standards are being used in the design and operation of workplaces and products that can impact consumers&#x27; health. Some of such standards seek to ensure occupational safety and health and ergonomics. For example, chairs (see e.g. active sitting and steps of research) could be potentially be designed and chosen using standards that may or may not be based on adequate scientific data. Standards could reduce the variety of products and lead to convergence on fewer broad designs – which can often be efficiently mass-produced via common shared automated procedures and instruments – or formulations deemed to be the most healthy, most efficient or best compromise between healthiness and other factors. Standardization is sometimes or could also be used to ensure or increase or enable consumer health protection beyond the workplace and ergonomics such as standards in food, food production, hygiene products, tab water, cosmetics, drugs/medicine, drink and dietary supplements, especially in cases where there is robust scientific data that suggests detrimental impacts on health (e.g. of ingredients) despite being substitutable and not necessarily of consumer interest.

===Clothing===
==== Clinical assessment ====
In the context of assessment, standardization may define how a measuring instrument or procedure is similar to every subjects or patients. For example, educational psychologist may adopt structured interview to systematically interview the people in concern. By delivering the same procedures, all subjects is evaluated using same criteria and minimising any confounding variable that reduce the validity. Some other example includes mental status examination and personality test.

===Social science===
In the context of social criticism and social science, standardization often means the process of establishing standards of various kinds and improving efficiency to handle people, their interactions, cases, and so forth. Examples include formalization of judicial procedure in court, and establishing uniform criteria for diagnosing mental disease. Standardization in this sense is often discussed along with (or synonymously to) such large-scale social changes as modernization, bureaucratization, homogenization, and centralization of society.

===Customer service===
In the context of customer service, standardization refers to the process of developing an international standard that enables organizations to focus on customer service, while at the same time providing recognition of success through a third party organization, such as the British Standards Institution. An international standard has been developed by The International Customer Service Institute.

===Supply and materials management===

In the context of supply chain management and materials management, standardization covers the process of specification and use of any item the company must buy in or make, allowable substitutions, and build or buy decisions.

==Process==

The process of standardization can itself be standardized. There are at least four levels of standardization: compatibility, interchangeability, commonality and reference. These standardization processes create compatibility, similarity, measurement, and symbol standards.

There are typically four different techniques for standardization
* Simplification or variety control
* Codification
* Value engineering
* Statistical process control.

Types of standardization process:
* Emergence as de facto standard: tradition, market domination, etc.
* Written by a Standards organization:
** in a closed consensus process: Restricted membership and often having formal procedures for due-process among voting members
** in a full consensus process: usually open to all interested and qualified parties and with formal procedures for due-process considerations
* Written by a government or regulatory body
* Written by a corporation, union, trade association, etc.
* Agile standardization. A group of entities, themselves or through an association, creates and publishes a drafted version shared for public review based on actual examples of use.

==Effects==
Standardization has a variety of benefits and drawbacks for firms and consumers participating in the market, and on technology and innovation.

===Effect on firms===
The primary effect of standardization on firms is that the basis of competition is shifted from integrated systems to individual components within the system. Prior to standardization a company&#x27;s product must span the entire system because individual components from different competitors are incompatible, but after standardization each company can focus on providing an individual component of the system. When the shift toward competition based on individual components takes place, firms selling tightly integrated systems must quickly shift to a modular approach, supplying other companies with subsystems or components.

===Effect on consumers===
Standardization has a variety of benefits for consumers, but one of the greatest benefits is enhanced network effects. Standards increase compatibility and interoperability between products, allowing information to be shared within a larger network and attracting more consumers to use the new technology, further enhancing network effects. Other benefits of standardization to consumers are reduced uncertainty, because consumers can be more certain that they are not choosing the wrong product, and reduced lock-in, because the standard makes it more likely that there will be competing products in the space. Consumers may also get the benefit of being able to mix and match components of a system to align with their specific preferences. Once these initial benefits of standardization are realized, further benefits that accrue to consumers as a result of using the standard are driven mostly by the quality of the technologies underlying that standard.

Probably the greatest downside of standardization for consumers is lack of variety. There is no guarantee that the chosen standard will meet all consumers&#x27; needs or even that the standard is the best available option. Another downside is that if a standard is agreed upon before products are available in the market, then consumers are deprived of the penetration pricing that often results when rivals are competing to rapidly increase market share in an attempt to increase the likelihood that their product will become the standard. It is also possible that a consumer will choose a product based upon a standard that fails to become dominant. In this case, the consumer will have spent resources on a product that is ultimately less useful to him or her as the result of the standardization process.

===Effect on technology===
Much like the effect on consumers, the effect of standardization on technology and innovation is mixed. Meanwhile, the various links between research and standardization have been identified, also as a platform of knowledge transfer and translated into policy measures (e.g. WIPANO).

Increased adoption of a new technology as a result of standardization is important because rival and incompatible approaches competing in the marketplace can slow or even kill the growth of the technology (a state known as market fragmentation). The shift to a modularized architecture as a result of standardization brings increased flexibility, rapid introduction of new products, and the ability to more closely meet individual customer&#x27;s needs.

The negative effects of standardization on technology have to do with its tendency to restrict new technology and innovation. Standards shift competition from features to price because the features are defined by the standard. The degree to which this is true depends on the specificity of the standard. Standardization in an area also rules out alternative technologies as options while encouraging others.

==See also==

* American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
* ASTM
* Conformity assessment
* Cost accounting,standard costs
* Embrace, extend and extinguish
* Environmental standard
* Harmonization (standards)
* International Classification for Standards (ICS)
* International Organization for Standardization
* International standard
* Interoperability
* ISO 14000 standards - a family of environmental management standards
* ISO 22000 - a food safety standard
* Java Community Process - &quot;The Java Community Process(SM) Program&quot;
* Network effect
* Open format
* Open standard
* Open system
* OpenDocument
* Quality infrastructure
* Standard gauge
* Standard (metrology)
* Standards organizations
* Technical standard
* Transport standards organizations
* United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names
* Vendor lock-in
* World Standards Day 


==Further reading==
* Kellermann, Martin (2019). Ensuring Quality to Gain Access to Global Markets: A Reform Toolkit(PDF). International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank and Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB). Standards Chapter, pages 45-68. ISBN 978-1-4648-1372-6.
*
*
==References==
==External links==
* 
* International Organization for Standardization
** 
** 
** </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="0" end="15" title="Standardization" label="Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="17" end="33" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="38" end="53" title="Standardization" label="standardisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="55" end="70" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="118" end="136" title="technical standard" label="technical standard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="301" end="314" title=":wikt:compatibility" label="compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q749647" start="316" end="332" title="interoperability" label="interoperability"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566551" start="334" end="340" title="safety" label="safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q520171" start="342" end="355" title="repeatability" label="repeatability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034411" start="357" end="367" title="efficiency" label="efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q185957" start="373" end="380" title="Quality (business)" label="quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="456" end="471" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="483" end="492" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q656316" start="565" end="585" title="coordination problem" label="coordination problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316162" start="772" end="796" title="Non-tariff barriers to trade" label="non-tariff trade barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="884" end="909" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="1219" end="1237" title="Technical standard" label="Technical standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="1295" end="1314" title="angular measurement" label="angular measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9443" start="1416" end="1422" title="Lothal" label="Lothal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646429" start="1424" end="1433" title="Surkotada" label="Surkotada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722226" start="1435" end="1445" title="Kalibangan" label="Kalibangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9468" start="1447" end="1455" title="Dholavira" label="Dolavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="1457" end="1464" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="1470" end="1482" title="Mohenjo-daro" label="Mohenjo-daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1548" end="1554" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="1559" end="1571" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="1823" end="1844" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q19768" start="1877" end="1889" title="machine tool" label="machine tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q871913" start="1895" end="1916" title="interchangeable parts" label="interchangeable parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q936499" start="1919" end="1933" title="Henry Maudslay" label="Henry Maudslay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994303" start="1977" end="1996" title="screw-cutting lathe" label="screw-cutting lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q749400" start="2046" end="2058" title="screw thread" label="screw thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q871913" start="2135" end="2153" title="Interchangeable parts" label="interchangeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q190977" start="2196" end="2200" title="Nut (hardware)" label="nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11022" start="2205" end="2210" title="Screw" label="bolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q474188" start="2320" end="2326" title="chisel" label="chisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193142" start="2332" end="2337" title="file (tool)" label="files"/>
<link wikidata="Q190977" start="2340" end="2344" title="Nut (hardware)" label="Nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q104813499" start="2674" end="2687" title="Tap and die" label="taps and dies"/>
<link wikidata="Q712307" start="3110" end="3126" title="Joseph Whitworth" label="Joseph Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13402968" start="3285" end="3311" title="British Standard Whitworth" label="British Standard Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3646" end="3656" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="3664" end="3675" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="3832" end="3839" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579138" start="4037" end="4060" title="Unified Thread Standard" label="American Unified Coarse"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="4601" end="4610" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778585" start="4938" end="4969" title="BSI Group" label="Engineering Standards Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5457" end="5472" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="5613" end="5640" title="American National Standards Institute" label="National Standard Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q743706" start="5656" end="5696" title="AFNOR" label="Commission Permanente de Standardisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328899" start="5977" end="5999" title="Standards organization" label="Standards Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q648403" start="6190" end="6193" title="European Committee for Standardization" label="CEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378146" start="6195" end="6202" title="European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization" label="CENELEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q899383" start="6207" end="6211" title="European Telecommunications Standards Institute" label="ETSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381810" start="6830" end="6856" title="International Organization" label="International Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="6858" end="6888" title="Intergovernmental Organization" label="Intergovernmental Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="6929" end="6966" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="7554" end="7565" title="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin" label="Lord Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q847965" start="7847" end="7862" title="current balance" label="current balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q272035" start="7966" end="7973" title="accuracy and precision" label="precise"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="7995" end="8001" title="ampere" label="ampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="8007" end="8015" title="standardisation" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="8016" end="8020" title="Units of measurement" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="8024" end="8040" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166151" start="8043" end="8060" title="R. E. B. Crompton" label="R. E. B. Crompton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="8303" end="8307" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="8312" end="8321" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="8323" end="8330" title="Electric current" label="current"/>
<link wikidata="Q29899647" start="8703" end="8736" title="International Electrical Congress" label="International Electrical Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520847" start="8762" end="8791" title="Louisiana Purchase Exposition" label="Louisiana Purchase Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="8795" end="8806" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="Saint Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524579" start="8838" end="8871" title="Institute of Electrical Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193858" start="9104" end="9145" title="International Electrotechnical Commission" label="International Electrotechnical Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="9365" end="9432" title="ISO" label="International Federation of the National Standardizing Associations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9603" end="9615" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="9850" end="9856" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="9901" end="9947" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627333" start="10131" end="10135" title="ABNT" label="ABNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q291461" start="10137" end="10212" title="Asociación Española de Normalización y Certificación" label="AENOR (now called UNE, &amp;quot;Spanish Association for Standardization&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q743706" start="10214" end="10219" title="Association française de Normalisation" label="AFNOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="10221" end="10225" title="American National Standards Institute" label="ANSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778585" start="10227" end="10230" title="BSI Group" label="BSI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10232" end="10235" title="Dirección General de Normas" label="DGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q152746" start="10237" end="10240" title="DIN" label="DIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843958" start="10242" end="10246" title="Instituto Argentino de Normalización y Certificación" label="IRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041733" start="10248" end="10252" title="Japanese Industrial Standards Committee" label="JISC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16094554" start="10254" end="10258" title="Korean Agency for Technology and Standards" label="KATS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565436" start="10260" end="10264" title="South African Bureau of Standards" label="SABS"/>
<link wikidata="Q63961" start="10266" end="10269" title="Standardization Administration of China" label="SAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993673" start="10271" end="10274" title="Standards Council of Canada" label="SCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372413" start="10276" end="10279" title="Swedish Standards Institute" label="SIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993673" start="10546" end="10549" title="Standards Council of Canada" label="SCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="10601" end="10638" title="American National Standards Institute" label="American National Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189488" start="10665" end="10682" title="Crown Corporation" label="Crown Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325436" start="10778" end="10787" title="501(c)(3)" label="501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q385853" start="11148" end="11165" title="de facto standard" label="de facto standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="11241" end="11248" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919644" start="11903" end="11930" title="validation and verification" label="validation and verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="12003" end="12020" title="technical standard" label="private standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="12366" end="12379" title="public policy" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="12558" end="12573" title="formal language" label="formal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023321" start="12736" end="12745" title="UN/CEFACT" label="UN/CEFACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="12779" end="12782" title="W3C" label="W3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752554" start="12789" end="12828" title="Telecommunications Industry Association" label="Telecommunications Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455952" start="12914" end="12919" title="OASIS (organization)" label="OASIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101564" start="12938" end="12951" title="specification" label="specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="13026" end="13034" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="13103" end="13106" title="W3C" label="W3C"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="13168" end="13172" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="13189" end="13210" title="Request for Comments" label="Requests for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649561" start="13407" end="13442" title="Sustainability standards and certification" label="Standardized product certifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q380778" start="13454" end="13466" title="organic food" label="organic food"/>
<link wikidata="Q242606" start="13468" end="13477" title="green building" label="buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649694" start="13481" end="13509" title="Sustainable seafood advisory lists and certification" label="possibly sustainable seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069280" start="13594" end="13617" title="regulation of chemicals" label="regulation of chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13619" end="13628" title="Ingredients of cosmetics#Regulation" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q909821" start="13633" end="13644" title="food safety" label="food safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q833495" start="13721" end="13736" title="consumer choice" label="consumer choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553864" start="14004" end="14014" title="governance" label="governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="14023" end="14030" title="economic system" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="14226" end="14247" title="marine protected area" label="marine protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q327400" start="14425" end="14441" title="electronic waste" label="electronic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q749647" start="14526" end="14539" title="interoperability" label="interoperable"/>
<link wikidata="Q523256" start="14611" end="14618" title="sustainable design" label="durable"/>
<link wikidata="Q192704" start="14620" end="14636" title="energy efficiency (physics)" label="energy-efficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q912009" start="14638" end="14645" title="modularity" label="modular"/>
<link wikidata="Q920419" start="14647" end="14658" title="upgradeability" label="upgradeable"/>
<link wikidata="Q30748592" start="14659" end="14669" title="repairability" label="repairable"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="14674" end="14684" title="recyclability" label="recyclable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156854" start="14914" end="14941" title="Policy making" label="Policy-makers could develop"/>
<link wikidata="Q25584060" start="15092" end="15113" title="energy infrastructure" label="energy infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="15273" end="15284" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247798" start="15721" end="15736" title="product testing" label="product testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324585" start="15741" end="15757" title="product analysis" label="product analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q664183" start="15847" end="15866" title="consumer protection" label="consumer protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q76737185" start="16135" end="16173" title="sustainable food system" label="environmental impacts of food products"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16220" end="16229" title="Life-cycle assessment#LCA dataset creation" label="a dataset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="16249" end="16257" title="Product (business)" label="products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156854" start="16321" end="16327" title="policy" label="policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722388" start="16382" end="16407" title="personal carbon allowance" label="personal carbon allowance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16435" end="16482" title="Externality#Scientific calculation of external costs" label="targeted alteration of (ultimate overall) costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="16553" end="16559" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q900971" start="16567" end="16580" title="hazard symbol" label="hazard symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334738" start="16653" end="16679" title="International standard" label="on the international level"/>
<link wikidata="Q898943" start="16909" end="16924" title="biosafety level" label="biosafety level"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="17104" end="17108" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17247" end="17260" title=":wikt:compatibility" label="compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q871913" start="17262" end="17280" title="interchangeable parts" label="interchangeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989710" start="17284" end="17295" title="commonality" label="commonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q628858" start="17520" end="17529" title="workplace" label="workplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="17622" end="17652" title="occupational safety and health" label="occupational safety and health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750812" start="17657" end="17667" title="ergonomics" label="ergonomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15026" start="17682" end="17687" title="chair" label="chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677530" start="17699" end="17713" title="active sitting" label="active sitting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17718" end="17735" title="Research#Steps in conducting research" label="steps of research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625207" start="18877" end="18897" title="structured interview" label="structured interview"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125472" start="19049" end="19069" title="Confounding" label="confounding variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q18757" start="19086" end="19094" title="Validity (statistics)" label="validity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895596" start="19124" end="19149" title="mental status examination" label="mental status examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475455" start="19154" end="19170" title="personality test" label="personality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="19233" end="19247" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060653" start="19783" end="19799" title="customer service" label="customer service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778585" start="20040" end="20069" title="British Standards Institution" label="British Standards Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742293" start="20119" end="20163" title="The International Customer Service Institute" label="The International Customer Service Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q492886" start="20223" end="20246" title="supply chain management" label="supply chain management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242875" start="20251" end="20271" title="materials management" label="materials management"/>
<link wikidata="Q942582" start="20407" end="20419" title="build or buy" label="build or buy"/>
<link wikidata="Q871913" start="20570" end="20588" title="interchangeable parts" label="interchangeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989710" start="20590" end="20601" title="commonality" label="commonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q121769" start="20606" end="20615" title="reference" label="reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067270" start="20838" end="20855" title="Value engineering" label="Value engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356717" start="20858" end="20885" title="Statistical process control" label="Statistical process control"/>
<link wikidata="Q385853" start="20937" end="20954" title="de facto standard" label="de facto standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="20956" end="20965" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328899" start="21006" end="21028" title="Standards organization" label="Standards organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477708" start="24729" end="24749" title="market fragmentation" label="market fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="25386" end="25423" title="American National Standards Institute" label="American National Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q621977" start="25433" end="25437" title="ASTM" label="ASTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072285" start="25440" end="25461" title="Conformity assessment" label="Conformity assessment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25464" end="25494" title="Cost accounting#Standard cost accounting" label="Cost accounting,standard costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335089" start="25497" end="25527" title="Embrace, extend and extinguish" label="Embrace, extend and extinguish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381360" start="25530" end="25552" title="Environmental standard" label="Environmental standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339318" start="25555" end="25580" title="Harmonization (standards)" label="Harmonization (standards)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510727" start="25583" end="25625" title="International Classification for Standards" label="International Classification for Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="25634" end="25680" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334738" start="25683" end="25705" title="International standard" label="International standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q749647" start="25708" end="25724" title="Interoperability" label="Interoperability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322065" start="25727" end="25746" title="ISO 14000" label="ISO 14000 standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q929380" start="25761" end="25785" title="environmental management" label="environmental management"/>
<link wikidata="Q524143" start="25798" end="25807" title="ISO 22000" label="ISO 22000"/>
<link wikidata="Q909821" start="25812" end="25823" title="food safety" label="food safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q840596" start="25835" end="25857" title="Java Community Process" label="Java Community Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q649124" start="25913" end="25927" title="Network effect" label="Network effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056408" start="25930" end="25941" title="Open format" label="Open format"/>
<link wikidata="Q681263" start="25944" end="25957" title="Open standard" label="Open standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382874" start="25960" end="25971" title="Open system (computing)" label="Open system"/>
<link wikidata="Q184473" start="25974" end="25986" title="OpenDocument" label="OpenDocument"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="25989" end="26011" title="Infrastructure" label="Quality infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="26014" end="26028" title="Standard gauge" label="Standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271511" start="26031" end="26051" title="Standard (metrology)" label="Standard (metrology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328899" start="26054" end="26076" title="Standards organization" label="Standards organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="26080" end="26098" title="Technical standard" label="Technical standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835148" start="26101" end="26134" title="Transport standards organisations" label="Transport standards organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q838685" start="26137" end="26190" title="United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names" label="United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503227" start="26193" end="26207" title="Vendor lock-in" label="Vendor lock-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861872" start="26210" end="26229" title="World Standards Day" label="World Standards Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27067" wikidata="Q132959" url="?curid=27067" title="Sub-Saharan Africa">
<text>Sub-Saharan Africa is the area and regions of the continent of Africa that lie south of the Sahara. These include Central Africa, East Africa, Southern Africa, and West Africa. Geopolitically, in addition to the African countries and territories that are situated fully in that specified region, the term may also include polities that only have part of their territory located in that region, per the definition of the United Nations (UN). This is considered a non-standardised geographical region with the number of countries included varying from 46 to 48 depending on the organisation describing the region (e.g. UN, WHO, World Bank, etc.). The African Union (AU) uses a different regional breakdown, recognising all 55 member states on the continent—grouping them into five distinct and standard regions.

The term serves as a grouping counterpart to North Africa, which is instead grouped with the definition of MENA (i.e. Middle East and North Africa) as it is part of the Arab world, and most North African states are likewise members of the Arab League. However, while they are also member states of the Arab League, the Comoros, Djibouti, Mauritania, and Somalia (and sometimes Sudan) are all geographically considered to be part of sub-Saharan Africa. Overall, the UN Development Programme applies the &quot;sub-Saharan&quot; classification to 46 of Africa&#x27;s 55 countries, excluding Djibouti, SADR, Somalia, and Sudan. The concept has been criticised by scholars on both sides of the Sahara as a racialist construction.

Since around 3900 BCE, the Saharan and sub-Saharan regions of Africa have been separated by the extremely harsh climate of the sparsely populated Sahara, forming an effective barrier that is interrupted only by the Nile in Sudan, though navigation on the Nile was blocked by the Sudd and the river&#x27;s cataracts. The Sahara pump theory explains how flora and fauna (including &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;) left Africa to penetrate Eurasia and beyond. African pluvial periods are associated with a &quot;Wet Sahara&quot; phase, during which larger lakes and more rivers existed.

==Nomenclature and conceptual criticism==

Geographers historically divided the region into several distinct ethnographic sections based on each area&#x27;s respective inhabitants. The concept has been criticised as a racist construction intended to separate North Africa or &quot;European/White Africa&quot; and &quot;Black Africa&quot; or &quot;Africa noire&quot;. Critics from various countries have provided arguments supporting the interconnectedness of continental Africa, pointing to historical and cultural connections, as well as trade between North, West, and East Africa.

Commentators in Arabic in the medieval period used the general term &quot;bilâd as-sûdân&quot; (&quot;Land of the Blacks&quot;) for the vast Sudan region (an expression denoting Central and West Africa), or sometimes extending from the coast of West Africa to Western Sudan. Its equivalent in Southeast Africa was &quot;Zanj&quot; (&quot;Country of the Blacks&quot;), which referred primarily to the Swahili coast.

The geographers drew an explicit ethnographic distinction between the Sudan region and its analogue Zanj, from the area to their extreme east on the Red Sea coast in the Horn of Africa. In modern-day Ethiopia and Eritrea was &quot;Al-Habash&quot; or Abyssinia, which was inhabited by the &quot;Habash&quot; or Abyssinians, who were the forebears of the Habesha. In northern Somalia was &quot;Barbara&quot; or the &quot;Bilad al-Barbar&quot; (&quot;Land of the Berbers&quot;), which was inhabited by the Eastern &quot;Baribah&quot; or &quot;Barbaroi&quot;, as the ancestors of the Somalis were referred to by medieval Arab and ancient Greek geographers, respectively.

In the 19th and 20th centuries, the populations south of the Sahara were divided into three broad racial groups: Hamites and Semites in the Horn of Africa and Sahel related to those in North Africa, who spoke languages belonging to the Afroasiatic family; Negroes in most of the rest of the subcontinent (hence, the toponym &quot;Black Africa&quot; for Africa south of the Sahara), who spoke languages belonging to the Niger-Congo and Nilo-Saharan families; and Khoisan in Southern Africa, who spoke languages belonging to the Khoisan family.

==Climate zones and ecoregions==

Sub-Saharan Africa has a wide variety of climate zones or biomes. South Africa and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular are considered megadiverse countries. It has a dry winter season and a wet summer season.
* The Sahel extends across all of Africa at a latitude of about 10° to 15° N. Countries that include parts of the Sahara Desert proper in their northern territories and parts of the Sahel in their southern region include Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad, and Sudan. The Sahel has a hot semi-arid climate.
* South of the Sahel, a belt of savanna (the West and East Sudanian savannas) stretch from the Atlantic Ocean to the Ethiopian Highlands. The more humid Guinean and Northern Congolian forest–savanna mosaic lie between the savannas and the equatorial forests.
* The Horn of Africa includes hot desert climate along the coast but a hot semi-arid climate can be found much more in the interior, contrasting with savanna and moist broadleaf forests in the Ethiopian Highlands.
* Tropical Africa encompasses tropical rainforest stretching along the southern coast of West Africa and across most of Central Africa (the Congo) west of the African Great Lakes.
* In East Africa, woodlands, savannas, and grasslands are found in the equatorial zone, including the Serengeti ecosystem in Tanzania and Kenya.
* Distinctive Afromontane forests, grasslands, and shrublands are found in the high mountains and mountain ranges of eastern Africa, from the Ethiopian Highlands to South Africa.
* South of the equatorial forests, the Western and Southern Congolian forest–savanna mosaic are transition zones between the tropical forests and the miombo woodland belt that spans the continent from Angola to Mozambique and Tanzania.
* The Namib and Kalahari Deserts lie in Southern Africa, and are surrounded by semi-deserts including the Karoo region of South Africa. The Bushveld grasslands lie to the east of the deserts.
* The Cape Floristic Region is at Africa&#x27;s southern tip, and is home to diverse subtropical and temperate forests, woodlands, grasslands, and shrublands.

==History==

===Prehistory===

According to paleontology, early hominid skull anatomy was similar to that of their close cousins, the great African forest apes, gorilla and chimpanzee. However, they had adopted a bipedal locomotion and freed hands, giving them a crucial advantage enabling them to live in both forested areas and on the open savanna at a time when Africa was drying up, with savanna encroaching on forested areas. This occurred 10 million to 5 million years ago.

By 3 million years ago several australopithecine hominid species had developed throughout Southern, East, and Central Africa. They were tool users rather than tool manufacturers. The next major evolutionary step occurred around 2.3 million BCE, when primitive stone tools were used to scavenge the carcasses of animals killed by other predators, both for their meat and their marrow. In hunting, &quot;H. habilis&quot; was most likely not capable of competing with large predators and was more prey than hunter, although &quot;H. habilis&quot; likely did steal eggs from nests and may have been able to catch small game and weakened larger prey such as cubs and older animals. The tools were classed as Oldowan.

Roughly 1.8 million years ago, &quot;Homo ergaster&quot; first appeared in the fossil record in Africa. From &quot;Homo ergaster&quot;, &quot;Homo erectus&quot; (upright man) evolved 1.5 million years ago. Some of the earlier representatives of this species were small-brained and used primitive stone tools, much like &quot;H. habilis&quot;. The brain later grew in size, and &quot;H. erectus&quot; eventually developed a more complex stone tool technology called the Acheulean. Potentially the first hominid to engage in hunting, &quot;H. erectus&quot; mastered the art of making fire. They were the first hominids to leave Africa, going on to colonise the entire Old World, and perhaps later on giving rise to &quot;Homo floresiensis&quot;. Although some recent writers suggest that &quot;H. georgicus&quot;, a &quot;H. habilis&quot; descendant, was the first and most primitive hominid to ever live outside Africa, many scientists consider &quot;H. georgicus&quot; to be an early and primitive member of the &quot;H. erectus&quot; species.

The fossil and genetic evidence shows &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; developed in East and Southern Africa by around 350,000 to 260,000 years ago and gradually migrated across the continent in waves. Between 50,000 and 60,000 years ago, their expansion out of Africa launched the colonisation of the planet by modern humans. By 10,000 BCE, &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; had spread to all corners of the world. This dispersal of the human species is suggested by linguistic, cultural and genetic evidence.

During the 11th millennium BP, pottery was independently invented in West Africa, with the earliest pottery there dating to about 9,400 BC from central Mali. It spread throughout the Sahel and southern Sahara.

After the Sahara became a desert, it did not present a totally impenetrable barrier for travelers between north and south because of the application of animal husbandry towards carrying water, food, and supplies across the desert. Prior to the introduction of the camel, the use of oxen, mule, and horses for desert crossing was common, and trade routes followed chains of oases that were strung across the desert. The trans-saharan trade was in full motion by 500 BCE with Carthage being a major economic force for its establishment. It is thought that the camel was first brought to Egypt after the Persian Empire conquered Egypt in 525 BCE, although large herds did not become common enough in North Africa for camels to be the pack animal of choice for the trans-saharan trade.

===West Africa===

The Bantu expansion is a major migration movement that originated in West Central Africa (possibly around Cameroon) around 2500 BCE, reaching East and Central Africa by 1000 BCE and Southern Africa by the early centuries CE.

The Djenné-Djenno city-state flourished from 250 BCE to 900 CE and was influential to the development of the Ghana Empire. The Nok culture of Nigeria (lasting from 1,500 BCE to 200 CE) is known from a type of terracotta figure. There were a number of medieval empires of the southern Sahara and the Sahel, based on trans-Saharan trade, including the Ghana Empire and the Mali Empire, Songhai Empire, the Kanem Empire and the subsequent Bornu Empire. They built stone structures like in Tichit, but mainly constructed in adobe. The Great Mosque of Djenne is most reflective of Sahelian architecture and is the largest adobe building in the world.

In the forest zone, several states and empires such as Bono State, Akwamu and others emerged. The Ashanti Empire arose in the 18th century in modern-day Ghana. The Kingdom of Nri, was established by the Igbo in the 11th century. Nri was famous for having a priest-king who wielded no military power. Nri was a rare African state which was a haven for freed slaves and outcasts who sought refuge in their territory. Other major states included the kingdoms of Ifẹ and Oyo in the western block of Nigeria which became prominent about 700–900 and 1400 respectively, and center of Yoruba culture. The Yoruba built massive mud walls around their cities, the most famous being Sungbo&#x27;s Eredo. Another prominent kingdom in southwestern Nigeria was the Kingdom of Benin, whose power lasted between the 15th and 19th century. Their dominance reached as far as the well-known city of Eko which was named Lagos by the Portuguese traders and other early European settlers. The Edo-speaking people of Benin are known for their famous bronze casting and rich coral, wealth, ancient science and technology and the Walls of Benin, which is the largest man-made structure in the world.

In the 18th century, the Oyo and the Aro Confederacy were responsible for most of the slaves exported from modern-day Nigeria, selling them to European slave traders. Following the Napoleonic Wars, the British expanded their influence into the Nigerian interior. In 1885, British claims to a West African sphere of influence received international recognition, and in the following year the Royal Niger Company was chartered under the leadership of Sir George Goldie. In 1900, the company&#x27;s territory came under the control of the British government, which moved to consolidate its hold over the area of modern Nigeria. On 1 January 1901, Nigeria became a British protectorate as part of the British Empire, the foremost world power at the time. Nigeria was granted its independence in 1960 during the period of decoloniszation.

===Central Africa===


Archeological finds in Central Africa provide evidence of human settlement that may date back over 10,000 years. According to Zangato and Holl, there is evidence of iron-smelting in the Central African Republic and Cameroon that may date back to 3,000 to 2,500 BCE. Extensive walled sites and settlements have recently been found in Zilum, Chad. The area is located approximately southwest of Lake Chad, and has been radiocarbon dated to the first millennium BCE.

Trade and improved agricultural techniques supported more sophisticated societies, leading to the early civilisations of Sao, Kanem, Bornu, Shilluk, Baguirmi, and Wadai.

Following the Bantu Migration into Central Africa, during the 14th century, the Luba Kingdom in southeast Congo came about under a king whose political authority derived from religious, spiritual legitimacy. The kingdom controlled agriculture and regional trade of salt and iron from the north and copper from the Zambian/Congo copper belt.

Rival kingship factions which split from the Luba Kingdom later moved among the Lunda people, marrying into its elite and laying the foundation of the Lunda Empire in the 16th century. The ruling dynasty centralised authority among the Lunda under the Mwata Yamyo or Mwaant Yaav. The Mwata Yamyo&#x27;s legitimacy, like that of the Luba king, came from being viewed as a spiritual religious guardian. This imperial cult or system of divine kings was spread to most of central Africa by rivals in kingship migrating and forming new states. Many new states received legitimacy by claiming descent from the Lunda dynasties.

The Kingdom of Kongo existed from the Atlantic west to the Kwango river to the east. During the 15th century, the Bakongo farming community was united with its capital at M&#x27;banza-Kongo, under the king title, Manikongo. Other significant states and peoples included the Kuba Kingdom, producers of the famous raffia cloth, the Eastern Lunda, Bemba, Burundi, Rwanda, and the Kingdom of Ndongo.

===East Africa===
====Sudan====


Nubia, covered by present-day northern Sudan and southern Egypt, was referred to as &quot;Aethiopia&quot; (&quot;land of the burnt face&quot;) by the Greeks. Nubia in her greatest phase is considered sub-Saharan Africa&#x27;s oldest urban civilisation. Nubia was a major source of gold for the ancient world. Nubians built famous structures and numerous pyramids. Sudan, the site of ancient Nubia, has more pyramids than anywhere else in the world.

====Horn of Africa====

The Axumite Empire spanned the southern Sahara, south Arabia and the Sahel along the western shore of the Red Sea. Located in northern Ethiopia and Eritrea, Aksum was deeply involved in the trade network between India and the Mediterranean. Growing from the proto-Aksumite Iron Age period ( 4th century BCE), it rose to prominence by the 1st century CE. The Aksumites constructed monolithic stelae to cover the graves of their kings, such as King Ezana&#x27;s Stele. The later Zagwe dynasty, established in the 12th century, built churches out of solid rock. These rock-hewn structures include the Church of St. George at Lalibela.

In ancient Somalia, city-states flourished such as Opone, Mosyllon and Malao that competed with the Sabaeans, Parthians and Axumites for the wealthy Indo–Greco–Roman trade.

In the Middle Ages several powerful Somali empires dominated the region&#x27;s trade, including the Ajuran Sultanate, which excelled in hydraulic engineering and fortress building, the Sultanate of Adal, whose General Ahmed Gurey was the first African commander in history to use cannon warfare on the continent during Adal&#x27;s conquest of the Ethiopian Empire, and the Geledi Sultanate, whose military dominance forced governors of the Omani empire north of the city of Lamu to pay tribute to the Somali Sultan Ahmed Yusuf.

====Southeast Africa====
According to the theory of recent African origin of modern humans, the mainstream position held within the scientific community, all humans originate from either Southeast Africa or the Horn of Africa. During the first millennium CE, Nilotic and Bantu-speaking peoples moved into the region, and the latter now account for three-quarters of Kenya&#x27;s population.

On the coastal section of Southeast Africa, a mixed Bantu community developed through contact with Muslim Arab and Persian traders, leading to the development of the mixed Arab, Persian and African Swahili City States. The Swahili culture that emerged from these exchanges evinces many Arab and Islamic influences not seen in traditional Bantu culture, as do the many Afro-Arab members of the Bantu Swahili people. With its original speech community centered on the coastal parts of Tanzania (particularly Zanzibar) and Kenya a seaboard referred to as the Swahili Coast the Bantu Swahili language contains many Arabic loan-words as a consequence of these interactions.

The earliest Bantu inhabitants of the Southeast coast of Kenya and Tanzania encountered by these later Arab and Persian settlers have been variously identified with the trading settlements of Rhapta, Azania and Menouthias referenced in early Greek and Chinese writings from 50 CE to 500 CE. These early writings perhaps document the first wave of Bantu settlers to reach Southeast Africa during their migration.

Between the 14th and 15th centuries, large medieval Southeast African kingdoms and states emerged, such as the Buganda, Bunyoro and Karagwe kingdoms of Uganda and Tanzania.

During the early 1960s, the Southeast African nations achieved independence from colonial rule.

===Southern Africa===

Settlements of Bantu-speaking peoples, who were iron-using agriculturists and herdsmen, were already present south of the Limpopo River by the 4th or 5th century displacing and absorbing the original Khoisan speakers. They slowly moved south, and the earliest ironworks in modern-day KwaZulu-Natal Province are believed to date from around 1050. The southernmost group was the Xhosa people, whose language incorporates certain linguistic traits from the earlier Khoisan inhabitants. They reached the Fish River in today&#x27;s Eastern Cape Province. Monomotapa was a medieval kingdom (c. 1250–1629), which existed between the Zambezi and Limpopo rivers of Southern Africa in the territory of modern-day Zimbabwe and Mozambique. Its old capital was located at Great Zimbabwe.

In 1487, Bartolomeu Dias became the first European to reach the southernmost tip of Africa. In 1652, a victualling station was established at the Cape of Good Hope by Jan van Riebeeck on behalf of the Dutch East India Company. For most of the 17th and 18th centuries, the slowly expanding settlement was a Dutch possession. In 1795, the Dutch colony was captured by the British during the French Revolutionary Wars. The British intended to use Cape Town as a major port on the route to Australia and India. It was later returned to the Dutch in 1803, but soon afterward the Dutch East India Company declared bankruptcy, and the Dutch (now under French control) and the British found themselves at war again. The British captured the Dutch possession yet again at the Battle of Blaauwberg, commanded by Sir David Blair. The Zulu Kingdom was a Southern African tribal state in what is now KwaZulu-Natal in southeastern South Africa. The small kingdom gained world fame during and after their defeat in the Anglo-Zulu War. During the 1950s and early 1960s, most sub-Saharan African nations achieved independence from colonial rule.

==Demographics==
===Population===

According to , the population of sub-Saharan Africa was 1.1 billion in 2019. The current growth rate is 2.3%. The UN predicts for the region a population between 2 and 2.5 billion by 2050 with a population density of 80 per km2 compared to 170 for Western Europe, 140 for Asia and 30 for the Americas.

Sub-Saharan African countries top the list of countries and territories by fertility rate with 40 of the highest 50, all with TFR greater than 4 in 2008. All are above the world average except South Africa and Seychelles. More than 40% of the population in sub-Saharan countries is younger than 15 years old, as well as in Sudan, with the exception of South Africa.

GDP per Capita (PPP) &quot;(2016, 2017 (PPP, US$))&quot;, Life (Exp.) &quot;(Life Expectancy 2006)&quot;, Literacy (Male/Female 2006), Trans &quot;(Transparency 2009)&quot;, HDI &quot;(Human Development Index)&quot;, EODBR &quot;(Ease of Doing Business Rank June 2008 through May 2009)&quot;, SAB (&quot;Starting a Business June 2008 through May 2009)&quot;, PFI &quot;(Press Freedom Index 2009)&quot;

===Languages and ethnic groups===



Sub-Saharan Africa contains over 1,500 languages.

==== Afroasiatic ====
With the exception of the extinct Sumerian (a language isolate) of Mesopotamia, Afroasiatic has the oldest documented history of any language family in the world. Egyptian was recorded as early as 3200 BCE. The Semitic branch was recorded as early as 2900 BCE in the form of the Akkadian language of Mesopotamia (Assyria and Babylonia) and circa 2500 BCE in the form of the Eblaite language of northeastern Syria.

The distribution of the Afroasiatic languages within Africa is principally concentrated in North Africa and the Horn of Africa. Languages belonging to the family&#x27;s Berber branch are mainly spoken in the north, with its speech area extending into the Sahel (northern Mauritania, northern Mali, northern Niger). The Cushitic branch of Afroasiatic is centered in the Horn, and is also spoken in the Nile Valley and parts of the African Great Lakes region. Additionally, the Semitic branch of the family, in the form of Arabic, is widely spoken in the parts of Africa that are within the Arab world. South Semitic languages are also spoken in parts of the Horn of Africa (Ethiopia, Eritrea). The Chadic branch is distributed in Central and West Africa. Hausa, its most widely spoken language, serves as a lingua franca in West Africa (Niger, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Cameroon, and Chad).

==== Khoisan ====
The several families lumped under the term Khoi-San include languages indigenous to Southern Africa and Tanzania, though some, such as the Khoi languages, appear to have moved to their current locations not long before the Bantu expansion. In Southern Africa, their speakers are the Khoikhoi and San (Bushmen), in Southeast Africa, the Sandawe and Hadza.

==== Niger–Congo ====
The Niger–Congo family is the largest in the world in terms of the number of languages (1,436) it contains. The vast majority of languages of this family are tonal, such as Yoruba and Igbo. However, others such as Fulani, Wolof and Kiswahili are not. A major branch of the Niger–Congo languages is Bantu, which covers a greater geographic area than the rest of the family. Bantu speakers represent the majority of inhabitants in southern, central and southeastern Africa, though San, Pygmy, and Nilotic groups, respectively, can also be found in those regions. Bantu-speakers can also be found in parts of Central Africa such as Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, and southern Cameroon. Swahili, a Bantu language with many Arabic, Persian, and other Middle Eastern and South Asian loan words, developed as a &quot;lingua franca&quot; for trade between the different peoples in southeastern Africa. In the Kalahari Desert of Southern Africa, the distinct people known as Bushmen (also &quot;San&quot;, closely related to, but distinct from &quot;Hottentots&quot;) have long been present. The San evince unique physical traits, and are the indigenous people of southern Africa. Pygmies are the pre-Bantu indigenous peoples of Central Africa.

==== Nilo-Saharan ====
The Nilo-Saharan languages are concentrated in the upper parts of the Chari and Nile rivers of Central Africa and Southeast Africa. They are principally spoken by Nilotic peoples and are also spoken in Sudan among the Fur, Masalit, Nubian, and Zaghawa peoples and in West and Central Africa among the Songhai, Zarma, and Kanuri. The Old Nubian language is also a member of this family.

Major languages of Africa by region, family and number of primary language speakers in millions:

==== Genetic history ====
===Major cities===


Sub-Saharan Africa has several large cities. Lagos is a city in the Nigerian state of Lagos. The city, with its adjoining conurbation, is the most populous in Nigeria, and the second-most populous in Africa after Cairo, Egypt. It is one of the fastest-growing cities in the world, and also one of the most populous urban agglomerations. Lagos is a major financial centre in Africa; this megacity has the highest GDP, and also houses Apapa, one of the largest and busiest ports on the continent.

Dar es Salaam is the former capital of, as well as the most populous city in, Tanzania; it is a regionally important economic centre. It is located on the Swahili coast.

Johannesburg is the largest city in South Africa. It is the provincial capital and largest city in Gauteng, which is the wealthiest province in South Africa. While Johannesburg is not one of South Africa&#x27;s three capital cities, it is the seat of the Constitutional Court. The city is located in the mineral-rich Witwatersrand range of hills, and is the centre of a large-scale gold and diamond trade.

Nairobi is the capital and the largest city of Kenya. The name comes from the Maasai phrase &quot;Enkare Nyrobi&quot;, which translates to &quot;cool water&quot;, a reference to the Nairobi River which flows through the city. The city is popularly referred to as the Green City in the Sun.

Other major cities in sub-Saharan Africa include Abidjan, Cape Town, Kinshasa, Luanda, Mogadishu and Addis Ababa.

==Economy==
In the mid-2010s, private capital flew to sub-Saharan Africa primarily from the BRICs, private-sector investment portfolios, and remittances began to exceed official development assistance.

As of 2011, Africa is one of the fastest developing regions in the world. Six of the world&#x27;s ten fastest-growing economies over the previous decade were situated below the Sahara, with the remaining four in East and Central Asia. According to the World Bank, the economic growth rate in the region had risen to 4.7% in 2013. This continued rise was attributed to increasing investment in infrastructure and resources as well as steady expenditure per household.

In 2019, 424 million people in sub-Saharan Africa were reportedly living in severe poverty. In 2022, 460 million people—an increase of 36 million in only three years—were anticipated to be living in extreme poverty as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Sub-Saharan Africa&#x27;s government debt rose from 28% of gross domestic product in 2012 to 50% of gross domestic product in 2019. The COVID-19 pandemic caused it to rise to 57% of gross domestic product in 2021.

Sub-Saharan Africa was severely harmed when government revenue declined from 22% of GDP in 2011 to 17% in 2021. 15 African nations were (or are) at significant risk of debt, and 7 were (2021) in financial crisis according to the IMF. 
The region went on to receive IMF Special Drawing Rights of $23 billion in 2021 to assist critical public spending.

===Energy and power===


, 50% of Africa was rural with no access to electricity. In 2021, Africa generated 889 TWh of electricity, amounting to 3.13% of the global market share. Many countries were (as of 2009) affected by power shortages.

The percentage of residences with access to electricity in sub-Saharan Africa is the lowest in the world. In some remote regions, fewer than one in every 20 households has electricity.

Because of rising prices in commodities such as coal and oil, thermal sources of energy are proving to be too expensive for power generation. Sub-Saharan Africa has the potential to generate 1,750 TWh of energy, of which only 7% has been explored. The failure to exploit its full energy potential is largely due to significant underinvestment, as at least four times as much (approximately $23 billion a year) and what is currently spent is invested in operating high cost power systems and not on expanding the infrastructure.

African governments are taking advantage of the readily available water resources to broaden their energy mix. Hydro Turbine Markets in sub-Saharan Africa generated revenues of $120.0 million in 2007 and was estimated to reach $425.0 million. 
Asian countries, notably China, India, and Japan, are playing an active role in power projects across the African continent. The majority of these power projects are hydro-based because of China&#x27;s vast experience in the construction of hydro-power projects and part of the Energy &amp; Power Growth Partnership Services programme.

With electrification numbers, sub-Saharan Africa with access to the Sahara and being in the tropical zones has massive potential for solar photovoltaic electrical potential. Six hundred million people could be served with electricity based on its photovoltaic potential. 
In 2003, China promised to train 10,000 technicians from Africa and other developing countries in the use of solar energy technologies over the next five years. Training African technicians to use solar power is part of the China-Africa science and technology cooperation agreement signed by Chinese science minister Xu Guanhua and African counterparts during premier Wen Jiabao&#x27;s visit to Ethiopia in December 2003.

The New Partnership for Africa&#x27;s Development (NEPAD) is developing an integrated, continent-wide energy strategy. This has been funded by, amongst others, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the EU-Africa Infrastructure Trust Fund. These projects must be sustainable, involve a cross-border dimension and/or have a regional impact, involve public and private capital, contribute to poverty alleviation and economic development, and involve at least one country in sub-Saharan Africa.

Renewable Energy Performance Platform was established by the European Investment Bank and the United Nations Environment Programme with a five-year goal of improving energy access for at least two million people in sub-Saharan Africa. It has so far invested around $45 million to renewable energy projects in 13 countries in sub-Saharan Africa. Solar power and hydropower are among the energy methods used in the projects.

===Media===
In 2007, Radio was the major source of information in sub-Saharan Africa. Average coverage stands at more than a third of the population. Countries such as Gabon, Seychelles, and South Africa boast almost 100% penetration. Only five countries—Burundi, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Somalia—still have a penetration of less than 10%. Broadband penetration outside of South Africa has been limited where it is exorbitantly expensive. Access to the internet via cell phones is on the rise.

Television is the second major source of information. Because of power shortages, the spread of television viewing has been limited. Eight per cent have television, a total of 62 million. Those in the television industry view the region as an untapped green market. Digital television and pay for service are on the rise.

===Oil and minerals===

The region is a major exporter to the world of gold, uranium, chromium, vanadium, antimony, coltan, bauxite, iron ore, copper, and manganese. South Africa, along with Gabon and Ghana, collectively supplies over 60% of global manganese, and is also a major exporter of chromium. A 2001 estimate is that 42% of the world&#x27;s reserves of chromium may be found in South Africa. South Africa is the largest producer of platinum, with 80% of the total world&#x27;s annual mine production and 88% of the world&#x27;s platinum reserve. Sub-Saharan Africa produces 33% of the world&#x27;s bauxite, with Guinea as the major supplier. Zambia is a major producer of copper. The Democratic Republic of Congo is a major source of coltan. Production from DR Congo is very small, but the country has 80% of the proven reserves in Africa, which are 80% of those worldwide. Sub-Saharan Africa is a major producer of gold, producing up to 30% of global production. Major suppliers are South Africa, Ghana, Zimbabwe, Tanzania, Guinea, and Mali. South Africa had been first in the world in terms of gold production since 1905, but in 2007 it moved to second place, according to GFMS, the precious metals consultancy. Uranium is major commodity from the region. Significant suppliers are Niger, Namibia, and South Africa. Namibia was the number one supplier from sub-Saharan Africa in 2008. The region produces 49% of the world&#x27;s diamonds.

Sub-Saharan Africa has been the focus of an intense race for oil by the West, China, India, and other emerging economies, even though it holds only 10% of proven oil reserves, less than the Middle East. This race has been referred to as the second Scramble for Africa. All reasons for this global scramble come from the reserves&#x27; economic benefits. Transportation cost is low and no pipelines have to be laid as in Central Asia. Almost all reserves are offshore, so political turmoil within the host country will not directly interfere with operations. Sub-Saharan oil is viscous, with a very low sulfur content. This quickens the refining process and effectively reduces costs. New sources of oil are being located in sub-Saharan Africa more frequently than anywhere else. Of all new sources of oil, are in sub-Saharan Africa.

Sub-Saharan Africa is a key player in the global minerals market, producing over 70%of the world&#x27;s cobalt and hosting about 50%of its reserves in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). The region also harbors significant lithium deposits in Zimbabwe, the DRC, and Mali.

===Agriculture===
Sub-Saharan Africa has more variety of grains than anywhere in the world. Between 13,000 and 11,000 BCE wild grains began to be collected as a source of food in the cataract region of the Nile, south of Egypt. The collecting of wild grains as source of food spread to Syria, parts of Turkey, and Iran by the eleventh millennium BCE. By the tenth and ninth millennia southwest Asians domesticated their wild grains, wheat, and barley after the notion of collecting wild grains spread from the Nile.

Numerous crops have been domesticated in the region and spread to other parts of the world. These crops included sorghum, castor beans, coffee, cotton, okra, black-eyed peas, watermelon, gourd, and pearl millet. Other domesticated crops included teff, enset, African rice, yams, kola nuts, oil palm, and raffia palm.

Domesticated animals include the guinea fowl and the donkey.

Agriculture represents 20% to 30% of GDP and 50% of exports. In some cases, 60% to 90% of the labor force are employed in agriculture. Most agricultural activity is subsistence farming. This has made agricultural activity vulnerable to climate change and global warming. As of right now Sub-Saharan Africa has degraded land covering one million square kilometres. Biotechnology has been advocated to create high yield, pest and environmentally resistant crops in the hands of small farmers. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation is a strong advocate and donor to this cause. Biotechnology and GM crops have met resistance both by natives and environmental groups.

Cash crops include cotton, coffee, tea, cocoa, sugar, and tobacco.

The OECD says Africa has the potential to become an agricultural superbloc if it can unlock the wealth of the savannahs by allowing farmers to use their land as collateral for credit. There is such international interest in sub-Saharan agriculture, that the World Bank increased its financing of African agricultural programs to $1.3 billion in the 2011 fiscal year. Recently, there has been a trend to purchase large tracts of land in sub-Sahara for agricultural use by developing countries.
Early in 2009, George Soros highlighted a new farmland buying frenzy caused by growing population, scarce water supplies and climate change. Chinese interests bought up large swathes of Senegal to supply it with sesame. Aggressive moves by China, South Korea, and Gulf states to buy vast tracts of agricultural land in sub-Saharan Africa could soon be limited by a new global international protocol.

== Infrastructure ==

According to researchers at the Overseas Development Institute, the lack of infrastructure in many developing countries represents one of the most significant limitations to economic growth and achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Infrastructure investments and maintenance can be very expensive, especially in such as areas as landlocked, rural and sparsely populated countries in Africa.

Infrastructure investments contributed to Africa&#x27;s growth, and increased investment is necessary to maintain growth and tackle poverty. The returns to investment in infrastructure are very significant, with on average 30–40% returns for telecommunications (ICT) investments, over 40% for electricity generation and 80% for roads.

In Africa, it is argued that in order to meet the MDGs, infrastructure investments would need to reach about 15% of GDP (around $93 billion a year). Currently, the source of financing varies significantly across sectors. Some sectors are dominated by state spending, others by overseas development aid (ODA) and yet others by private investors. In sub-Saharan Africa, the state spends around $9.4 billion out of a total of $24.9 billion. In irrigation, SSA states represent almost all spending; in transport and energy a majority of investment is state spending; in ICT and water supply and sanitation, the private sector represents the majority of capital expenditure. Overall, aid, the private sector and non-OECD financiers between them exceed state spending. The private sector spending alone equals state capital expenditure, though the majority is focused on ICT infrastructure investments. External financing increased from $7 billion (2002) to $27 billion (2009). China, in particular, has emerged as an important investor.

=== Transport ===
Less than 40% of rural Africans live within two kilometers of an all-season road, the lowest level of rural accessibility in the developing world. Spending on roads averages just below 2% of GDP with varying degree among countries. This compares with 1% of GDP that is typical in industrialised countries, and 2–3% of GDP found in fast-growing emerging economies. Although the level of expenditure is high relative to the size of Africa&#x27;s economies, it remains small in absolute terms, with low-income countries spending an average of about US$7 per capita per year.

==Education==

Forty per cent of African scientists live in OECD countries, predominantly in Europe, the United States and Canada. This has been described as an African brain drain. According to Naledi Pandor, the South African Minister of Science and Technology, even with the drain enrollments in sub-Saharan African universities tripled between 1991 and 2005, expanding at an annual rate of 8.7%, which is one of the highest regional growth rates in the world. In the last 10 to 15 years interest in pursuing university-level degrees abroad has increased.

According to the CIA, low global literacy rates are concentrated in sub-Saharan Africa, West Asia and South Asia. However, literacy rates in sub-Saharan Africa vary significantly between countries. The highest registered literacy rate in the region is in Zimbabwe (90.7%; 2003 est.), while the lowest literacy rate is in South Sudan (27%).

Research on human capital formation was able to determine, that the numeracy levels of sub-Saharan Africa and Africa, in general, were higher than numeracy levels in South Asia. In the 1940s more than 75% of the population of sub-Saharan Africa was numerate. The numeracy of the West African countries, Benin and Ghana, was even higher with more than 80% of the population being numerate. In contrast, numeracy in South Asia was only around 50%.

Higher diversity in Sub-Saharan African countries has been found to lead to a poorer economy. Researchers have argued that this is because of ethnic favouritism in their politics. Sub-Saharan leaders are more likely to provide better resources to their coethnic groups when in power. A study found that, on average, children of the favoured ethnic group are 2.25% more likely to attend primary school and 1.80% more likely to complete primary school. A 1% increase in GDP is associated with a 1.5% increase in the ethnic favouritism effect on primary school attendance.

Sub-Saharan African countries spent an average of 0.3% of their GDP on science and technology in 2007. This represents an increase from US$1.8 billion in 2002 to US$2.8 billion in 2007, a 50% increase in spending.

=== Major progress in access to education ===

At the World Conference held in Jomtien, Thailand in 1990, delegates from 155 countries and representatives of some 150 organisations gathered with the goal to promote universal primary education and the radical reduction of illiteracy before the end of the decade. The World Education Forum, held ten years later in Dakar, Senegal, provided the opportunity to reiterate and reinforce these goals. This initiative contributed to having education made a priority of the Millennium Development Goals in 2000, with the aim of achieving universal schooling (MDG2) and eliminating gender disparities, especially in primary and secondary education (MDG3). Since the World Education Forum in Dakar, considerable efforts have been made to respond to these demographic challenges in terms of education. The amount of funds raised has been decisive. Between 1999 and 2010, public spending on education as a percentage of gross national product (GNP) increased by 5% per year in sub-Saharan Africa, with major variations between countries, with percentages varying from 1.8% in Cameroon to over 6% in Burundi. As of 2015, governments in sub-Saharan Africa spend on average 18% of their total budget on education, against 15% in the rest of the world.

In the years immediately after the Dakar Forum, the efforts made by the African States towards achieving EFA produced multiple results in sub-Saharan Africa. The greatest advance was in access to primary education, which governments had made their absolute priority. The number of children in a primary school in sub-Saharan Africa thus rose from 82 million in 1999 to 136.4 million in 2011. In Niger, for example, the number of children entering school increased by more than three-and-a-half times between 1999 and 2011. In Ethiopia, over the same period, over 8.5 million more children were admitted to primary school. The net rate of first-year access in sub-Saharan Africa has thus risen by 19 points in 12 years, from 58% in 1999 to 77% in 2011. Despite the considerable efforts, the latest available data from the UNESCO Institute for Statistics estimates that, for 2012, there were still 57.8 million children who were not in school. Of these, 29.6 million were in sub-Saharan Africa alone, a figure which has not changed for several years. Many sub-Saharan countries have notably included the first year of secondary school in basic education. In Rwanda, the first year of secondary school was attached to primary education in 2009, which significantly increased the number of pupils enrolled at this level of education. In 2012, the primary completion rate (PCR) – which measures the proportion of children reaching the final year of primary school – was 70%, meaning that more than three out of ten children entering primary school do not reach the final primary year.

Literacy rates have gone up in sub-Saharan Africa, and internet access has improved considerably. At least 39 countries in sub-Saharan Africa have some large-scale school feeding programs, which can improve access to education. In aggregate, 16% of school-age children (and 25% of primary school-age children) in the region benefit from school meal programs, and about 82% of the funding for these programs is provided by governments. Nonetheless, a lot must yet happen for this region to catch up. The statistics show that the literacy rate for sub-Saharan Africa was 65% in 2017. In other words, one-third of the people aged 15 and above were unable to read and write. The comparative figure for 1984 was an illiteracy rate of 49%. In 2017, only about 22% of Africans were internet users at all, according to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).

== Science and technology ==
==Health==
Health challenges in Sub-Saharan Africa include HIV/AIDS in Africa, malaria, neglected tropical diseases, tuberculosis, onchocerciasis, maternal mortality and infant mortality.

In 1987, the Bamako Initiative conference organized by the World Health Organization was held in Bamako, the capital of Mali, and helped reshape the health policy of sub-Saharan Africa. The new strategy dramatically increased accessibility through community-based healthcare reform, resulting in more efficient and equitable provision of services. A comprehensive approach strategy was extended to all areas of health care, with subsequent improvement in the health care indicators and improvement in health care efficiency and cost.

In 2011, sub-Saharan Africa was home to 69% of all people living with HIV/AIDS worldwide. In response, a number of initiatives have been launched to educate the public on HIV/AIDS. Among these are combination prevention programmes, considered to be the most effective initiative, the abstinence, be faithful, use a condom campaign, and the Desmond Tutu HIV Foundation&#x27;s outreach programs. According to a 2013 special report issued by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the number of HIV positive people in Africa receiving anti-retro viral treatment in 2012 was over seven times the number receiving treatment in 2005, with an almost 1 million added in the last year alone. The number of AIDS-related deaths in sub-Saharan Africa in 2011 was 33 per cent less than the number in 2005. The number of new HIV infections in sub-Saharan Africa in 2011 was 25 per cent less than the number in 2001.

Life expectancy at birth in sub-Saharan Africa increased from 40 years in 1960 to 61 years in 2017.

Malaria is an endemic illness in sub-Saharan Africa, where the majority of malaria cases and deaths worldwide occur. Routine immunisation has been introduced in order to prevent measles. Onchocerciasis (&quot;river blindness&quot;), a common cause of blindness, is also endemic to parts of the region. More than 99% of people affected by the illness worldwide live in 31 countries therein. In response, the African Programme for Onchocerciasis Control (APOC) was launched in 1995 with the aim of controlling the disease. Maternal mortality is another challenge, with more than half of maternal deaths in the world occurring in sub-Saharan Africa. However, there has generally been progress here as well, as a number of countries in the region have halved their levels of maternal mortality since 1990. Additionally, the African Union in July 2003 ratified the Maputo Protocol, which pledges to prohibit female genital mutilation (FGM). Somalia, Guinea, Djibouti, Sierra Leone and Mali have the highest prevalence of FGM in the world. Infibulation, the most extreme form of FGM, is concentrated primarily in Northeast Africa.

National health systems vary between countries. In Ghana, most health care is provided by the government and largely administered by the Ministry of Health and Ghana Health Services. The healthcare system has five levels of providers: health posts which are first-level primary care for rural areas, health centers and clinics, district hospitals, regional hospitals, and tertiary hospitals. These programs are funded by the government of Ghana, financial credits, Internally Generated Fund (IGF), and Donors-pooled Health Fund.

Ebola virus disease, which was first identified in 1976, occasionally occurs in outbreaks in tropical regions of Sub-Saharan Africa. The 2013–2016 Western African Ebola virus epidemic originated in Guinea, later spreading to neighbouring Liberia and Sierra Leone.

==Religion==

The principal religions of Sub-Saharan Africa are Christianity, Islam and traditional African religions, with Christianity being the largest religion, and religious syncretism being also common. African countries below the Sahara are largely Christian, while those above the Sahara, in North Africa, are predominantly Islamic. There are also Muslim majorities in parts of the Horn of Africa (Djibouti and Somalia) and in the Sahel and Sudan regions (the Gambia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, Mali, Niger, Senegal, Burkina Faso and Chad), as well as significant Muslim communities in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and on the Swahili Coast (Tanzania, Mozambique and Kenya). West Africa is the only subregion of sub-Saharan Africa which has a Muslim majority population, and Nigeria has the largest Muslim population in sub-Saharan Africa. 

Mauritius is the only country in Africa to have a Hindu majority. In 2012, sub-Saharan Africa constituted in absolute terms the world&#x27;s third largest Christian population, after Europe and Latin America respectively. In 2012, sub-Saharan Africa also constituted in absolute terms the world&#x27;s third largest Muslim population, after Asia and the Middle East and North Africa respectively. 

Traditional African religions are also commonly practiced across sub-Saharan Africa, with these religions being especially common in South Sudan, Guinea Bissau, Mozambique, and Cameroon. Traditional African religions can be broken down into linguistic cultural groups, with common themes. Among Niger–Congo-speakers is a belief in a creator god or higher deity, along with ancestor spirits, territorial spirits, evil caused by human ill will and neglecting ancestor spirits, and priests of territorial spirits. New world religions such as Santería, Vodun, and Candomblé, would be derived from this world. Among Nilo-Saharan speakers is the belief in Divinity; evil is caused by divine judgement and retribution; prophets as middlemen between Divinity and man. Among Afro-Asiatic-speakers is henotheism, the belief in one&#x27;s own gods but accepting the existence of other gods; evil here is caused by malevolent spirits. The Semitic Abrahamic religion of Judaism is comparable to the latter world view. San religion is non-theistic but a belief in a Spirit or Power of existence which can be tapped in a trance-dance; trance-healers.

Generally, traditional African religions are united by an ancient complex animism and ancestor worship.

Traditional religions in sub-Saharan Africa often display complex ontology, cosmology and metaphysics. Mythologies, for example, demonstrated the difficulty fathers of creation had in bringing about order from chaos. Order is what is right and natural and any deviation is chaos. Cosmology and ontology is also neither simple or linear. It defines duality, the material and immaterial, male and female, heaven and earth. Common principles of being and becoming are widespread: Among the Dogon, the principle of &quot;Amma&quot; (being) and &quot;Nummo&quot; (becoming), and among the Bambara, &quot;Pemba&quot; (being) and &quot;Faro&quot; (becoming).

;West Africa
* Akan mythology
* Ashanti mythology (Ghana)
* Dahomey (Fon) mythology
* Efik mythology (Nigeria, Cameroon)
* Igbo mythology (Nigeria)
* Serer religion and Serer creation myth (Senegal, Gambia and Mauritania)
* Yoruba mythology (Nigeria, Benin)

;Central Africa
* Dinka mythology (South Sudan)
* Lotuko mythology (South Sudan)
* Bushongo mythology (Congo)
* Bambuti (Pygmy) mythology (Congo)
* Lugbara mythology (Congo)

;Southeast Africa
* Akamba mythology (eastern Kenya)
* Masai mythology (Kenya, Tanzania)

;Southern Africa
* Khoisan religion
* Lozi mythology (Zambia)
* Tumbuka mythology (Malawi)
* Zulu mythology (South Africa)

Sub-Saharan traditional divination systems display great sophistication. For example, the bamana sand divination uses well established symbolic codes that can be reproduced using four bits or marks. A binary system of one or two marks are combined. Random outcomes are generated using a fractal recursive process. It is analogous to a digital circuit but can be reproduced on any surface with one or two marks. This system is widespread in sub-Saharan Africa.

==Culture==

Sub-Saharan Africa is diverse, with many communities, villages, and cities, each with their own beliefs and traditions. Traditional African Societies are communal, they believe that the needs of the many far outweigh an individual&#x27;s needs and achievements. Essentially, an individual&#x27;s keep must be shared with other extended family members. Extended families are made up of various individuals and families who have shared responsibilities within the community. This extended family is one of the core aspects of every African community. &quot;An African will refer to an older person as auntie or uncle. Siblings of parents will be called father or mother rather than uncle and aunt. Cousins will be called brother or sister&quot;. This system can be very difficult for outsiders to understand; however, it is no less important. &quot;Also reflecting their communal ethic, Africans are reluctant to stand out in a crowd or to appear different from their neighbours or colleagues, a result of social pressure to avoid offense to group standards and traditions.&quot; Women also have a very important role in African culture because they take care of the house and children. Traditionally, in many cultures &quot;men do the heavy work of clearing and ploughing the land, women sow the seeds, tend the fields, harvest the crops, haul the water, and bear the major burden for growing the family&#x27;s food&quot;. Despite their work in the fields, women are expected to be subservient to men in some African cultures. &quot;When young women migrate to cities, this imbalance between the sexes, as well as financial need, often causes young women of lower economic status, who lack education and job training, to have sexual relationships with older men who are established in their work or profession and can afford to support a girlfriend or two&quot;.

===Art===
The oldest abstract art in the world is a shell necklace, dated to 82,000 years, in the Cave of Pigeons in Taforalt, eastern Morocco. The second-oldest abstract form of art, and the oldest rock art, is found in the Blombos Cave at the Cape in South Africa, dated 77,000 years. Sub-Saharan Africa has some of the oldest and most varied style of rock art in the world.

Although sub-Saharan African art is very diverse, there are some common themes. One is the use of the human figure. Second, there is a preference for sculpture. Sub-Saharan African art is meant to be experienced in three dimensions, not two. A house is meant to be experienced from all angles. Third, art is meant to be performed. Sub-Saharan Africans have a specific name for masks. The name incorporates the sculpture, the dance, and the spirit that incorporates the mask. The name denotes all three elements. Fourth, art that serves a practical function. The artist and craftsman are not separate. A sculpture shaped like a hand can be used as a stool. Fifth, the use of fractals or non-linear scaling. The shape of the whole is the shape of the parts at different scales. Before the discovery of fractal geometry, Leopold Sedar Senghor, Senegal&#x27;s first president, referred to this as &quot;dynamic symmetry&quot;. William Fagg, a British art historian, has compared it to the logarithmic mapping of natural growth by biologist D&#x27;Arcy Thompson. Lastly, sub-Saharan African art is visually abstract, instead of naturalistic. Sub-Saharan African art represents spiritual notions, social norms, ideas, values, etc. An artist might exaggerate the head of a sculpture in relation to the body not because he does not know anatomy but because he wants to illustrate that the head is the seat of knowledge and wisdom. 

The visual abstraction of African art was very influential in the works of modernist artists like Pablo Picasso, Henri Matisse, and Jacques Lipchitz.

===Architecture===
===Music===

Traditional sub-Saharan African music is as diverse as the region&#x27;s various populations. The common perception of sub-Saharan African music is that it is rhythmic music centered around the drums. This is partially true. A large part of sub-Saharan music, mainly among speakers of Niger–Congo and Nilo-Saharan languages, is rhythmic and centered around the drum. Sub-Saharan music is polyrhythmic, usually consisting of multiple rhythms in one composition. Dance involves moving multiple body parts. These aspects of sub-Saharan music has been transferred to the new world by enslaved sub-Saharan Africans and can be seen in its influence on music forms as samba, jazz, rhythm and blues, rock and roll, salsa, reggae and rap music.

Some forms of sub-Saharan African music use strings, horns, and very little poly-rhythms. Music from the eastern Sahel and along the Nile, among the Nilo-Saharan, made extensive use of strings and horns in ancient times. Among the Afro-Asiatics of Northeast Africa, there is extensive use of string instruments and the pentatonic scale. Dancing involves swaying body movements and footwork. Among the San is extensive use of string instruments with emphasis on footwork.

Modern sub-Saharan African music has been influenced by music from the New World (Jazz, Salsa, Rhythm and Blues etc.) vice versa being influenced by enslaved sub-Saharan Africans. Popular styles are Mbalax in Senegal and Gambia, Highlife in Ghana, Zoblazo in Ivory Coast, Makossa in Cameroon, Soukous in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Kizomba in Angola, and Mbaqanga in South Africa. New World styles like Salsa, R&amp;B/Rap, Reggae, and Zouk also have widespread popularity.

===Cuisine===

Sub-Saharan African cuisine is very diverse. A lot of regional overlapping occurs, but there are dominant elements region by region.

West African cuisine can be described as starchy, flavorfully spicey. Dishes include fufu, kenkey, couscous, garri, foutou, and banku. Ingredients are of native starchy tubers, yams, cocoyams, and cassava. Grains include millet, sorghum, and rice, usually in the Sahel. Oils include palm oil and shea butter (Sahel). One finds recipes that mix fish and meat. Beverages are palm wine (sweet or sour) and millet beer. Roasting, baking, boiling, frying, mashing, and spicing are all cooking techniques.

Southeast African cuisine, especially those of the Swahili people, reflects its Islamic, geographical Indian Ocean cultural links. Dishes include ugali, sukuma wiki, and halva. Spices such as curry, saffron, cloves, cinnamon, pomegranate juice, cardamon, ghee, and sage are used, especially among Muslims. Meat includes cattle, sheep, and goats, but is rarely eaten since meat is viewed as a luxury.

In the Horn of Africa, pork and non-fish seafood are avoided by Christians and Muslims. Dairy products and all meats are avoided during lent by Ethiopians. Maize (corn) is a major staple. Cornmeal is used to make ugali, a popular dish with different names. Teff is used to make injera or canjeero (Somali) bread. Other important foods include enset, noog, lentils, rice, banana, leafy greens, chili peppers, coconut milk, and tomatoes. Beverages are coffee (domesticated in Ethiopia), chai tea, fermented beer from banana or millet. Cooking techniques include roasting and marinating.
Central African cuisine connects with all major regions of sub-Saharan Africa: Its cuisine reflects that. Ugali and fufu are eaten in the region. Central African cuisine is very starchy and spicy hot. Dominant crops include plantains, cassava, peanuts, chillis, and okra. Meats include beef, chicken, and sometimes exotic meats called bushmeat (antelope, warthog, crocodile). Widespread spicy hot fish cuisine is one of the differentiating aspects. Mushroom is sometimes used as a meat substitute.

Traditional Southern African cuisine surrounds meat. Traditional society typically focused on raising sheep, goats, and especially cattle. Dishes include braai (barbecue meat), sadza, bogobe, pap (fermented cornmeal), milk products (buttermilk, yoghurt). Crops utilised are sorghum, maize (corn), pumpkin beans, leafy greens, and cabbage. Beverages include ting (fermented sorghum or maize), milk, chibuku (milky beer). Influences from the Indian and Malay communities can be seen in its use of curries, sambals, pickled fish, fish stews, chutney, and samosa. European influences can be seen in cuisines like biltong (dried beef strips), potjies (stews of maize, onions, tomatoes), French wines, and crueler or koeksister (sugar syrup cookie).

===Clothing===

Like most of the world, sub-Saharan Africans have adopted Western-style clothing. In some countries like Zambia, used Western clothing has flooded markets, causing great angst in the retail community. Sub-Saharan Africa boasts its own traditional clothing style. Cotton seems to be the dominant material.

In East Africa, one finds extensive use of cotton clothing. Shemma, shama, and kuta are types of Ethiopian clothing. Kanga are Swahili cloth that comes in rectangular shapes, made of pure cotton, and put together to make clothing. Kitenges are similar to kangas and kikoy, but are of a thicker cloth, and have an edging only on a long side. Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, and South Sudan are some of the African countries where kitenge is worn. In Malawi, Namibia and Zambia, kitenge is known as Chitenge. One of the unique materials, which is not a fiber and is used to make clothing is barkcloth, an innovation of the Baganda people of Uganda. It came from the Mutuba tree (Ficus natalensis). In Madagascar a type of draped cloth called lamba is worn.
In West Africa, again cotton is the material of choice. In the Sahel and other parts of West Africa the boubou and kaftan style of clothing are featured. Kente cloth is created by the Akan people of Ghana and Ivory Coast, from silk of the various moth species in West Africa. Kente comes from the Akan twi word &quot;kenten&quot; which means basket. It is sometimes used to make dashiki and kufi. Adire is a type of Yoruba cloth that is starch resistant. Raffia cloth and barkcloth are also utilised in the region.

In Central Africa, the Kuba people developed raffia cloth from the raffia plant fibers. It was widely used in the region. Barkcloth was also extensively used.

In Southern Africa one finds numerous uses of animal hide and skins for clothing. The Ndau in central Mozambique and the Shona mix hide with barkcloth and cotton cloth. Cotton cloth is referred to as machira. Xhosa, Tswana, Sotho, and Swazi also made extensive use of hides. Hides come from cattle, sheep, goat, and elephant. Leopard skins were coveted and were a symbol of kingship in Zulu society. Skins were tanned to form leather, dyed, and embedded with beads.

===Theater===
===Film industry===
===Games===
===Sports===
Football (soccer) is the most popular sport in sub-Saharan Africa. Sub-Saharan men are its main patrons. Major competitions include the African Champions League, a competition for the best clubs on the continent and the Confederation Cup, a competition primarily for the national cup winner of each African country. The Africa Cup of Nations is a competition of 16 national teams from various African countries held every two years. South Africa hosted the 2010 FIFA World Cup, a first for a sub-Saharan country. In 2010, Cameroon played in the World Cup for the sixth time, which is the current record for a sub-Saharan team. In 1996 Nigeria won the Olympic gold for football. In 2000 Cameroon maintained the continent&#x27;s supremacy by winning the title too. Momentous achievements for sub-Saharan African football. Famous sub-Saharan football stars include Abedi Pele, Emmanuel Adebayor, George Weah, Michael Essien, Didier Drogba, Roger Milla, Nwankwo Kanu, Jay-Jay Okocha, Bruce Grobbelaar, Samuel Eto&#x27;o, Kolo Touré, Yaya Touré, Sadio Mané and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang. The most talented sub-Saharan African football players find themselves courted and sought after by European leagues. There are currently more than 1000 Africans playing for European clubs. Sub-Saharan Africans have found themselves the target of racism by European fans. FIFA has been trying hard to crack down on racist outburst during games.

Rugby is popular in sub-Saharan Africa. The Confederation of African Rugby governs rugby games in the region. South Africa is a major force in the game and won the Rugby World Cup in 1995, 2007 and 2019. Africa is also allotted one guaranteed qualifying place in the Rugby World Cup.

Boxing is a popular sport. Battling Siki is the first world champion to come out of sub-Saharan Africa. Countries such as Nigeria, Ghana and South Africa have produced numerous professional world champions such as Dick Tiger, Hogan Bassey, Gerrie Coetzee, Samuel Peter, Azumah Nelson and Jake Matlala.

Cricket has a following. The African Cricket Association is an international body which oversees cricket in African countries. South Africa and Zimbabwe have their own governing bodies. In 2003 the Cricket World Cup was held in South Africa, first time it was held in sub-Saharan Africa.

Over the years, Ethiopia and Kenya have produced many notable long-distance athletes. Each country has federations that identify and cultivate top talent. Athletes from Ethiopia and Kenya hold, save for two exceptions, all the men&#x27;s outdoor records for Olympic distance events from 800m to the marathon. Famous runners include Haile Gebrselassie, Kenenisa Bekele, Paul Tergat, and John Cheruiyot Korir.
==Tourism==
The development of tourism in this region has been identified as having the ability to create jobs and improve the economy. South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Botswana, Ghana, Cape Verde, Tanzania and Kenya have been identified as having well developed tourism industries. Cape Town and the surrounding area is very popular with tourists.

==List of countries and regional organisation==
Only six African countries are not geopolitically a part of sub-Saharan Africa: Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia and Western Sahara (claimed by Morocco); they form the UN subregion of Northern Africa, which also makes up the largest bloc of the Arab World. Nevertheless, some international organisations include Sudan as part of North Africa. Although a long-standing member of the Arab League, Sudan has around 30% non-Arab populations in the west (Darfur, Masalit, Zaghawa), far north (Nubian) and south (Kordofan, Nuba), and a largely Arabised native Nubian population that represents the majority at 70% hence its inclusion in North Africa, but geographically and culturally Sudan is part of Sub Saharan Africa. Mauritania and Niger only include a band of the Sahel along their southern borders. All other African countries have at least significant portions of their territory within sub-Saharan Africa.

===Central Africa===

* cap. Juba cur. South Sudanese pound (£) lang. English

; ECCAS (Economic Community of Central African States)
* (also in SADC) cap. Luanda cur. Angolan kwanza (Kz) lang. Portuguese
* (also in EAC) cap. Gitega (former Bujumbura) cur. Burundian franc (FBu) lang. French
* (also in SADC) cap. Kinshasa cur. Congolese franc (FC) lang. French
* (also in EAC) cap. Kigali cur. Rwandan franc (RF) lang. Kinyarwanda, French, English
* cap. São Tomé cur. São Tomé and Príncipe dobra (Db) lang. Portuguese

;CEMAC (Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa)
* cap. Yaoundé cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. English, French
* cap. Bangui cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. Sango, French
* cap. N&#x27;Djamena cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. French, Arabic
* cap. Brazzaville cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. French
* cap. Malabo cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. Spanish, French
* cap. Libreville cur. Central African CFA franc (FCFA) lang. French

===East Africa===

* cap. Khartoum cur. Sudanese pound (£S.) lang. Arabic (Sudanese Arabic) and English
* cap. Juba cur. South Sudanese pound (£) lang. English and Arabic (Juba Arabic)
* cap. Mogadishu cur. Somali shilling (So.Sh /-) lang. Somali, Arabic (official)
* cap. Nairobi cur. Kenyan shilling (KSh /=) lang. Swahili, English
* cap. Kampala cur. Ugandan shilling (USh /=) lang. Swahili, English
* (also in ECCAS) cap. Kigali cur. Rwandan franc (RF) lang. Kinyarwanda, French, English
* (also in SADC) cap. Dodoma cur. Tanzanian shilling (TSh /=) lang. Swahili, English
* (also in ECCAS) cap. Gitega (former Bujumbura) cur. Burundian franc (FBu) lang. Kirundi, French
* cap. Asmara cur. Eritrean nakfa (Nfk) &#x27;lang.&#x27; Tigrinya, Arabic, Italian, English (unofficial, lingua franca)
* cap. Djibouti cur. Djiboutian franc (Fdj) lang. Arabic, French (official)

==== Northeast Africa ====

* Horn of Africa
** cap. Djibouti cur. Djiboutian franc (Fdj) lang. Arabic, French (official)
** cap. Asmara cur. Eritrean nakfa (Nfk) &#x27;lang.&#x27; Tigrinya, Arabic, Italian, English (unofficial, lingua franca)
** cap. Addis Ababa cur. Ethiopian birr (Br) lang. Afar, Amharic, Oromo, Somali, and Tigrinya
** cap. Mogadishu cur. Somali shilling (So.Sh) lang. Somali, Arabic (official)
* Sudan &amp; South Sudan
** cap. Khartoum cur. Sudanese pound (£Sd.) lang. Arabic (Sudanese Arabic) and English
** cap. Juba cur. South Sudanese pound (£) lang. English and Arabic (Juba Arabic)

====Southeast Africa====
;EAC
* (also in ECCAS) cap. Gitega (former Bujumbura) cur. Burundian franc (FBu) lang. Kirundi, French
* cap. Nairobi cur. Kenyan shilling (KSh /=) lang. Swahili, English
* (also in ECCAS) cap. Kigali cur. Rwandan franc (RF) lang. Kinyarwanda, French, English
* (also in SADC) cap. Dodoma cur. Tanzanian shilling (TSh. /=) lang. Swahili, English
* cap. Kampala cur. Ugandan shilling (USh /=) lang. Swahili, English

===Southern Africa===
;SADC (Southern African Development Community)
* (also in ECCAS) cap. Luanda cur. Angolan kwanza (Kz) lang. Portuguese
* cap. Gaborone cur. Botswana pula (P) lang. Tswana, English
* cap. Moroni cur. Comorian franc (FC) lang. Comorian, Arabic, French
* cap. Mbabane cur. Swazi lilangeni (L)(E) lang. SiSwati, English
* cap. Maseru cur. Lesotho loti (L)(M) lang. Sesotho, English
* cap. Antananarivo cur. Malagasy ariary (Ar.) lang. Malagasy, French
* cap. Lilongwe cur. Malawian kwacha (MK) lang. English
* cap. Port Louis cur. Mauritian rupee (Re/Rs /-) lang. English
* cap. Maputo cur. Mozambican metical (MTn) lang. Portuguese
* cap. Windhoek cur. Namibian dollar (N$) lang. English
* cap. Victoria cur. Seychellois rupee (Re/Rs /-) lang. Seychellois Creole, English, French
* cap. Bloemfontein, Cape Town, Pretoria cur. South African rand (R) lang. 11 official languages
* cap. Lusaka cur. Zambian kwacha (ZK) lang. English
* cap. Harare cur. Zimbabwean dollar ($) lang. English

===Sudan===
Depending on classification Sudan is often not considered part of sub-Saharan Africa, as it is considered part of North Africa.
* cap. Khartoum cur. Sudanese pound (SDG) lang. Arabic and English

===West Africa===

;ECOWAS (Economic Community of West African States)
* cap. Yamoussoukro, Abidjan cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)
* cap. Banjul cur. Gambian dalasi (D)
* cap. Accra cur. Ghanaian cedi (GH₵)
* cap. Conakry cur. Guinean franc (FG)
* cap. Monrovia cur. Liberian dollar (L$)
* cap. Nouakchott cur. Mauritanian ouguiya (UM) (sometimes, like Sudan, considered part of North Africa)
* cap. Abuja &quot;cur.&quot; Nigerian naira (₦)
* cap. Freetown cur. Sierra Leonean leone (Le)

;UEMOA (West African Economic and Monetary Union)
* cap. Porto-Novo cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)
* cap. Ouagadougou cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)
* cap. Yamoussoukro, Abidjan cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)
* cap. Bissau cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)
* cap. Bamako cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)
* cap. Niamey cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)
* cap. Dakar cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)
* cap. Lomé cur. West African CFA franc (CFA)

==See also==
* African diaspora
* Black people
* Geography of Africa
* History of Africa

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* &quot;Taking Action to Reduce Poverty in Sub-Saharan Africa&quot;, World Bank Publications (1997), .


== Further reading ==
* Chido, Diane E. &quot;From Chaos to Cohesion: A Regional Approach to Security, Stability, and Development in Sub-Saharan Africa&quot;. Carlisle, Pa.: Strategic Studies Institute and U.S. Army War College Press, 2013.

==External links==

* African People website (archived)
* The Story of Africa – BBC World Service</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="0" end="18" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="63" end="69" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="92" end="98" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="114" end="128" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="130" end="141" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="143" end="158" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="164" end="175" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q228201" start="212" end="245" title="list of sovereign states and dependent territories in Africa" label="African countries and territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261674" start="420" end="434" title="United Nations geoscheme for Africa" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="617" end="619" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="621" end="624" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="626" end="636" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092680" start="649" end="662" title="Regions of the African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="856" end="868" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="918" end="922" title="Middle East and North Africa" label="MENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="929" end="940" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="980" end="990" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="1050" end="1061" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814226" start="1092" end="1124" title="member states of the Arab League" label="member states of the Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="1130" end="1137" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="1139" end="1147" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="1149" end="1159" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="1165" end="1172" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="1188" end="1193" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="1276" end="1300" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="UN Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q40362" start="1409" end="1413" title="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic" label="SADR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="1512" end="1521" title="racialist" label="racialist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1550" end="1558" title="African humid period#End" label="3900 BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="1752" end="1756" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q654544" start="1816" end="1820" title="Sudd" label="Sudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q649907" start="1825" end="1851" title="Cataracts of the Nile" label="the river&amp;#x27;s cataracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505359" start="1857" end="1875" title="Sahara pump theory" label="Sahara pump theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1889" end="1894" title="Natural history of Africa#Flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q511044" start="1899" end="1904" title="Fauna of Africa" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="1922" end="1934" title="Recent African origin of modern humans" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="1967" end="1974" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852115" start="1995" end="2002" title="pluvial" label="pluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q60259056" start="2039" end="2049" title="African humid period" label="Wet Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="2224" end="2236" title="Ethnography" label="ethnographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="2333" end="2352" title="Scientific racism" label="racist construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="2654" end="2696" title="Trans-Saharan trade" label="trade between North, West, and East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2729" end="2744" title="medieval period" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q209703" start="2840" end="2852" title="Sudan (region)" label="Sudan region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2877" end="2884" title="Upper Central Africa" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="2889" end="2900" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q209703" start="2959" end="2972" title="Western Sudan" label="Western Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569281" start="2992" end="3008" title="Southeast Africa" label="Southeast Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q146666" start="3019" end="3023" title="Zanj" label="Zanj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739014" start="3099" end="3112" title="Swahili coast" label="Swahili coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="3264" end="3271" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="3285" end="3299" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="3328" end="3335" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702431" start="3346" end="3355" title="Al-Habash" label="Al-Habash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566832" start="3468" end="3475" title="Habesha people" label="Habesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858689" start="3507" end="3514" title="Barbara (region)" label="Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="3575" end="3582" title="Berber people" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="3695" end="3702" title="Somali people" label="Somalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="3749" end="3754" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191194" start="3896" end="3903" title="Hamites" label="Hamites"/>
<link wikidata="Q62928" start="3908" end="3915" title="Semitic people" label="Semites"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="4019" end="4030" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130557" start="4039" end="4044" title="Negro" label="Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="4202" end="4213" title="Niger-Congo languages" label="Niger-Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33705" start="4218" end="4230" title="Nilo-Saharan languages" label="Nilo-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="4245" end="4252" title="Khoisan" label="Khoisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="4256" end="4271" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33614" start="4310" end="4317" title="Khoisan languages" label="Khoisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q267474" start="4402" end="4414" title="climate zone" label="climate zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="4419" end="4424" title="biome" label="biome"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="4427" end="4439" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="4448" end="4480" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="4510" end="4531" title="megadiverse countries" label="megadiverse countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="4591" end="4596" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="4806" end="4816" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="4818" end="4822" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="4824" end="4829" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="4831" end="4835" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="4841" end="4846" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="4864" end="4885" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="4919" end="4926" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474468" start="4932" end="4936" title="West Sudanian savanna" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329451" start="4941" end="4962" title="East Sudanian savanna" label="East Sudanian savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q319288" start="5004" end="5023" title="Ethiopian Highlands" label="Ethiopian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672617" start="5040" end="5047" title="Guinean forest–savanna mosaic" label="Guinean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058261" start="5052" end="5092" title="Northern Congolian forest–savanna mosaic" label="Northern Congolian forest–savanna mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="5152" end="5166" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="5176" end="5194" title="hot desert climate" label="hot desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="5217" end="5238" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000409" start="5308" end="5331" title="List of tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests ecoregions" label="moist broadleaf forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q319288" start="5339" end="5358" title="Ethiopian Highlands" label="Ethiopian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q388614" start="5362" end="5377" title="Tropical Africa" label="Tropical Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="5390" end="5409" title="tropical rainforest" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="5500" end="5505" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q87982" start="5519" end="5538" title="African Great Lakes" label="African Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991540" start="5642" end="5651" title="Serengeti" label="Serengeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q388515" start="5699" end="5710" title="Afromontane" label="Afromontane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024551" start="5903" end="5910" title="Western Congolian forest–savanna mosaic" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024548" start="5915" end="5955" title="Southern Congolian forest–savanna mosaic" label="Southern Congolian forest–savanna mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q537348" start="6014" end="6029" title="miombo woodland" label="miombo woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="6065" end="6071" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="6075" end="6085" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="6090" end="6098" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q131377" start="6106" end="6111" title="Namib" label="Namib"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="6116" end="6131" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q916997" start="6206" end="6211" title="Karoo" label="Karoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q779758" start="6240" end="6248" title="Bushveld" label="Bushveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974274" start="6298" end="6319" title="Cape Floristic Region" label="Cape Floristic Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="6496" end="6508" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="6607" end="6611" title="great ape" label="apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36611" start="6613" end="6620" title="gorilla" label="gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="6625" end="6635" title="Common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q372949" start="6665" end="6670" title="biped" label="biped"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="6794" end="6801" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q103237" start="6964" end="6981" title="Australopithecus" label="australopithecine"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="6982" end="6989" title="hominid" label="hominid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="7023" end="7031" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="7033" end="7037" title="East Africa" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="7043" end="7057" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088700" start="7193" end="7204" title="Lithic technology" label="stone tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="7548" end="7552" title="game (food)" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q746287" start="7636" end="7643" title="Oldowan" label="Oldowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105777" start="7683" end="7696" title="Homo ergaster" label="Homo ergaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="7788" end="7800" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088700" start="7942" end="7953" title="lithic technology" label="stone tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q101373" start="7971" end="7981" title="Homo habilis" label="H. habilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210774" start="8115" end="8124" title="Acheulean" label="Acheulean"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="8312" end="8321" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q186266" start="8365" end="8382" title="Homo floresiensis" label="Homo floresiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q218815" start="8438" end="8450" title="H. georgicus" label="H. georgicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517820" start="8483" end="8493" title="lineage (anthropology)" label="descendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="8735" end="8747" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="8938" end="8951" title="Single-origin hypothesis" label="out of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="9213" end="9215" title="Before Present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="9369" end="9374" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="9388" end="9394" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="9661" end="9666" title="camel" label="camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="9770" end="9775" title="Oasis" label="oases"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="9816" end="9835" title="trans-saharan trade" label="trans-saharan trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="9871" end="9879" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="9982" end="9987" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="9998" end="10012" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q130251" start="10203" end="10218" title="Bantu expansion" label="Bantu expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q607668" start="10429" end="10442" title="Djenné-Djenno" label="Djenné-Djenno"/>
<link wikidata="Q206789" start="10534" end="10546" title="Ghana Empire" label="Ghana Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q927291" start="10552" end="10563" title="Nok culture" label="Nok culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="10634" end="10644" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="10740" end="10759" title="trans-Saharan trade" label="trans-Saharan trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q206789" start="10775" end="10787" title="Ghana Empire" label="Ghana Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q184536" start="10796" end="10807" title="Mali Empire" label="Mali Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202687" start="10809" end="10823" title="Songhai Empire" label="Songhai Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="10829" end="10841" title="Kanem Empire" label="Kanem Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="10861" end="10873" title="Bornu Empire" label="Bornu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q985527" start="10911" end="10917" title="Tichit" label="Tichit"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="10945" end="10950" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q683632" start="10956" end="10978" title="Great Mosque of Djenne" label="Great Mosque of Djenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248546" start="11127" end="11137" title="Bono state" label="Bono State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791839" start="11139" end="11145" title="Akwamu" label="Akwamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="11170" end="11184" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Ashanti Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="11225" end="11230" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q145749" start="11236" end="11250" title="Kingdom of Nri" label="Kingdom of Nri"/>
<link wikidata="Q244157" start="11275" end="11279" title="Igbo people" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180084" start="11531" end="11534" title="Ife" label="Ifẹ"/>
<link wikidata="Q849623" start="11539" end="11542" title="Oyo Empire" label="Oyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="11649" end="11655" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092142" start="11743" end="11762" title="Sungbo&amp;#x27;s Eredo" label="Sungbo&amp;#x27;s Eredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171203" start="11822" end="11838" title="Kingdom of Benin" label="Kingdom of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="11971" end="11976" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q171203" start="12042" end="12045" title="Kingdom of Benin" label="Edo"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224092" start="12176" end="12190" title="Walls of Benin" label="Walls of Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q761370" start="12284" end="12299" title="Aro Confederacy" label="Aro Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="12390" end="12412" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="European slave traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="12428" end="12443" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806380" start="12638" end="12657" title="Royal Niger Company" label="Royal Niger Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545092" start="12696" end="12713" title="George Taubman Goldie" label="Sir George Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046345" start="12899" end="12905" title="Colonial Nigeria" label="became"/>
<link wikidata="Q21479969" start="12908" end="12928" title="British protectorate" label="British protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="12944" end="12958" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="13022" end="13034" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="13064" end="13079" title="decolonization" label="decoloniszation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117791245" start="13438" end="13443" title="Archaeology of Zilum" label="Zilum"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="13522" end="13539" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dated"/>
<link wikidata="Q500502" start="13691" end="13694" title="Sao civilization" label="Sao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="13696" end="13701" title="Kanem Empire" label="Kanem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="13703" end="13708" title="Bornu Empire" label="Bornu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482103" start="13710" end="13717" title="Shilluk Kingdom" label="Shilluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472873" start="13719" end="13727" title="Kingdom of Baguirmi" label="Baguirmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132786" start="13733" end="13738" title="Wadai Empire" label="Wadai"/>
<link wikidata="Q130251" start="13755" end="13770" title="Bantu Migration" label="Bantu Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768252" start="13821" end="13833" title="Luba Kingdom" label="Luba Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796223" start="14234" end="14246" title="Lunda Empire" label="Lunda Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271557" start="14489" end="14502" title="imperial cult" label="imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q796583" start="14709" end="14725" title="Kingdom of Kongo" label="Kingdom of Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q500189" start="14876" end="14894" title="M&amp;#x27;banza-Kongo" label="M&amp;#x27;banza-Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q926643" start="14918" end="14927" title="Manikongo" label="Manikongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q209327" start="14979" end="14991" title="Kuba Kingdom" label="Kuba Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330266" start="15035" end="15048" title="Eastern Lunda" label="Eastern Lunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q644450" start="15050" end="15055" title="Bemba people" label="Bemba"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="15057" end="15064" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="15066" end="15072" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796232" start="15082" end="15099" title="Kingdom of Ndongo" label="Kingdom of Ndongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="15136" end="15141" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="15175" end="15180" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="15194" end="15199" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q410453" start="15226" end="15235" title="Aethiopia" label="Aethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="15286" end="15292" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q139377" start="15614" end="15628" title="Axumite Empire" label="Axumite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="15716" end="15723" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="15745" end="15753" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="15758" end="15765" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="15883" end="15891" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="16001" end="16007" title="Stele" label="stelae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259366" start="16052" end="16075" title="King Ezana&amp;#x27;s Stele" label="King Ezana&amp;#x27;s Stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q140446" start="16087" end="16100" title="Zagwe dynasty" label="Zagwe dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971367" start="16208" end="16240" title="Church of Saint George, Lalibela" label="Church of St. George at Lalibela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16246" end="16261" title="History of somalia#Ancient" label="ancient Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098410" start="16294" end="16299" title="Opone" label="Opone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145030" start="16301" end="16309" title="Cape Guardafui" label="Mosyllon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281533" start="16314" end="16319" title="Malao (ancient)" label="Malao"/>
<link wikidata="Q216068" start="16343" end="16351" title="Sabaeans" label="Sabaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="16353" end="16360" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q139377" start="16367" end="16375" title="Axumite Empire" label="Axumites"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16392" end="16396" title="India" label="Indo"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="16397" end="16402" title="Greco-Roman" label="Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="16403" end="16408" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q862532" start="16517" end="16533" title="Ajuran Sultanate" label="Ajuran Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="16553" end="16562" title="hydraulic" label="hydraulic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="16563" end="16574" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365048" start="16602" end="16619" title="Sultanate of Adal" label="Sultanate of Adal"/>
<link wikidata="Q335728" start="16635" end="16646" title="Ahmed Gurey" label="Ahmed Gurey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915203" start="16736" end="16756" title="Abyssinian–Adal War" label="Adal&amp;#x27;s conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="16764" end="16780" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Ethiopian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q862518" start="16790" end="16806" title="Geledi Sultanate" label="Geledi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="16857" end="16869" title="Oman" label="Omani empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q272799" start="16891" end="16895" title="Lamu" label="Lamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="16918" end="16924" title="Somali people" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696056" start="16932" end="16943" title="Ahmed Yusuf (Gobroon)" label="Ahmed Yusuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="16998" end="17036" title="recent African origin of modern humans" label="recent African origin of modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q664262" start="17205" end="17212" title="Nilotic" label="Nilotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="17217" end="17222" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q130251" start="17240" end="17261" title="Bantu expansion" label="moved into the region"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="17437" end="17443" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="17444" end="17448" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="17453" end="17460" title="Persian people" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739014" start="17536" end="17555" title="Swahili Coast" label="Swahili City States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="17561" end="17576" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563891" start="17706" end="17715" title="Afro-Arab" label="Afro-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q721854" start="17737" end="17751" title="Swahili people" label="Swahili people"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="17821" end="17829" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="17844" end="17852" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="17858" end="17863" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739014" start="17894" end="17907" title="Swahili Coast" label="Swahili Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="17918" end="17934" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="17949" end="17955" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="17956" end="17966" title="loan-words" label="loan-words"/>
<link wikidata="Q637876" start="18200" end="18206" title="Rhapta" label="Rhapta"/>
<link wikidata="Q786942" start="18208" end="18214" title="Azania" label="Azania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938623" start="18219" end="18229" title="Menouthias" label="Menouthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q473748" start="18532" end="18539" title="Buganda" label="Buganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q889897" start="18541" end="18548" title="Bunyoro" label="Bunyoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711033" start="18553" end="18560" title="Karagwe" label="Karagwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="18730" end="18735" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="18763" end="18767" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="18837" end="18850" title="Limpopo River" label="Limpopo River"/>
<link wikidata="Q33614" start="18915" end="18922" title="Khoisan languages" label="Khoisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="18999" end="19021" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="KwaZulu-Natal Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q207996" start="19092" end="19104" title="Xhosa people" label="Xhosa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130009" start="19215" end="19225" title="Great Fish River" label="Fish River"/>
<link wikidata="Q130840" start="19242" end="19263" title="Eastern Cape" label="Eastern Cape Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q854468" start="19265" end="19275" title="Monomotapa" label="Monomotapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="19341" end="19348" title="Zambezi" label="Zambezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="19353" end="19360" title="Limpopo River" label="Limpopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="19371" end="19386" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="19418" end="19426" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="19431" end="19441" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q209217" start="19474" end="19488" title="Great Zimbabwe" label="Great Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q130377" start="19500" end="19515" title="Bartolomeu Dias" label="Bartolomeu Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165514" start="19594" end="19613" title="Victualler" label="victualling station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="19637" end="19654" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q294769" start="19658" end="19674" title="Jan van Riebeeck" label="Jan van Riebeeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="19692" end="19716" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q130654" start="19797" end="19802" title="Dutch Empire" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="19861" end="19868" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="19880" end="19905" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="19935" end="19944" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="19977" end="19986" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="19991" end="19996" title="Indian subcontinent" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786767" start="20258" end="20278" title="Battle of Blaauwberg" label="Battle of Blaauwberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791677" start="20293" end="20308" title="Sir David Baird, 1st Baronet" label="Sir David Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q729768" start="20314" end="20326" title="Zulu Kingdom" label="Zulu Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q81725" start="20378" end="20391" title="KwaZulu-Natal" label="KwaZulu-Natal"/>
<link wikidata="Q228911" start="20495" end="20509" title="Anglo-Zulu War" label="Anglo-Zulu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075150" start="20997" end="21048" title="list of countries and territories by fertility rate" label="list of countries and territories by fertility rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="21085" end="21088" title="Total fertility rate" label="TFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="21152" end="21164" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="21169" end="21179" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297611" start="21241" end="21248" title="Demographics of Nigeria" label="younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="21282" end="21287" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="21873" end="21881" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="21885" end="21901" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="21906" end="21917" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="22050" end="22057" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="22118" end="22135" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="22152" end="22159" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="22164" end="22173" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35345" start="22213" end="22229" title="Eblaite language" label="Eblaite language"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="22246" end="22251" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="22278" end="22299" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="22423" end="22429" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q33248" start="22573" end="22581" title="Cushitic languages" label="Cushitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="22775" end="22781" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q38890" start="22855" end="22878" title="South Semitic languages" label="South Semitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33184" start="22951" end="22957" title="Chadic languages" label="Chadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="23008" end="23013" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="23060" end="23073" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q459387" start="23200" end="23208" title="Khoi-San" label="Khoi-San"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="23241" end="23256" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="23261" end="23269" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736449" start="23296" end="23310" title="Khoi languages" label="Khoi languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q130251" start="23380" end="23395" title="Bantu expansion" label="Bantu expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="23440" end="23448" title="Khoikhoi" label="Khoikhoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="23453" end="23456" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292246" start="23493" end="23500" title="Sandawe people" label="Sandawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258889" start="23505" end="23510" title="Hadza people" label="Hadza"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="23539" end="23550" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger–Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="23693" end="23698" title="tonal language" label="tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="23708" end="23714" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q33578" start="23719" end="23723" title="Igbo language" label="Igbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="23749" end="23755" title="Fulani language" label="Fulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q34257" start="23757" end="23762" title="Wolof language" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="23767" end="23776" title="Kiswahili" label="Kiswahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="23833" end="23838" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="24014" end="24017" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q171927" start="24019" end="24024" title="Pygmy" label="Pygmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q664262" start="24030" end="24037" title="Nilotic" label="Nilotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="24141" end="24155" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="24164" end="24169" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q983" start="24171" end="24188" title="Equatorial Guinea" label="Equatorial Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="24203" end="24211" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="24213" end="24220" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="24249" end="24255" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="24257" end="24264" title="Farsi" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="24307" end="24316" title="loan word" label="loan word"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="24340" end="24353" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="24431" end="24446" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q219252" start="24571" end="24581" title="Khoikhoi" label="Hottentots"/>
<link wikidata="Q33705" start="24794" end="24816" title="Nilo-Saharan languages" label="Nilo-Saharan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q135477" start="24860" end="24865" title="Chari River" label="Chari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="24870" end="24874" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q664262" start="24953" end="24960" title="Nilotic" label="Nilotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124032" start="25008" end="25011" title="Fur people" label="Fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640583" start="25013" end="25020" title="Masalit people" label="Masalit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15140604" start="25022" end="25028" title="Nubian people" label="Nubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q140328" start="25034" end="25041" title="Zaghawa people" label="Zaghawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q487902" start="25091" end="25098" title="Songhai people" label="Songhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q148004" start="25100" end="25105" title="Zarma people" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q572665" start="25111" end="25117" title="Kanuri people" label="Kanuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268" start="25123" end="25142" title="Old Nubian language" label="Old Nubian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="25235" end="25251" title="primary language" label="primary language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8673" start="25367" end="25372" title="Lagos" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="25390" end="25397" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q465842" start="25399" end="25404" title="States of Nigeria" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q815913" start="25408" end="25413" title="Lagos State" label="Lagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="25444" end="25455" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509340" start="25460" end="25488" title="List of Nigerian cities by population" label="the most populous in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="25522" end="25528" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="25535" end="25540" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="25542" end="25547" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="25637" end="25656" title="urban agglomeration" label="urban agglomeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066984" start="25676" end="25692" title="financial centre" label="financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q174844" start="25709" end="25717" title="megacity" label="megacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q617618" start="25755" end="25760" title="Apapa" label="Apapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960" start="25818" end="25831" title="Dar es Salaam" label="Dar es Salaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="25896" end="25904" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739014" start="25973" end="25986" title="Swahili coast" label="Swahili coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="25989" end="26001" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="26025" end="26037" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="26049" end="26059" title="province" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q133083" start="26088" end="26095" title="Gauteng" label="Gauteng"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26180" end="26220" title="South Africa#Politics and government" label="South Africa&amp;#x27;s three capital cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133886" start="26244" end="26264" title="Constitutional Court of South Africa" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q587808" start="26306" end="26319" title="Witwatersrand" label="Witwatersrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="26396" end="26403" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="26443" end="26448" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35787" start="26474" end="26480" title="Maasai language" label="Maasai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233042" start="26578" end="26591" title="Nairobi River" label="Nairobi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="26736" end="26743" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="26745" end="26754" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="26756" end="26764" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897" start="26766" end="26772" title="Luanda" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="26774" end="26783" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="26788" end="26799" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q833202" start="26894" end="26898" title="BRIC" label="BRIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="27257" end="27267" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="27707" end="27724" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="27733" end="27760" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="27788" end="27803" title="government debt" label="government debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="27821" end="27843" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="27944" end="27966" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q363958" start="28246" end="28268" title="Special Drawing Rights" label="Special Drawing Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="30006" end="30018" title="photovoltaic" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067964" start="30456" end="30466" title="Xu Guanhua" label="Xu Guanhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979764" start="30566" end="30611" title="New Partnership for Africa&amp;#x27;s Development" label="New Partnership for Africa&amp;#x27;s Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="30726" end="30750" title="African Development Bank" label="African Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q192247" start="31117" end="31141" title="European Investment Bank" label="European Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="31150" end="31186" title="United Nations Environment Programme" label="United Nations Environment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="31401" end="31412" title="Solar power" label="Solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="31417" end="31427" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="31648" end="31653" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="31655" end="31665" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="31671" end="31683" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="31744" end="31752" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="31754" end="31761" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="31763" end="31771" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="31777" end="31784" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194163" start="31828" end="31849" title="Broadband" label="Broadband penetration"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="32377" end="32381" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="32383" end="32390" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="32392" end="32400" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="32402" end="32410" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="32412" end="32420" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q518713" start="32422" end="32428" title="coltan" label="coltan"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="32430" end="32437" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="32439" end="32447" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="32449" end="32455" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="32461" end="32470" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000" start="32497" end="32502" title="Gabon" label="Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="32507" end="32512" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="32555" end="32564" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="32598" end="32606" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="32747" end="32755" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="33746" end="33754" title="diamonds" label="diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="34005" end="34024" title="Scramble for Africa" label="Scramble for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="34640" end="34647" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="34695" end="34701" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="34746" end="34778" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="34822" end="34829" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="34842" end="34850" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="34865" end="34869" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="35502" end="35509" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q155867" start="35511" end="35523" title="castor beans" label="castor beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="35525" end="35531" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="35533" end="35539" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q80531" start="35541" end="35545" title="okra" label="okra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246973" start="35547" end="35562" title="black-eyed peas" label="black-eyed peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="35564" end="35574" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339237" start="35576" end="35581" title="gourd" label="gourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="35593" end="35599" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q843942" start="35635" end="35639" title="teff" label="teff"/>
<link wikidata="Q199075" start="35641" end="35646" title="enset" label="enset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670252" start="35648" end="35660" title="African rice" label="African rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="35662" end="35666" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yams"/>
<link wikidata="Q912522" start="35668" end="35676" title="kola nut" label="kola nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q165403" start="35679" end="35687" title="Elaeis guineensis" label="oil palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q133289" start="35693" end="35704" title="raffia palm" label="raffia palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q171953" start="35740" end="35751" title="guinea fowl" label="guinea fowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="35760" end="35766" title="donkey" label="donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834114" start="35991" end="36019" title="Climate change vulnerability" label="vulnerable to climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="36264" end="36297" title="Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation" label="Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="36506" end="36510" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q12908" start="37010" end="37022" title="George Soros" label="George Soros"/>
<link wikidata="Q565054" start="37450" end="37480" title="Overseas Development Institute" label="Overseas Development Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="37517" end="37537" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="37592" end="37607" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="37631" end="37659" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="38070" end="38088" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="38121" end="38132" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q865909" start="38450" end="38465" title="development aid" label="development aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="38605" end="38615" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="38730" end="38733" title="Information and communication technologies" label="ICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="38738" end="38750" title="water supply" label="water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="38755" end="38765" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="39848" end="39852" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q190222" start="39957" end="39968" title="brain drain" label="brain drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11043304" start="39983" end="39996" title="Naledi Pandor" label="Naledi Pandor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="40436" end="40445" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="40450" end="40460" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="40603" end="40611" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="40669" end="40680" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="40701" end="40714" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q140637" start="40757" end="40765" title="numeracy" label="numeracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423544" start="42001" end="42008" title="Jomtien Beach" label="Jomtien"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="42010" end="42018" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127424" start="42137" end="42164" title="Universal Primary Education" label="universal primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078674" start="42239" end="42260" title="World Education Forum" label="World Education Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="42286" end="42291" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="42293" end="42300" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="42438" end="42466" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="42880" end="42908" title="Gross national product" label="gross national product (GNP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="43315" end="43318" title="Education For All" label="EFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152127" start="44031" end="44062" title="UNESCO Institute for Statistics" label="UNESCO Institute for Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358589" start="45740" end="45758" title="HIV/AIDS in Africa" label="HIV/AIDS in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="45760" end="45767" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q929451" start="45769" end="45796" title="neglected tropical diseases" label="neglected tropical diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="45798" end="45810" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137321" start="45812" end="45826" title="onchocerciasis" label="onchocerciasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339474" start="45828" end="45846" title="maternal mortality" label="maternal mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="45851" end="45867" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q805921" start="45883" end="45900" title="Bamako Initiative" label="Bamako Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="45929" end="45954" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703" start="45967" end="45973" title="Bamako" label="Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="45990" end="45994" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q60603744" start="46134" end="46151" title="healthcare reform" label="healthcare reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="46475" end="46483" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101537" start="46689" end="46726" title="abstinence, be faithful, use a condom" label="abstinence, be faithful, use a condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264812" start="46745" end="46772" title="Desmond Tutu HIV Foundation" label="Desmond Tutu HIV Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q588982" start="46848" end="46890" title="Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS" label="Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="47326" end="47350" title="Life expectancy at birth" label="Life expectancy at birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="47427" end="47434" title="Malaria" label="Malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="47605" end="47612" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137321" start="47614" end="47628" title="Onchocerciasis" label="Onchocerciasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q737460" start="47678" end="47687" title="blindness" label="blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339474" start="47948" end="47966" title="Maternal mortality" label="Maternal mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="48247" end="48260" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924288" start="48287" end="48302" title="Maputo Protocol" label="Maputo Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q208373" start="48330" end="48355" title="female genital mutilation" label="female genital mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662388" start="48461" end="48473" title="Infibulation" label="Infibulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057805" start="48534" end="48550" title="Northeast Africa" label="Northeast Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="48604" end="48609" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867086" start="48690" end="48708" title="Ministry of Health, Ghana" label="Ministry of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555350" start="48713" end="48734" title="Ghana Health Services" label="Ghana Health Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q51993" start="49083" end="49102" title="Ebola virus disease" label="Ebola virus disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989108" start="49230" end="49266" title="Western African Ebola virus epidemic" label="Western African Ebola virus epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="49412" end="49424" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="49426" end="49431" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q386498" start="49436" end="49465" title="traditional African religions" label="traditional African religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q21652002" start="49517" end="49537" title="religious syncretism" label="religious syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="49648" end="49660" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="49754" end="49762" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="49767" end="49774" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="49812" end="49822" title="the Gambia" label="the Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="49824" end="49836" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="49838" end="49844" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="49846" end="49850" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="49852" end="49857" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="49859" end="49866" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="49868" end="49880" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="49885" end="49889" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="49937" end="49945" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="49950" end="49957" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="49985" end="49993" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="49995" end="50005" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="50010" end="50015" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="50118" end="50125" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="50185" end="50194" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="50218" end="50224" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="50235" end="50240" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965842" start="50313" end="50360" title="Christianity by country" label="world&amp;#x27;s third largest Christian population"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="50379" end="50392" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q42590" start="50474" end="50518" title="Islam by country" label="world&amp;#x27;s third largest Muslim population"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="50526" end="50530" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="50539" end="50567" title="Middle East and North Africa" label="Middle East and North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q386498" start="50584" end="50613" title="Traditional African religions" label="Traditional African religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="50717" end="50728" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="50730" end="50743" title="Guinea Bissau" label="Guinea Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="50745" end="50755" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="50761" end="50769" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="50879" end="50890" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger–Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q927277" start="51123" end="51131" title="Santería" label="Santería"/>
<link wikidata="Q177764" start="51133" end="51138" title="West African Vodun" label="Vodun"/>
<link wikidata="Q752660" start="51144" end="51153" title="Candomblé" label="Candomblé"/>
<link wikidata="Q33705" start="51195" end="51207" title="Nilo-Saharan languages" label="Nilo-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="51350" end="51362" title="Afro-Asiatic languages" label="Afro-Asiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150395" start="51375" end="51385" title="henotheism" label="henotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="51519" end="51537" title="Abrahamic religion" label="Abrahamic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="51541" end="51548" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306421" start="51589" end="51601" title="San religion" label="San religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="51795" end="51802" title="animism" label="animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="51807" end="51823" title="ancestor worship" label="ancestor worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="52106" end="52115" title="Cosmology" label="Cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="52120" end="52128" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493154" start="52494" end="52508" title="Akan mythology" label="Akan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493154" start="52511" end="52528" title="Ashanti mythology" label="Ashanti mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q716356" start="52539" end="52562" title="Dahomey mythology" label="Dahomey (Fon) mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345970" start="52565" end="52579" title="Efik mythology" label="Efik mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723030" start="52602" end="52616" title="Igbo mythology" label="Igbo mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424404" start="52629" end="52643" title="Serer religion" label="Serer religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453254" start="52648" end="52667" title="Serer creation myth" label="Serer creation myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086440" start="52703" end="52719" title="Yoruba mythology" label="Yoruba mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278361" start="52756" end="52771" title="Dinka mythology" label="Dinka mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q115862" start="52788" end="52804" title="Lotuko mythology" label="Lotuko mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001554" start="52821" end="52839" title="Bushongo mythology" label="Bushongo mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331855" start="52850" end="52875" title="Bambuti mythology" label="Bambuti (Pygmy) mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699750" start="52886" end="52903" title="Lugbara mythology" label="Lugbara mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143929" start="52933" end="52949" title="Akamba mythology" label="Akamba mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721220" start="52968" end="52983" title="Masai mythology" label="Masai mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q386498" start="53022" end="53038" title="Khoisan religion" label="Khoisan religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694668" start="53041" end="53055" title="Lozi mythology" label="Lozi mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459657" start="53067" end="53084" title="Tumbuka mythology" label="Tumbuka mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444698" start="53096" end="53110" title="Zulu mythology" label="Zulu mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="53414" end="53421" title="fractal" label="fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="55485" end="55497" title="abstract art" label="abstract art"/>
<link wikidata="Q167862" start="55581" end="55589" title="Taforalt" label="Taforalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q884971" start="55689" end="55701" title="Blombos Cave" label="Blombos Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="55992" end="56001" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="56516" end="56524" title="fractals" label="fractals"/>
<link wikidata="Q15130790" start="56765" end="56777" title="William Buller Fagg" label="William Fagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="57342" end="57355" title="modernist art" label="modernist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="57365" end="57378" title="Pablo Picasso" label="Pablo Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="57380" end="57393" title="Henri Matisse" label="Henri Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q380426" start="57399" end="57415" title="Jacques Lipchitz" label="Jacques Lipchitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="57735" end="57746" title="Niger–Congo" label="Niger–Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33705" start="57751" end="57763" title="Nilo-Saharan" label="Nilo-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11403" start="58111" end="58116" title="samba" label="samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="58118" end="58122" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="58124" end="58140" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="58142" end="58155" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q208239" start="58157" end="58162" title="salsa music" label="salsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="58164" end="58170" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="58175" end="58184" title="rap music" label="rap music"/>
<link wikidata="Q33705" start="58336" end="58348" title="Nilo-Saharan" label="Nilo-Saharan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="58418" end="58430" title="Afro-Asiatic" label="Afro-Asiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="58435" end="58451" title="Horn of Africa" label="Northeast Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917508" start="58479" end="58497" title="Music of Ethiopia" label="string instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q191345" start="58506" end="58522" title="pentatonic scale" label="pentatonic scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q172365" start="58588" end="58591" title="San people" label="San"/>
<link wikidata="Q556959" start="58858" end="58864" title="Mbalax" label="Mbalax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="58868" end="58875" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005" start="58880" end="58886" title="Gambia" label="Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q963061" start="58888" end="58896" title="Highlife" label="Highlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="58900" end="58905" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575673" start="58907" end="58914" title="Zoblazo" label="Zoblazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="58918" end="58929" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815364" start="58931" end="58938" title="Makossa" label="Makossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="58942" end="58950" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752683" start="58952" end="58959" title="Soukous" label="Soukous"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="58967" end="58995" title="Democratic Republic of Congo" label="Democratic Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597549" start="58997" end="59004" title="Kizomba" label="Kizomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="59008" end="59014" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914924" start="59020" end="59028" title="Mbaqanga" label="Mbaqanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="59032" end="59044" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q386284" start="59154" end="59181" title="African cuisine" label="Sub-Saharan African cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q941004" start="59373" end="59377" title="fufu" label="fufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742211" start="59379" end="59385" title="kenkey" label="kenkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="59387" end="59395" title="couscous" label="couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494252" start="59397" end="59402" title="garri" label="garri"/>
<link wikidata="Q806839" start="59416" end="59421" title="Banku (dish)" label="banku"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="59465" end="59469" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yams"/>
<link wikidata="Q15225458" start="59471" end="59479" title="Eddoe" label="cocoyams"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="59485" end="59492" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="59509" end="59515" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="59517" end="59524" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="59530" end="59534" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="59571" end="59579" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q495857" start="59584" end="59595" title="shea butter" label="shea butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="59632" end="59636" title="Fish as food" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="59641" end="59645" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q839492" start="59661" end="59670" title="palm wine" label="palm wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905047" start="59691" end="59702" title="millet beer" label="millet beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865573" start="59704" end="59712" title="Roasting" label="Roasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q720398" start="59714" end="59720" title="baking" label="baking"/>
<link wikidata="Q41716" start="59722" end="59729" title="boiling" label="boiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q300472" start="59731" end="59737" title="frying" label="frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276781" start="59739" end="59746" title="mashing" label="mashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="59752" end="59759" title="spicing" label="spicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435874" start="59935" end="59940" title="ugali" label="ugali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070251" start="59942" end="59953" title="sukuma wiki" label="sukuma wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q183599" start="59959" end="59964" title="halva" label="halva"/>
<link wikidata="Q164606" start="59981" end="59986" title="curry" label="curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="59988" end="59995" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q26736" start="59997" end="60002" title="clove" label="clove"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="60005" end="60013" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567034" start="60015" end="60032" title="pomegranate juice" label="pomegranate juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625808" start="60034" end="60042" title="cardamon" label="cardamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q323225" start="60044" end="60048" title="ghee" label="ghee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111359" start="60054" end="60058" title="Salvia officinalis" label="sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="60109" end="60115" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="60117" end="60122" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="60128" end="60132" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="60197" end="60211" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="60346" end="60351" title="Maize" label="Maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286140" start="60378" end="60386" title="Cornmeal" label="Cornmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q843942" start="60447" end="60451" title="Teff" label="Teff"/>
<link wikidata="Q935807" start="60468" end="60474" title="injera" label="injera"/>
<link wikidata="Q199075" start="60533" end="60538" title="enset" label="enset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818500" start="60540" end="60544" title="noog" label="noog"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="60546" end="60552" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="60561" end="60567" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q20134" start="60569" end="60581" title="leafy greens" label="leafy greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="60583" end="60595" title="chili pepper" label="chili pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q841779" start="60598" end="60610" title="coconut milk" label="coconut milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="60616" end="60622" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q877661" start="60675" end="60683" title="chai tea" label="chai tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="60695" end="60699" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q725668" start="60763" end="60773" title="marinating" label="marinating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435874" start="60881" end="60886" title="Ugali" label="Ugali"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="60999" end="61008" title="Cooking banana" label="plantains"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="61019" end="61025" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="61061" end="61065" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q864693" start="61067" end="61074" title="Chicken as food" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q649978" start="61110" end="61118" title="bushmeat" label="bushmeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="61120" end="61128" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645260" start="61130" end="61137" title="warthog" label="warthog"/>
<link wikidata="Q43169" start="61139" end="61148" title="crocodile" label="crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q654236" start="61224" end="61232" title="Edible mushroom" label="Mushroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783089" start="61428" end="61433" title="braai" label="braai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435874" start="61451" end="61456" title="sadza" label="sadza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435874" start="61458" end="61464" title="bogobe" label="bogobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435874" start="61466" end="61469" title="pap (food)" label="pap"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="61492" end="61504" title="milk product" label="milk product"/>
<link wikidata="Q106612" start="61507" end="61517" title="buttermilk" label="buttermilk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="61519" end="61526" title="yoghurt" label="yoghurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="61604" end="61611" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="61666" end="61670" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903812" start="61672" end="61679" title="chibuku" label="chibuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056554" start="61778" end="61784" title="sambal" label="sambal"/>
<link wikidata="Q695101" start="61787" end="61799" title="pickled fish" label="pickled fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454673" start="61801" end="61810" title="fish stew" label="fish stew"/>
<link wikidata="Q275650" start="61813" end="61820" title="chutney" label="chutney"/>
<link wikidata="Q491517" start="61826" end="61832" title="samosa" label="samosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q863394" start="61883" end="61890" title="biltong" label="biltong"/>
<link wikidata="Q262515" start="61912" end="61918" title="potjie" label="potjie"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="61937" end="61942" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q630531" start="61956" end="61967" title="French wine" label="French wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q286829" start="61985" end="61995" title="koeksister" label="koeksister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6448300" start="62420" end="62424" title="kuta (clothing)" label="kuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q942219" start="62458" end="62463" title="Kanga (African garment)" label="Kanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="62468" end="62475" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q940565" start="62572" end="62579" title="Kitenge" label="Kitenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q322781" start="62607" end="62612" title="kikoy" label="kikoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="62682" end="62687" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="62689" end="62695" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="62697" end="62705" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="62711" end="62722" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="62783" end="62789" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="62791" end="62798" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q953" start="62803" end="62809" title="Zambia" label="Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022404" start="63011" end="63027" title="Ficus natalensis" label="Ficus natalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216602" start="63074" end="63079" title="Lamba (garment)" label="lamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647929" start="63193" end="63199" title="boubou (clothing)" label="boubou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932927" start="63204" end="63210" title="kaftan" label="kaftan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428368" start="63243" end="63254" title="Kente cloth" label="Kente cloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q415693" start="63273" end="63284" title="Akan people" label="Akan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="63386" end="63390" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36850" start="63391" end="63394" title="twi" label="twi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133675" start="63468" end="63475" title="dashiki" label="dashiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078333" start="63480" end="63484" title="kufi" label="kufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q219261" start="64427" end="64451" title="CAF Champions League" label="African Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q909863" start="64511" end="64528" title="CAF Confederation Cup" label="Confederation Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="64611" end="64632" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="64748" end="64767" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="64836" end="64845" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q138711" start="64921" end="64967" title="Nigeria at the 1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Nigeria won the Olympic gold for football"/>
<link wikidata="Q336916" start="65153" end="65163" title="Abedi Pele" label="Abedi Pele"/>
<link wikidata="Q386876" start="65165" end="65182" title="Emmanuel Adebayor" label="Emmanuel Adebayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173139" start="65184" end="65195" title="George Weah" label="George Weah"/>
<link wikidata="Q969520" start="65197" end="65211" title="Michael Essien" label="Michael Essien"/>
<link wikidata="Q48892" start="65213" end="65226" title="Didier Drogba" label="Didier Drogba"/>
<link wikidata="Q168540" start="65228" end="65239" title="Roger Milla" label="Roger Milla"/>
<link wikidata="Q599675" start="65241" end="65253" title="Nwankwo Kanu" label="Nwankwo Kanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q605817" start="65255" end="65269" title="Jay-Jay Okocha" label="Jay-Jay Okocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q444295" start="65271" end="65287" title="Bruce Grobbelaar" label="Bruce Grobbelaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255625" start="65289" end="65306" title="Samuel Eto&amp;#x27;o" label="Samuel Eto&amp;#x27;o"/>
<link wikidata="Q147589" start="65308" end="65318" title="Kolo Touré" label="Kolo Touré"/>
<link wikidata="Q184277" start="65320" end="65330" title="Yaya Touré" label="Yaya Touré"/>
<link wikidata="Q209942" start="65332" end="65342" title="Sadio Mané" label="Sadio Mané"/>
<link wikidata="Q44977" start="65347" end="65372" title="Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang" label="Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="65719" end="65724" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125520" start="65763" end="65793" title="Confederation of African Rugby" label="Confederation of African Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130017" start="65902" end="65906" title="1995 Rugby World Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q124753" start="65908" end="65912" title="2007 Rugby World Cup" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724176" start="65917" end="65921" title="2019 Rugby World Cup" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="65986" end="66001" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q811029" start="66031" end="66044" title="Battling Siki" label="Battling Siki"/>
<link wikidata="Q326938" start="66218" end="66228" title="Dick Tiger" label="Dick Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510303" start="66230" end="66242" title="Hogan Bassey" label="Hogan Bassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552362" start="66244" end="66258" title="Gerrie Coetzee" label="Gerrie Coetzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q379542" start="66260" end="66272" title="Samuel Peter" label="Samuel Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q173873" start="66274" end="66287" title="Azumah Nelson" label="Azumah Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805791" start="66292" end="66304" title="Jake Matlala" label="Jake Matlala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299155" start="66336" end="66363" title="African Cricket Association" label="African Cricket Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q192202" start="66505" end="66522" title="Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="66612" end="66620" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="66625" end="66630" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q40244" start="66895" end="66903" title="marathon" label="marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171500" start="66928" end="66946" title="Haile Gebrselassie" label="Haile Gebrselassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9119" start="66948" end="66963" title="Kenenisa Bekele" label="Kenenisa Bekele"/>
<link wikidata="Q313799" start="66965" end="66976" title="Paul Tergat" label="Paul Tergat"/>
<link wikidata="Q982706" start="66982" end="67002" title="John Cheruiyot Korir" label="John Cheruiyot Korir"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="67035" end="67042" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="67288" end="67297" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="67483" end="67490" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="67492" end="67497" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="67499" end="67504" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="67506" end="67513" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="67515" end="67522" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="67527" end="67541" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635230" start="67578" end="67590" title="UN subregion" label="UN subregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="67594" end="67609" title="Northern Africa" label="Northern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="67655" end="67665" title="Arab World" label="Arab World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="67792" end="67803" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q46733" start="67860" end="67866" title="Darfur" label="Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640583" start="67868" end="67875" title="Masalit people" label="Masalit"/>
<link wikidata="Q140328" start="67877" end="67884" title="Zaghawa people" label="Zaghawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15140604" start="67898" end="67904" title="Nubian people" label="Nubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q867052" start="67917" end="67925" title="Kordofan" label="Kordofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280105" start="67927" end="67931" title="Nuba" label="Nuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="68126" end="68136" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="68141" end="68146" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947" start="68349" end="68353" title="Juba" label="Juba"/>
<link wikidata="Q244366" start="68359" end="68379" title="South Sudanese pound" label="South Sudanese pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q189966" start="68408" end="68452" title="Economic Community of Central African States" label="Economic Community of Central African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897" start="68476" end="68482" title="Luanda" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q200337" start="68488" end="68502" title="Angolan kwanza" label="Angolan kwanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q167551" start="68546" end="68552" title="Gitega" label="Gitega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854" start="68561" end="68570" title="Bujumbura" label="Bujumbura"/>
<link wikidata="Q238007" start="68577" end="68592" title="Burundian franc" label="Burundian franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="68634" end="68642" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734" start="68648" end="68663" title="Congolese franc" label="Congolese franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="68703" end="68709" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741" start="68715" end="68728" title="Rwandan franc" label="Rwandan franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="68740" end="68751" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932" start="68776" end="68784" title="São Tomé" label="São Tomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q193712" start="68790" end="68817" title="São Tomé and Príncipe dobra" label="São Tomé and Príncipe dobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940250" start="68849" end="68898" title="Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa" label="Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808" start="68907" end="68914" title="Yaoundé" label="Yaoundé"/>
<link wikidata="Q847739" start="68920" end="68945" title="Central African CFA franc" label="Central African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832" start="68982" end="68988" title="Bangui" label="Bangui"/>
<link wikidata="Q847739" start="68994" end="69019" title="Central African CFA franc" label="Central African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q33954" start="69033" end="69038" title="Sango language" label="Sango"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659" start="69054" end="69068" title="N&amp;#x27;Djamena" label="N&amp;#x27;Djamena"/>
<link wikidata="Q847739" start="69074" end="69099" title="Central African CFA franc" label="Central African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844" start="69135" end="69146" title="Brazzaville" label="Brazzaville"/>
<link wikidata="Q847739" start="69152" end="69177" title="Central African CFA franc" label="Central African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818" start="69205" end="69211" title="Malabo" label="Malabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q847739" start="69217" end="69242" title="Central African CFA franc" label="Central African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825" start="69279" end="69289" title="Libreville" label="Libreville"/>
<link wikidata="Q847739" start="69295" end="69320" title="Central African CFA franc" label="Central African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="69368" end="69376" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q271206" start="69382" end="69396" title="Sudanese pound" label="Sudanese pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q56573" start="69417" end="69432" title="Sudanese Arabic" label="Sudanese Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="69438" end="69445" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947" start="69453" end="69457" title="Juba" label="Juba"/>
<link wikidata="Q244366" start="69463" end="69483" title="South Sudanese pound" label="South Sudanese pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="69494" end="69501" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262143" start="69514" end="69525" title="Juba Arabic" label="Juba Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="69534" end="69543" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603" start="69549" end="69564" title="Somali shilling" label="Somali shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="69582" end="69588" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="69590" end="69596" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="69615" end="69622" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202882" start="69628" end="69643" title="Kenyan shilling" label="Kenyan shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="69659" end="69666" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894" start="69683" end="69690" title="Kampala" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598" start="69696" end="69712" title="Ugandan shilling" label="Ugandan shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="69728" end="69735" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="69768" end="69774" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741" start="69780" end="69793" title="Rwandan franc" label="Rwandan franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="69805" end="69816" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866" start="69856" end="69862" title="Dodoma" label="Dodoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589" start="69868" end="69886" title="Tanzanian shilling" label="Tanzanian shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="69902" end="69909" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q167551" start="69942" end="69948" title="Gitega" label="Gitega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854" start="69957" end="69966" title="Bujumbura" label="Bujumbura"/>
<link wikidata="Q238007" start="69973" end="69988" title="Burundian franc" label="Burundian franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q33583" start="70001" end="70008" title="Kirundi" label="Kirundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642" start="70024" end="70030" title="Asmara" label="Asmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q171503" start="70036" end="70050" title="Eritrean nakfa" label="Eritrean nakfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="70075" end="70083" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="70085" end="70091" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="70093" end="70100" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="70102" end="70109" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="70145" end="70153" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594" start="70159" end="70175" title="Djiboutian franc" label="Djiboutian franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="70188" end="70194" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="70196" end="70202" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q977" start="70268" end="70276" title="Djibouti" label="Djibouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594" start="70282" end="70298" title="Djiboutian franc" label="Djiboutian franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="70311" end="70317" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="70319" end="70325" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642" start="70345" end="70351" title="Asmara" label="Asmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q171503" start="70357" end="70371" title="Eritrean nakfa" label="Eritrean nakfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="70396" end="70404" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="70406" end="70412" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="70414" end="70421" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="70423" end="70430" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="70467" end="70478" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q206243" start="70484" end="70498" title="Ethiopian birr" label="Ethiopian birr"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811" start="70510" end="70514" title="Afar language" label="Afar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="70516" end="70523" title="Amharic language" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33864" start="70525" end="70530" title="Oromo language" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="70532" end="70538" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="70544" end="70552" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="70561" end="70570" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603" start="70576" end="70591" title="Somali shilling" label="Somali shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="70606" end="70612" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="70614" end="70620" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="70666" end="70674" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q271206" start="70680" end="70694" title="Sudanese pound" label="Sudanese pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q56573" start="70716" end="70731" title="Sudanese Arabic" label="Sudanese Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="70737" end="70744" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947" start="70753" end="70757" title="Juba" label="Juba"/>
<link wikidata="Q244366" start="70763" end="70783" title="South Sudanese pound" label="South Sudanese pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="70794" end="70801" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262143" start="70814" end="70825" title="Juba Arabic" label="Juba Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167551" start="70881" end="70887" title="Gitega" label="Gitega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854" start="70896" end="70905" title="Bujumbura" label="Bujumbura"/>
<link wikidata="Q238007" start="70912" end="70927" title="Burundian franc" label="Burundian franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q33583" start="70940" end="70947" title="Kirundi" label="Kirundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="70963" end="70970" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202882" start="70976" end="70991" title="Kenyan shilling" label="Kenyan shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="71007" end="71014" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859" start="71047" end="71053" title="Kigali" label="Kigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741" start="71059" end="71072" title="Rwandan franc" label="Rwandan franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="71084" end="71095" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866" start="71135" end="71141" title="Dodoma" label="Dodoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589" start="71147" end="71165" title="Tanzanian shilling" label="Tanzanian shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="71182" end="71189" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3894" start="71206" end="71213" title="Kampala" label="Kampala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598" start="71219" end="71235" title="Ugandan shilling" label="Ugandan shilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758211" start="71251" end="71258" title="Swahili culture" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897" start="71361" end="71367" title="Luanda" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q200337" start="71373" end="71387" title="Angolan kwanza" label="Angolan kwanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919" start="71417" end="71425" title="Gaborone" label="Gaborone"/>
<link wikidata="Q186794" start="71431" end="71444" title="Botswana pula" label="Botswana pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q34137" start="71455" end="71461" title="Tswana language" label="Tswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901" start="71478" end="71484" title="Moroni, Comoros" label="Moroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q267264" start="71490" end="71504" title="Comorian franc" label="Comorian franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q33077" start="71516" end="71524" title="Comorian language" label="Comorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3904" start="71548" end="71555" title="Mbabane" label="Mbabane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823" start="71561" end="71576" title="Swazi lilangeni" label="Swazi lilangeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="71590" end="71597" title="SiSwati" label="SiSwati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909" start="71614" end="71620" title="Maseru" label="Maseru"/>
<link wikidata="Q208039" start="71626" end="71638" title="Lesotho loti" label="Lesotho loti"/>
<link wikidata="Q34340" start="71652" end="71659" title="Sesotho" label="Sesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915" start="71676" end="71688" title="Antananarivo" label="Antananarivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584" start="71694" end="71709" title="Malagasy ariary" label="Malagasy ariary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="71722" end="71730" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876" start="71746" end="71754" title="Lilongwe" label="Lilongwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q211694" start="71760" end="71775" title="Malawian kwacha" label="Malawian kwacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929" start="71802" end="71812" title="Port Louis" label="Port Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212967" start="71818" end="71833" title="Mauritian rupee" label="Mauritian rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889" start="71866" end="71872" title="Maputo" label="Maputo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200753" start="71878" end="71896" title="Mozambican metical" label="Mozambican metical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935" start="71927" end="71935" title="Windhoek" label="Windhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q202462" start="71941" end="71956" title="Namibian dollar" label="Namibian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940" start="71983" end="71991" title="Victoria, Seychelles" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595" start="71997" end="72014" title="Seychellois rupee" label="Seychellois rupee"/>
<link wikidata="Q34015" start="72032" end="72050" title="Seychellois Creole" label="Seychellois Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q37701" start="72075" end="72087" title="Bloemfontein" label="Bloemfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="72089" end="72098" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="72100" end="72108" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181907" start="72114" end="72132" title="South African rand" label="South African rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="72143" end="72164" title="South Africa" label="11 official languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881" start="72172" end="72178" title="Lusaka" label="Lusaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q73408" start="72184" end="72198" title="Zambian kwacha" label="Zambian kwacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="72225" end="72231" title="Harare" label="Harare"/>
<link wikidata="Q182803" start="72237" end="72254" title="Zimbabwean dollar" label="Zimbabwean dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="72314" end="72319" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963" start="72421" end="72429" title="Khartoum" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q271206" start="72435" end="72449" title="Sudanese pound" label="Sudanese pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="72510" end="72551" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768" start="72560" end="72572" title="Yamoussoukro" label="Yamoussoukro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="72574" end="72581" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="72587" end="72609" title="West African CFA franc" label="West African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726" start="72623" end="72629" title="Banjul" label="Banjul"/>
<link wikidata="Q202885" start="72635" end="72649" title="Gambian dalasi" label="Gambian dalasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="72661" end="72666" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="72672" end="72685" title="Ghanaian cedi" label="Ghanaian cedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733" start="72699" end="72706" title="Conakry" label="Conakry"/>
<link wikidata="Q213311" start="72712" end="72725" title="Guinean franc" label="Guinean franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748" start="72738" end="72746" title="Monrovia" label="Monrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q242988" start="72752" end="72767" title="Liberian dollar" label="Liberian dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688" start="72780" end="72790" title="Nouakchott" label="Nouakchott"/>
<link wikidata="Q207024" start="72796" end="72815" title="Mauritanian ouguiya" label="Mauritanian ouguiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="72838" end="72843" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="72864" end="72876" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787" start="72885" end="72890" title="Abuja" label="Abuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q203567" start="72908" end="72922" title="Nigerian naira" label="Nigerian naira"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="72934" end="72942" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587" start="72948" end="72968" title="Sierra Leonean leone" label="Sierra Leonean leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929699" start="72983" end="73023" title="West African Economic and Monetary Union" label="West African Economic and Monetary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799" start="73032" end="73042" title="Porto-Novo" label="Porto-Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="73048" end="73070" title="West African CFA franc" label="West African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777" start="73084" end="73095" title="Ouagadougou" label="Ouagadougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="73101" end="73123" title="West African CFA franc" label="West African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768" start="73137" end="73149" title="Yamoussoukro" label="Yamoussoukro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="73151" end="73158" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="73164" end="73186" title="West African CFA franc" label="West African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739" start="73200" end="73206" title="Bissau" label="Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="73212" end="73234" title="West African CFA franc" label="West African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703" start="73248" end="73254" title="Bamako" label="Bamako"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="73260" end="73282" title="West African CFA franc" label="West African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3674" start="73296" end="73302" title="Niamey" label="Niamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="73308" end="73330" title="West African CFA franc" label="West African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718" start="73344" end="73349" title="Dakar" label="Dakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="73355" end="73377" title="West African CFA franc" label="West African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="73391" end="73395" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q861690" start="73401" end="73423" title="West African CFA franc" label="West African CFA franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="73446" end="73462" title="African diaspora" label="African diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="73465" end="73477" title="Black people" label="Black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q781650" start="73480" end="73499" title="Geography of Africa" label="Geography of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q149813" start="73502" end="73519" title="History of Africa" label="History of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="73635" end="73645" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621816" start="73845" end="73872" title="Strategic Studies Institute" label="Strategic Studies Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="27068" wikidata="Q3889421" url="?curid=27068" title="Sahara desert (ecoregion)">
<text>The Sahara desert, as defined by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), includes the hyper-arid center of the Sahara, between latitudes 18° N and 30° N. It is one of several desert and xeric shrubland ecoregions that cover the northern portion of the African continent.

==Setting==
The Sahara Desert is the world&#x27;s largest hot, non-polar desert and is located in North Africa. It extends from the Atlantic Ocean in the west to the Red Sea in the east, and from the Mediterranean Sea in the north to the Sahel savanna in the south. The vast desert encompasses several ecologically distinct regions. The Sahara Desert ecoregion covers an area of in the hot, hyper-arid centre of the Sahara, surrounded on the north, south, east, and west by desert ecoregions with higher rainfall and more vegetation.

The North Saharan steppe and woodlands ecoregion lies to the north and west, bordering the Mediterranean climate regions of Africa&#x27;s Mediterranean and North Atlantic coasts. The North Saharan steppe and woodlands receives more regular winter rainfall than the Sahara Desert ecoregion. The South Saharan steppe and woodlands ecoregion lies to the south, between the Sahara Desert ecoregion and the Sahel grasslands. The South Saharan steppe and woodlands receive most of their annual rainfall during the summer. The Red Sea coastal desert lies in the coastal strip between the Sahara Desert ecoregion and the Red Sea. The western portion of the region is known as El Djouf, on the border of Mauritania and Mali.

Some mountain ranges rise up from the desert and receive more rainfall and cooler temperatures. These Saharan mountains are home to two distinct ecoregions; the West Saharan montane xeric woodlands in the Ahaggar, Tassili n&#x27;Ajjer, Aïr, and other ranges in the western and central Sahara Desert and the Tibesti–Jebel Uweinat montane xeric woodlands in the Tibesti and Jebel Uweinat of the eastern Sahara.

The surface of the desert ranges from large areas of sand dunes (erg), to stone plateaus (hamadas), gravel plains (reg), dry valleys (wadis), and salt flats. The only permanent river that crosses the ecoregion is the Nile River, which originates in east Africa and empties northward into the Mediterranean Sea. Some areas encompass vast underground aquifers, resulting in oases, while other regions severely lack water reserves.
===Climate===
The Sahara Desert features a hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;BWh&quot;). The Sahara Desert is one of the driest and hottest regions of the world, with a mean temperature sometimes over and the average high temperatures in summer are over for months at a time, and can even soar to . In desert rocky mountains such as the Tibesti in Libya or the Hoggar in Algeria, average highs in summer are slightly moderated by the high elevation and are between at elevation. Daily variations may also be extreme: a swing from has been observed. Typical temperature swings are between .

Precipitation in the Sahara Desert is scarce, as the whole desert generally receives less than of rain per year except on the northernmost and southernmost edges as well as in the highest desert mountains. More than half of the desert area is hyper-arid and virtually rainless, with an average annual precipitation below and many consecutive years may pass without any rainfall. The south of the Sahara Desert, along the boundary with the hot semi-arid climate (&quot;BSh&quot;) of the Sahel, receives most of its annual rainfall during the highest-sun months (summer) when the Intertropical Convergence Zone moves up from the south. Wind- and sandstorms occur in the early spring. Local inhabitants protect themselves from the heat, the sunshine, the dry air, the high diurnal temperature ranges, and the sometimes dusty or sandy winds by covering their heads, such as the cheche garment worn by Tuareg.

==History and conservation==

The Sahara was one of the first regions of Africa to be farmed. Some 5,000 years ago, the area was not so arid and the vegetation might have been closer to a savanna. Previous fauna may be recognised in stone carvings. However, desertification set in around 3000 BC, and the area became much like it is today.

The Sahara is largely undisturbed. The most degradation is found in areas where there is water, such as aquifer oases or along the desert margins where some rain usually falls most years. In these areas, animals such as addaxes, scimitar-horned oryxes, and bustards are over-hunted for their meat. Only one area of conservation is recorded in the Sahara: the Zellaf Nature Reserve in Libya.

==Ecoregion delineation==
In 2001, WWF devised Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World (TEOW) &quot;a biogeographic regionalization of the Earth&#x27;s terrestrial biodiversity&quot;. The 2001 regionalization divided the deserts of the Sahara into several ecoregions. The Sahara desert ecoregion included the Sahara&#x27;s hyper-arid center, and the more humid Saharan mountains and southern, northern, eastern, and western deserts were separate ecoregions.

In 2017, the authors of the 2001 system proposed a revised ecoregion system for the Sahara. Two new ecoregions, the West Sahara desert and East Sahara desert, were designated in the hyper-arid center. The transitional North Saharan steppe and woodlands and South Saharan steppe and woodlands ecoregions were extended towards the central Sahara, and the South Saharan steppe and woodlands was renamed South Sahara desert.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3889421" start="4" end="17" title="Sahara desert (ecoregion)" label="Sahara desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="37" end="63" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="109" end="115" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246061" start="173" end="199" title="deserts and xeric shrublands" label="desert and xeric shrubland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="250" end="256" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="286" end="299" title="Sahara Desert" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="368" end="380" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="402" end="416" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="436" end="443" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41285" start="809" end="843" title="North Saharan steppe and woodlands" label="North Saharan steppe and woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="896" end="917" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="943" end="956" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="961" end="975" title="North Atlantic" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890655" start="1099" end="1133" title="South Saharan steppe and woodlands" label="South Saharan steppe and woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="1207" end="1212" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5804200" start="1325" end="1347" title="Red Sea coastal desert" label="Red Sea coastal desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="1418" end="1425" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064799" start="1473" end="1481" title="El Djouf" label="El Djouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890933" start="1683" end="1719" title="West Saharan montane xeric woodlands" label="West Saharan montane xeric woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26399" start="1727" end="1734" title="Ahaggar" label="Ahaggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190048" start="1736" end="1756" title="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer" label="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170383" start="1758" end="1761" title="Aïr" label="Aïr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889412" start="1829" end="1874" title="Tibesti–Jebel Uweinat montane xeric woodlands" label="Tibesti–Jebel Uweinat montane xeric woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q309104" start="1882" end="1889" title="Tibesti" label="Tibesti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441442" start="1894" end="1907" title="Jebel Uweinat" label="Jebel Uweinat"/>
<link wikidata="Q319120" start="1997" end="2000" title="Erg (landform)" label="erg"/>
<link wikidata="Q757301" start="2022" end="2028" title="hamada" label="hamada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477455" start="2047" end="2050" title="Desert pavement" label="reg"/>
<link wikidata="Q187971" start="2066" end="2070" title="wadi" label="wadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="2149" end="2159" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="2304" end="2309" title="oasis" label="oases"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="2404" end="2422" title="hot desert climate" label="hot desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2424" end="2453" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q309104" start="2720" end="2727" title="Tibesti" label="Tibesti"/>
<link wikidata="Q26399" start="2744" end="2750" title="Hoggar" label="Hoggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="3413" end="3434" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="3460" end="3465" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="3552" end="3582" title="Intertropical Convergence Zone" label="Intertropical Convergence Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q81054" start="3608" end="3613" title="Windstorm" label="Wind-"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="3618" end="3627" title="sandstorm" label="sandstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q48835463" start="3848" end="3854" title="Tagelmust" label="cheche"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="3871" end="3877" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="4068" end="4075" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="4138" end="4153" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="4325" end="4338" title="oasis" label="aquifer oases"/>
<link wikidata="Q190154" start="4441" end="4446" title="addax" label="addax"/>
<link wikidata="Q369817" start="4450" end="4470" title="scimitar-horned oryx" label="scimitar-horned oryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q21755" start="4478" end="4485" title="bustard" label="bustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="4491" end="4502" title="over-hunting" label="over-hunted"/>
<link wikidata="Q20113959" start="4536" end="4548" title="conservation ethic" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5184" end="5202" title="West Sahara desert" label="West Sahara desert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5207" end="5225" title="East Sahara desert" label="East Sahara desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q41285" start="5286" end="5320" title="North Saharan steppe and woodlands" label="North Saharan steppe and woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890655" start="5468" end="5487" title="South Sahara desert" label="South Sahara desert"/>
</links>
</doc>
