<doc id="45871" wikidata="Q570" url="?curid=45871" title="Loudspeaker">
<text>A loudspeaker (commonly referred to as a speaker or, more fully, a speaker system) is a combination of one or more speaker drivers, an enclosure, and electrical connections (possibly including a crossover network). The speaker driver is an electroacoustic transducer that converts an electrical audio signal into a corresponding sound. 

The driver is a linear motor connected to a diaphragm, which transmits the motor&#x27;s movement to produce sound by moving air. An audio signal, typically originating from a microphone, recording, or radio broadcast, is electronically amplified to a power level sufficient to drive the motor, reproducing the sound corresponding to the original unamplified signal. This process functions as the inverse of a microphone. In fact, the &quot;dynamic speaker&quot; driver—the most common type—shares the same basic configuration as a dynamic microphone, which operates in reverse as a generator.

The dynamic speaker was invented in 1925 by Edward W. Kellogg and Chester W. Rice. When the electrical current from an audio signal passes through its voice coil—a coil of wire capable of moving axially in a cylindrical gap containing a concentrated magnetic field produced by a permanent magnet—the coil is forced to move rapidly back and forth due to Faraday&#x27;s law of induction; this attaches to a diaphragm or &quot;speaker cone&quot; (as it is usually conically shaped for sturdiness) in contact with air, thus creating sound waves. In addition to dynamic speakers, several other technologies are possible for creating sound from an electrical signal, a few of which are in commercial use.

For a speaker to efficiently produce sound, especially at lower frequencies, the speaker driver must be baffled so that the sound emanating from its rear does not cancel out the (intended) sound from the front; this generally takes the form of a speaker enclosure or &quot;speaker cabinet&quot;, an often rectangular box made of wood, but sometimes metal or plastic. The enclosure&#x27;s design plays an important acoustic role thus determining the resulting sound quality. Most high fidelity speaker systems (picture at right) include two or more sorts of speaker drivers, each specialized in one part of the audible frequency range. The smaller drivers capable of reproducing the highest audio frequencies are called tweeters, those for middle frequencies are called mid-range drivers and those for low frequencies are called woofers. Sometimes the reproduction of the very lowest frequencies (20–~50 Hz) is augmented by a &quot;subwoofer&quot; often in its own (large) enclosure. In a two-way or three-way speaker system (one with drivers covering two or three different frequency ranges) there is a small amount of passive electronics called a crossover network which helps direct components of the electronic signal to the speaker drivers best capable of reproducing those frequencies. In a &quot;powered speaker&quot; system, the power amplifier actually feeding the speaker drivers is built into the enclosure itself; these have become more and more common, especially as computer and Bluetooth speakers.

Smaller speakers are found in devices such as radios, televisions, portable audio players, personal computers (computer speakers), headphones, and earphones. Larger, louder speaker systems are used for home hi-fi systems (&quot;stereos&quot;), electronic musical instruments, sound reinforcement in theaters and concert halls, and in public address systems.
==Terminology==
The term &quot;loudspeaker&quot; may refer to individual transducers (also known as &quot;drivers&quot;) or to complete speaker systems consisting of an enclosure and one or more drivers.

To adequately and accurately reproduce a wide range of frequencies with even coverage, most loudspeaker systems employ more than one driver, particularly for higher sound pressure level (SPL) or maximum accuracy. Individual drivers are used to reproduce different frequency ranges. The drivers are named subwoofers (for very low frequencies); woofers (low frequencies); mid-range speakers (middle frequencies); tweeters (high frequencies); and sometimes supertweeters, for the highest audible frequencies and beyond. The terms for different speaker drivers differ, depending on the application. In two-way systems there is no mid-range driver, so the task of reproducing the mid-range sounds is divided between the woofer and tweeter. When multiple drivers are used in a system, a filter network, called an audio crossover, separates the incoming signal into different frequency ranges and routes them to the appropriate driver. A loudspeaker system with &quot;n&quot; separate frequency bands is described as &quot;n-way speakers&quot;: a two-way system will have a woofer and a tweeter; a three-way system employs a woofer, a mid-range, and a tweeter. Loudspeaker drivers of the type pictured are termed &quot;dynamic&quot; (short for electrodynamic) to distinguish them from other sorts including moving iron speakers, and speakers using piezoelectric or electrostatic systems.

==History==
Johann Philipp Reis installed an electric loudspeaker in his &quot;telephone&quot; in 1861; it was capable of reproducing clear tones, but later revisions could also reproduce muffled speech. Alexander Graham Bell patented his first electric loudspeaker (a moving iron type capable of reproducing intelligible speech) as part of his telephone in 1876, which was followed in 1877 by an improved version from Ernst Siemens. During this time, Thomas Edison was issued a British patent for a system using compressed air as an amplifying mechanism for his early cylinder phonographs, but he ultimately settled for the familiar metal horn driven by a membrane attached to the stylus. In 1898, Horace Short patented a design for a loudspeaker driven by compressed air; he then sold the rights to Charles Parsons, who was issued several additional British patents before 1910. A few companies, including the Victor Talking Machine Company and Pathé, produced record players using compressed-air loudspeakers. Compressed-air designs are significantly limited by their poor sound quality and their inability to reproduce sound at low volume. Variants of the design were used for public address applications, and more recently, other variations have been used to test space-equipment resistance to the very loud sound and vibration levels that the launching of rockets produces.

===Moving-coil===
The first experimental moving-coil (also called &quot;dynamic&quot;) loudspeaker was invented by Oliver Lodge in 1898. The first practical moving-coil loudspeakers were manufactured by Danish engineer Peter L. Jensen and Edwin Pridham in 1915, in Napa, California. Like previous loudspeakers these used horns to amplify the sound produced by a small diaphragm. Jensen was denied patents. Being unsuccessful in selling their product to telephone companies, in 1915 they changed their target market to radios and public address systems, and named their product Magnavox. Jensen was, for years after the invention of the loudspeaker, a part owner of The Magnavox Company.


The moving-coil principle commonly used today in speakers was patented in 1925 by Edward W. Kellogg and Chester W. Rice. The key difference between previous attempts and the patent by Rice and Kellogg is the adjustment of mechanical parameters to provide a reasonably flat frequency response.

These first loudspeakers used electromagnets, because large, powerful permanent magnets were generally not available at a reasonable price. The coil of an electromagnet, called a field coil, was energized by a current through a second pair of connections to the driver. This winding usually served a dual role, acting also as a choke coil, filtering the power supply of the amplifier that the loudspeaker was connected to. AC ripple in the current was attenuated by the action of passing through the choke coil. However, AC line frequencies tended to modulate the audio signal going to the voice coil and added to the audible hum. In 1930 Jensen introduced the first commercial fixed-magnet loudspeaker; however, the large, heavy iron magnets of the day were impractical and field-coil speakers remained predominant until the widespread availability of lightweight alnico magnets after World War II.

===First loudspeaker systems===
In the 1930s, loudspeaker manufacturers began to combine two and three drivers or sets of drivers each optimized for a different frequency range in order to improve frequency response and increase sound pressure level. In 1937, the first film industry-standard loudspeaker system, &quot;The Shearer Horn System for Theatres&quot;, a two-way system, was introduced by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. It used four 15&quot; low-frequency drivers, a crossover network set for 375 Hz, and a single multi-cellular horn with two compression drivers providing the high frequencies. John Kenneth Hilliard, James Bullough Lansing, and Douglas Shearer all played roles in creating the system. At the 1939 New York World&#x27;s Fair, a very large two-way public address system was mounted on a tower at Flushing Meadows. The eight 27&quot; low-frequency drivers were designed by Rudy Bozak in his role as chief engineer for Cinaudagraph. High-frequency drivers were likely made by Western Electric.

Altec Lansing introduced the &quot;604&quot;, which became their most famous coaxial Duplex driver, in 1943. It incorporated a high-frequency horn that sent sound through a hole in the pole piece of a 15-inch woofer for near-point-source performance. Altec&#x27;s &quot;Voice of the Theatre&quot; loudspeaker system was first sold in 1945, offering better coherence and clarity at the high output levels necessary in movie theaters. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences immediately began testing its sonic characteristics; they made it the film house industry standard in 1955.

In 1954, Edgar Villchur developed the acoustic suspension principle of loudspeaker design. This allowed for better bass response than previously obtainable from drivers mounted in larger cabinets. He and his partner Henry Kloss formed the Acoustic Research company to manufacture and market speaker systems using this principle. Subsequently, continuous developments in enclosure design and materials led to significant audible improvements.

The most notable improvements to date in modern dynamic drivers, and the loudspeakers that employ them, are improvements in cone materials, the introduction of higher-temperature adhesives, improved permanent magnet materials, improved measurement techniques, computer-aided design, and finite element analysis. At low frequencies, Thiele/Small parameters electrical network theory has been used to optimize bass driver and enclosure synergy since the early 1970s.
==Driver design: dynamic loudspeakers==
== Speaker systems ==
Speaker system design involves subjective perceptions of timbre and sound quality, measurements and experiments. Adjusting a design to improve performance is done using a combination of magnetic, acoustic, mechanical, electrical, and materials science theory, and tracked with high-precision measurements and the observations of experienced listeners. A few of the issues speaker and driver designers must confront are distortion, acoustic lobing, phase effects, off-axis response, and crossover artifacts. Designers can use an anechoic chamber to ensure the speaker can be measured independently of room effects, or any of several electronic techniques that, to some extent, substitute for such chambers. Some developers eschew anechoic chambers in favor of specific standardized room setups intended to simulate real-life listening conditions.

Individual electrodynamic drivers provide their best performance within a limited frequency range. Multiple drivers (e.g. subwoofers, woofers, mid-range drivers, and tweeters) are generally combined into a complete loudspeaker system to provide performance beyond that constraint. The three most commonly used sound radiation systems are the cone, dome and horn-type drivers.

=== Full-range drivers ===

A full- or wide-range driver is a speaker driver designed to be used alone to reproduce an audio channel without the help of other drivers and therefore must cover the audio frequency range required by the application. These drivers are small, typically in diameter to permit reasonable high-frequency response, and carefully designed to give low-distortion output at low frequencies, though with reduced maximum output level. Full-range drivers are found, for instance, in public address systems, in televisions, small radios, intercoms, and some computer speakers.

In hi-fi speaker systems, the use of wide-range drivers can avoid undesirable interactions between multiple drivers caused by non-coincident driver location or crossover network issues but also may limit frequency response and output abilities (most especially at low frequencies). Hi-fi speaker systems built with wide-range drivers may require large, elaborate or, expensive enclosures to approach optimum performance.

Full-range drivers often employ an additional cone called a &quot;whizzer&quot;: a small, light cone attached to the joint between the voice coil and the primary cone. The whizzer cone extends the high-frequency response of the driver and broadens its high-frequency directivity, which would otherwise be greatly narrowed due to the outer diameter cone material failing to keep up with the central voice coil at higher frequencies. The main cone in a whizzer design is manufactured so as to flex more in the outer diameter than in the center. The result is that the main cone delivers low frequencies and the whizzer cone contributes most of the higher frequencies. Since the whizzer cone is smaller than the main diaphragm, output dispersion at high frequencies is improved relative to an equivalent single larger diaphragm.

Limited-range drivers, also used alone, are typically found in computers, toys, and clock radios. These drivers are less elaborate and less expensive than wide-range drivers, and they may be severely compromised to fit into very small mounting locations. In these applications, sound quality is a low priority.

===Subwoofer===
A subwoofer is a woofer driver used only for the lowest-pitched part of the audio spectrum: typically below 200 Hz for consumer systems, below 100 Hz for professional live sound, and below 80 Hz in THX-approved systems. Because the intended range of frequencies is limited, subwoofer system design is usually simpler in many respects than for conventional loudspeakers, often consisting of a single driver enclosed in a suitable enclosure. Since sound in this frequency range can easily bend around corners by diffraction, the speaker aperture does not have to face the audience, and subwoofers can be mounted in the bottom of the enclosure, facing the floor. This is eased by the limitations of human hearing at low frequencies; Such sounds cannot be located in space, due to their large wavelengths compared to higher frequencies which produce differential effects in the ears due to shadowing by the head, and diffraction around it, both of which we rely upon for localization clues.

To accurately reproduce very low bass notes, subwoofer systems must be solidly constructed and properly braced to avoid unwanted sounds from cabinet vibrations. As a result, good subwoofers are typically quite heavy. Many subwoofer systems include integrated power amplifiers and electronic subsonic-filters, with additional controls relevant to low-frequency reproduction (e.g. a crossover knob and a phase switch). These variants are known as &quot;active&quot; or &quot;powered&quot; subwoofers. In contrast, &quot;passive&quot; subwoofers require external amplification.

In typical installations, subwoofers are physically separated from the rest of the speaker cabinets. Because of propagation delay and positioning, their output may be out of phase with the rest of the sound. Consequently, a subwoofer&#x27;s power amp often has a phase-delay adjustment which may be used improve performance of the system as a whole. Subwoofers are widely used in large concert and mid-sized venue sound reinforcement systems. Subwoofer cabinets are often built with a bass reflex port, a design feature which if properly engineered improves bass performance and increases efficiency.

=== Woofer ===
A woofer is a driver that reproduces low frequencies. The driver works with the characteristics of the speaker enclosure to produce suitable low frequencies. Some loudspeaker systems use a woofer for the lowest frequencies, sometimes well enough that a subwoofer is not needed. Additionally, some loudspeakers use the woofer to handle middle frequencies, eliminating the mid-range driver.

=== Mid-range driver ===
A mid-range speaker is a loudspeaker driver that reproduces a band of frequencies generally between 1–6 kHz, otherwise known as the &quot;mid&quot; frequencies (between the woofer and tweeter). Mid-range driver diaphragms can be made of paper or composite materials and can be direct radiation drivers (rather like smaller woofers) or they can be compression drivers (rather like some tweeter designs). If the mid-range driver is a direct radiator, it can be mounted on the front baffle of a loudspeaker enclosure, or, if a compression driver, mounted at the throat of a horn for added output level and control of radiation pattern.

=== Tweeter ===

A tweeter is a high-frequency driver that reproduces the highest frequencies in a speaker system. A major problem in tweeter design is achieving wide angular sound coverage (off-axis response), since high-frequency sound tends to leave the speaker in narrow beams. Soft-dome tweeters are widely found in home stereo systems, and horn-loaded compression drivers are common in professional sound reinforcement. Ribbon tweeters have gained popularity as the output power of some designs has been increased to levels useful for professional sound reinforcement, and their output pattern is wide in the horizontal plane, a pattern that has convenient applications in concert sound.

===Coaxial drivers===
A coaxial driver is a loudspeaker driver with two or more combined concentric drivers. Coaxial drivers have been produced by Altec, Tannoy, Pioneer, KEF, SEAS, B&amp;C Speakers, BMS, Cabasse and Genelec.
==System design==
===Crossover===

Used in multi-driver speaker systems, the crossover is an assembly of filters that separate the input signal into different frequency bands according to the requirements of each driver. Hence the drivers receive power only in the sound frequency range they were designed for, thereby reducing distortion in the drivers and interference between them. Crossovers can be &quot;passive&quot; or &quot;active&quot;.

A passive crossover is an electronic circuit that uses a combination of one or more resistors, inductors and capacitors. These components are combined to form a filter network and are most often placed between the full frequency-range power amplifier and the loudspeaker drivers to divide the amplifier&#x27;s signal into the necessary frequency bands before being delivered to the individual drivers. Passive crossover circuits need no external power beyond the audio signal itself, but have some disadvantages: they may require larger inductors and capacitors due to power handling requirements. Unlike active crossovers which include a built-in amplifier, passive crossovers have an inherent attenuation within the passband, typically leading to a reduction in damping factor before the voice coil.

An active crossover is an electronic filter circuit that divides the signal into individual frequency bands &quot;before&quot; power amplification, thus requiring at least one power amplifier for each band. Passive filtering may also be used in this way before power amplification, but it is an uncommon solution, being less flexible than active filtering. Any technique that uses crossover filtering followed by amplification is commonly known as bi-amping, tri-amping, quad-amping, and so on, depending on the minimum number of amplifier channels.

Some loudspeaker designs use a combination of passive and active crossover filtering, such as a passive crossover between the mid- and high-frequency drivers and an active crossover for the low-frequency driver.

Passive crossovers are commonly installed inside speaker boxes and are by far the most common type of crossover for home and low-power use. In car audio systems, passive crossovers may be in a separate box, necessary to accommodate the size of the components used. Passive crossovers may be simple for low-order filtering, or complex to allow steep slopes such as 18 or 24 dB per octave. Passive crossovers can also be designed to compensate for undesired characteristics of driver, horn, or enclosure resonances, and can be tricky to implement, due to component interaction. Passive crossovers, like the driver units that they feed, have power handling limits, have insertion losses, and change the load seen by the amplifier. The changes are matters of concern for many in the hi-fi world. When high output levels are required, active crossovers may be preferable. Active crossovers may be simple circuits that emulate the response of a passive network or may be more complex, allowing extensive audio adjustments. Some active crossovers, usually digital loudspeaker management systems, may include electronics and controls for precise alignment of phase and time between frequency bands, equalization, dynamic range compression and limiting.
===Enclosures===

Most loudspeaker systems consist of drivers mounted in an enclosure, or cabinet. The role of the enclosure is to prevent sound waves emanating from the back of a driver from interfering destructively with those from the front. The sound waves emitted from the back are 180° out of phase with those emitted forward, so without an enclosure they typically cause cancellations which significantly degrade the level and quality of sound at low frequencies.

The simplest driver mount is a flat panel (&quot;baffle&quot;) with the drivers mounted in holes in it. However, in this approach, sound frequencies with a wavelength longer than the baffle dimensions are canceled out because the antiphase radiation from the rear of the cone interferes with the radiation from the front. With an infinitely large panel, this interference could be entirely prevented. A sufficiently large sealed box can approach this behavior.

Since panels of infinite dimensions are impossible, most enclosures function by containing the rear radiation from the moving diaphragm. A sealed enclosure prevents transmission of the sound emitted from the rear of the loudspeaker by confining the sound in a rigid and airtight box. Techniques used to reduce the transmission of sound through the walls of the cabinet include thicker cabinet walls, internal bracing and lossy wall material.

However, a rigid enclosure reflects sound internally, which can then be transmitted back through the loudspeaker diaphragm—again resulting in degradation of sound quality. This can be reduced by internal absorption using absorptive materials such as glass wool, wool, or synthetic fiber batting, within the enclosure. The internal shape of the enclosure can also be designed to reduce this by reflecting sounds away from the loudspeaker diaphragm, where they may then be absorbed.

Other enclosure types alter the rear sound radiation so it can add constructively to the output from the front of the cone. Designs that do this (including &quot;bass reflex&quot;, &quot;passive radiator&quot;, &quot;transmission line&quot;, etc.) are often used to extend the effective low-frequency response and increase the low-frequency output of the driver.

To make the transition between drivers as seamless as possible, system designers have attempted to time align the drivers by moving one or more driver mounting locations forward or back so that the acoustic center of each driver is in the same vertical plane. This may also involve tilting the driver back, providing a separate enclosure mounting for each driver, or using electronic techniques to achieve the same effect. These attempts have resulted in some unusual cabinet designs.

The speaker mounting scheme (including cabinets) can also cause diffraction, resulting in peaks and dips in the frequency response. The problem is usually greatest at higher frequencies, where wavelengths are similar to, or smaller than, cabinet dimensions.
====Horn loudspeakers====


Horn loudspeakers are the oldest form of loudspeaker system. The use of horns as voice-amplifying megaphones dates at least to the 17th century, and horns were used in mechanical gramophones as early as 1877. Horn loudspeakers use a shaped waveguide in front of or behind the driver to increase the directivity of the loudspeaker and to transform a small diameter, high-pressure condition at the driver cone surface to a large diameter, low-pressure condition at the mouth of the horn. This improves the acoustic—electro/mechanical impedance match between the driver and ambient air, increasing efficiency, and focusing the sound over a narrower area.

The size of the throat, mouth, the length of the horn, as well as the area expansion rate along it must be carefully chosen to match the driver to properly provide this transforming function over a range of frequencies. The length and cross-sectional mouth area required to create a bass or sub-bass horn dictates a horn many feet long. &quot;Folded&quot; horns can reduce the total size, but compel designers to make compromises and accept increased cost and construction complications. Some horn designs not only fold the low-frequency horn but use the walls in a room corner as an extension of the horn mouth. In the late 1940s, horns whose mouths took up much of a room wall were not unknown among hi-fi fans. Room-sized installations became much less acceptable when two or more were required.

A horn-loaded speaker can have a sensitivity as high as 110 dBSPL at 2.83 volts (1 watt at 8 ohms) at 1 meter. This is a hundredfold increase in output compared to a speaker rated at 90 dB sensitivity (given the aforementioned specifications) and is invaluable in applications where high sound levels are required or amplifier power is limited.

==== Transmission line loudspeaker ====
A transmission line loudspeaker is a loudspeaker enclosure design that uses an acoustic transmission line within the cabinet, compared to the simpler enclosure-based designs. Instead of reverberating in a fairly simple damped enclosure, sound from the back of the bass speaker is directed into a long (generally folded) damped pathway within the speaker enclosure, which allows greater control and efficient use of speaker energy.
===Wiring connections===


Most home hi-fi loudspeakers use two wiring points to connect to the source of the signal (for example, to the audio amplifier or receiver). To accept the wire connection, the loudspeaker enclosure may have binding posts, spring clips, or a panel-mount jack. If the wires for a pair of speakers are not connected with respect to the proper electrical polarity, the loudspeakers are said to be &quot;out of phase&quot; or more properly &quot;out of polarity&quot;. Given identical signals, motion in the cone of an out of polarity loudspeaker is in the opposite direction of the others. This typically causes monophonic material in a stereo recording to be canceled out, reduced in level, and made more difficult to localize, all due to destructive interference of the sound waves. The cancellation effect is most noticeable at frequencies where the loudspeakers are separated by a quarter wavelength or less; low frequencies are affected the most. This type of miswiring error does not damage speakers, but is not optimal for listening.

With sound reinforcement system, PA system and instrument amplifier speaker enclosures, cables and some type of jack or connector are typically used. Lower- and mid-priced sound system and instrument speaker cabinets often use 1/4&quot; jacks. Higher-priced and higher-powered sound system cabinets and instrument speaker cabinets often use Speakon connectors. Speakon connectors are considered to be safer for high-wattage amplifiers, because the connector is designed so that human users cannot touch the connectors.

===Wireless speakers===

Wireless speakers are similar to wired powered speakers, but they receive audio signals using radio frequency (RF) waves rather than over audio cables. There is an amplifier integrated in the speaker&#x27;s cabinet because the RF waves alone are not enough to drive the speaker. Wireless speakers still need power, so require a nearby AC power outlet, or onboard batteries. Only the wire for the audio is eliminated.
==Specifications==
Speaker specifications generally include:
* Speaker or driver type (individual units only)full-range, woofer, tweeter, or mid-range.
* Size of individual drivers. For cone drivers, the quoted size is generally the outside diameter of the basket. However, it may less commonly also be the diameter of the cone surround, measured apex to apex, or the distance from the center of one mounting hole to its opposite. Voice-coil diameter may also be specified. If the loudspeaker has a compression horn driver, the diameter of the horn throat may be given.
* Rated powerpower, and peak power a loudspeaker can handle. A driver may be damaged at much less than its rated power if driven past its mechanical limits at lower frequencies. In some jurisdictions, power handling has a legal meaning allowing comparisons between loudspeakers under consideration. Elsewhere, the variety of meanings for power handling capacity can be quite confusing.
* Impedancetypically 4 Ω (ohms), 8 Ω, etc.
* Baffle or enclosure type (enclosed systems only)Sealed, bass reflex, etc.
* Number of drivers (complete speaker systems only)two-way, three-way, etc.
* Class of loudspeaker:
** Class 1: maximum SPL 110–119 dB, the type of loudspeaker used for reproducing a person speaking in a small space or for background music; mainly used as fill speakers for Class 2 or Class 3 speakers; typically small 4&quot; or 5&quot; woofers and dome tweeters
** Class 2: maximum SPL 120–129 dB, the type of medium-power–capable loudspeaker used for reinforcement in small to medium spaces or as fill speakers for Class 3 or Class 4 speakers; typically 5&quot; to 8&quot; woofers and dome tweeters
** Class 3: maximum SPL 130–139 dB, high-power–capable loudspeakers used in main systems in small to medium spaces; also used as fill speakers for class 4 speakers; typically 6.5&quot; to 12&quot; woofers and 2&quot; or 3&quot; compression drivers for high frequencies
** Class 4: maximum SPL 140 dB and higher, very-high-power–capable loudspeakers used as mains in medium to large spaces (or for fill speakers for these medium to large spaces); 10&quot; to 15&quot; woofers and 3&quot; compression drivers

and optionally:
* Crossover frequency(ies) (multi-driver systems only)The nominal frequency boundaries of the division between drivers.
* Frequency responseThe measured, or specified, output over a specified range of frequencies for a constant input level varied across those frequencies. It sometimes includes a variance limit, such as within &quot;± 2.5 dB.&quot;
* Thiele/Small parameters (individual drivers only)these include the driver&#x27;s &quot;F&quot;s (resonance frequency), &quot;Q&quot;ts (a driver&#x27;s &quot;Q&quot;; more or less, its damping factor at resonant frequency), &quot;V&quot;as (the equivalent air compliance volume of the driver), etc.
* SensitivityThe sound pressure level produced by a loudspeaker in a non-reverberant environment, often specified in SPL measured at 1 meter with an input of 1 watt (2.83 volts RMS into 8 Ω), typically at one or more specified frequencies. Manufacturers often use this rating in marketing material.
* Maximum sound pressure levelThe highest output the loudspeaker can manage, short of damage or not exceeding a particular distortion level. Manufacturers often use this rating in marketing material—commonly without reference to frequency range or distortion level.

===Electrical characteristics of dynamic loudspeakers===
To make sound, a loudspeaker is driven by modulated electric current (produced by an amplifier) that passes through a &quot;speaker coil&quot; which then (through inductance) creates a magnetic field around the coil. The electric current variations that pass through the speaker are thus converted to a varying magnetic field, whose interaction with the driver&#x27;s magnetic field moves the speaker diaphragm, which thus forces the driver to produce air motion that is similar to the original signal from the amplifier.

The load that a driver presents to an amplifier consists of a complex electrical impedance—a combination of resistance and both capacitive and inductive reactance, which combines properties of the driver, its mechanical motion, the effects of crossover components (if any are in the signal path between amplifier and driver), and the effects of air loading on the driver as modified by the enclosure and its environment. Most amplifiers&#x27; output specifications are given at a specific power into an ideal resistive load; however, a loudspeaker does not have a constant impedance across its frequency range. Instead, the voice coil is inductive, the driver has mechanical resonances, the enclosure changes the driver&#x27;s electrical and mechanical characteristics, and a passive crossover between the drivers and the amplifier contributes its own variations. The result is a load impedance that varies widely with frequency, and usually a varying phase relationship between voltage and current as well, also changing with frequency. Some amplifiers can cope with the variation better than others can.

===Electromechanical measurements===
Examples of typical loudspeaker measurement are: amplitude and phase characteristics vs. frequency; impulse response under one or more conditions (e.g. square waves, sine wave bursts, etc.); directivity vs. frequency (e.g. horizontally, vertically, spherically, etc.); harmonic and intermodulation distortion vs. sound pressure level (SPL) output, using any of several test signals; stored energy (i.e. ringing) at various frequencies; impedance vs. frequency; and small-signal vs. large-signal performance. Most of these measurements require sophisticated and often expensive equipment to perform. The sound pressure level (SPL) a loudspeaker produces is commonly expressed as decibels relative to 20 μPa (&quot;dBSPL&quot;).

===Efficiency vs. sensitivity===
Loudspeaker efficiency is defined as the sound power output divided by the electrical power input. Most loudspeakers are inefficient transducers; only about 1% of the electrical energy sent by an amplifier to a typical home loudspeaker is converted to acoustic energy. The remainder is converted to heat, mostly in the voice coil and magnet assembly. The main reason for this is the difficulty of achieving proper impedance matching between the acoustic impedance of the drive unit and the air it radiates into. The efficiency of loudspeaker drivers varies with frequency as well. For instance, the output of a woofer driver decreases as the input frequency decreases because of the increasingly poor impedance match between air and the driver.

Driver ratings based on the SPL for a given input are called &quot;sensitivity ratings&quot; and are notionally similar to efficiency. Sensitivity is usually expressed as the SPL (&quot;dBSPL&quot; by common usage meaning &quot;dB relative to &quot;) at 1 W electrical input, measured at 1 meter, often at a single frequency. The voltage used is often 2.83 VRMS, which results in 1 watt into a nominal 8 Ω speaker impedance. Measurements taken with this reference are typically quoted as dBSPL with 2.83 V @ 1 m.

The sound pressure output is measured at (or mathematically scaled to be equivalent to a measurement taken at) one meter from the loudspeaker and on-axis (directly in front of it), under the condition that the loudspeaker is radiating into an infinitely large space and mounted on an infinite baffle. Clearly then, sensitivity does not correlate precisely with efficiency, as it also depends on the directivity of the driver being tested and the acoustic environment in front of the actual loudspeaker. For example, a cheerleader&#x27;s horn produces more sound output in the direction it is pointed by concentrating sound waves from the cheerleader in one direction, thus &quot;focusing&quot; them. The horn also improves impedance matching between the voice and the air, which produces more acoustic power for a given speaker power. In some cases, improved impedance matching (via careful enclosure design) lets the speaker produce more acoustic power.

Typical home loudspeakers have sensitivities of about 85 to 95 dBSPL for 1 W @ 1 m—an efficiency of 0.5–4%. Sound reinforcement and public address loudspeakers have sensitivities of perhaps 95 to 102  dBSPL for 1 W @ 1 m—an efficiency of 4–10%. Rock concert, stadium PA, marine hailing, etc. speakers generally have higher sensitivities of 103 to 110  dBSPL for 1 W @ 1 m—an efficiency of 10–20%.

Since sensitivity and power handling are largely independent properties, a driver with a higher maximum power rating cannot necessarily be driven to louder levels than a lower-rated one. In the example that follows, assume (for simplicity) that the drivers being compared have the same electrical impedance, are operated at the same frequency within both driver&#x27;s respective passbands, and that power compression and distortion are insignificant. A speaker 3 dB more sensitive than another produces very nearly double the sound power (is 3 dB louder) for the same electrical power input. Thus, a 100 W driver (A) rated at 92  dBSPL for 1 W @ 1 m sensitivity puts out twice as much acoustic power as a 200 W driver (B) rated at 89  dBSPL for 1 W @ 1 m when both are driven with 100 W of electrical power. In this example, when driven at 100 W, speaker A produces the same SPL, or loudness as speaker B would produce with 200 W input. Thus, a 3 dB increase in the sensitivity of the speaker means that it needs half the amplifier power to achieve a given SPL. This translates into a smaller, less complex power amplifier—and often, to reduced overall system cost.
It is typically not possible to combine high efficiency (especially at low frequencies) with compact enclosure size and adequate low-frequency response. One can, for the most part, choose only two of the three parameters when designing a speaker system. So, for example, if extended low-frequency performance and small box size are important, one must accept low efficiency. This rule of thumb is sometimes called Hofmann&#x27;s Iron Law (after J.A. Hofmann, the H in KLH).

==Listening environment==
The interaction of a loudspeaker system with its environment is complex and is largely out of the loudspeaker designer&#x27;s control. Most listening rooms present a more or less reflective environment, depending on size, shape, volume, and furnishings. This means the sound reaching a listener&#x27;s ears consists not only of sound directly from the speaker system, but also the same sound delayed by traveling to and from (and being modified by) one or more surfaces. These reflected sound waves, when added to the direct sound, cause cancellation and addition at assorted frequencies (e.g. from resonant room modes), thus changing the timbre and character of the sound at the listener&#x27;s ears. The human brain is sensitive to small variations in reflected sound, and this is part of the reason why a loudspeaker system sounds different at different listening positions or in different rooms.

A significant factor in the sound of a loudspeaker system is the amount of absorption and diffusion present in the environment. Clapping one&#x27;s hands in a typical empty room, without draperies or carpet, produces a zippy, fluttery echo due to a lack of absorption and diffusion.

===Placement===
In a typical rectangular listening room, the hard, parallel surfaces of the walls, floor and ceiling cause primary acoustic resonance nodes in each of the three dimensions: left–right, up–down and forward–backward. Furthermore, there are more complex resonance modes involving up to all six boundary surfaces combining to create standing waves. This is called speaker boundary interference response (SBIR). Low frequencies excite these modes the most, since long wavelengths are not much affected by furniture compositions or placement. The mode spacing is critical, especially in small and medium-sized rooms like recording studios, home theaters and broadcast studios. The proximity of the loudspeakers to room boundaries affects how strongly the resonances are excited as well as affecting the relative strength at each frequency. The location of the listener is critical, too, as a position near a boundary can have a great effect on the perceived balance of frequencies. This is because standing wave patterns are most easily heard in these locations and at lower frequencies, below the Schroeder frequency—typically around 200–300 Hz, depending on room size.

===Directivity===
Acousticians, in studying the radiation of sound sources have developed some concepts important to understanding how loudspeakers are perceived. The simplest possible radiating source is a point source. An ideal point source is an infinitesimally small point radiating sound. It may be easier to imagine a tiny pulsating sphere, uniformly increasing and decreasing in diameter, sending out sound waves in all directions equally.

Any object radiating sound, including a loudspeaker system, can be thought of as being composed of combinations of such simple point sources. The radiation pattern of a combination of point sources is not the same as for a single source but depends on the distance and orientation between the sources, the position relative to them from which the listener hears the combination, and the frequency of the sound involved. Using mathematics, some simple combinations of sources are easily solved.

One simple combination is two simple sources separated by a distance and vibrating out of phase, one miniature sphere expanding while the other is contracting. The pair is known as a dipole, and the radiation of this combination is similar to that of a very small dynamic loudspeaker operating without a baffle. The directivity of a dipole is a figure-8 shape with maximum output along a vector that connects the two sources and minimum output to the sides when the observing point is equidistant from the two sourcesthe sum of the positive and negative waves cancel each other. While most drivers are dipoles, depending on the enclosure to which they are attached, they may radiate as point sources or dipoles. If mounted on a finite baffle, and these out-of-phase waves are allowed to interact, peaks and nulls in the frequency response result. When the rear radiation is absorbed or trapped in a box, the diaphragm becomes an approximate point-source radiator. Bipolar speakers, made by mounting in-phase drivers (both moving out of or into the box in unison) on opposite sides of a box, are a method of approaching omnidirectional radiation patterns.
In real life, individual drivers are complex 3D shapes such as cones and domes, and they are placed on a baffle for various reasons. A mathematical expression for the directivity of a complex shape, based on modeling combinations of point sources, is usually not possible, but in the far field, the directivity of a loudspeaker with a circular diaphragm is close to that of a flat circular piston, so it can be used as an illustrative simplification for discussion. As a simple example of the mathematical physics involved, consider the following:
the formula for far field directivity of a flat circular piston in an infinite baffle is 
where , is the pressure on axis, is the piston radius, is the wavelength (i.e. ) is the angle off axis and is the Bessel function of the first kind.

A planar source radiates sound uniformly for low frequencies&#x27; wavelengths longer than the dimensions of the planar source, and as frequency increases, the sound from such a source focuses into an increasingly narrower angle. The smaller the driver, the higher the frequency where this narrowing of directivity occurs. Even if the diaphragm is not perfectly circular, this effect occurs such that larger sources are more directive. Several loudspeaker designs approximate this behavior. Most are electrostatic or planar magnetic designs.

Various manufacturers use different driver mounting arrangements to create a specific type of sound field in the space for which they are designed. The resulting radiation patterns may be intended to more closely simulate the way sound is produced by real instruments, or simply create a controlled energy distribution from the input signal (some using this approach are called monitors, as they are useful in checking the signal just recorded in a studio). An example of the first is a room corner system with many small drivers on the surface of a 1/8 sphere. A system design of this type was patented and produced commercially by Professor Amar Bose—the 2201. Later Bose models have deliberately emphasized production of both direct and reflected sound by the loudspeaker itself, regardless of its environment. The designs are controversial in high fidelity circles, but have proven commercially successful. Several other manufacturers&#x27; designs follow similar principles.

Directivity is an important issue because it affects the frequency balance of sound a listener hears, and also the interaction of the speaker system with the room and its contents. A very directive (sometimes termed &#x27;beamy&#x27;) speaker (i.e. on an axis perpendicular to the speaker face) may result in a reverberant field lacking in high frequencies, giving the impression the speaker is deficient in treble even though it measures well on axis (e.g. &quot;flat&quot; across the entire frequency range). Speakers with very wide, or rapidly increasing directivity at high frequencies, can give the impression that there is too much treble (if the listener is on axis) or too little (if the listener is off axis). This is part of the reason why on-axis frequency response measurement is not a complete characterization of the sound of a given loudspeaker.
==Other speaker designs==
While dynamic cone speakers remain the most popular choice, many other speaker technologies exist.

===With a diaphragm===

====Moving-iron loudspeakers====

The original loudspeaker design was the moving iron. Unlike the newer dynamic (moving coil) design, a moving-iron speaker uses a stationary coil to vibrate a magnetized piece of metal (called the iron, reed, or armature). The metal is either attached to the diaphragm or is the diaphragm itself. This design originally appeared in the early telephone. 

Moving iron drivers are inefficient and can only produce a small band of sound. They require large magnets and coils to increase force.

Balanced armature drivers (a type of moving iron driver) use an armature that moves like a see-saw or diving board. Since they are not damped, they are highly efficient, but they also produce strong resonances. They are still used today for high-end earphones and hearing aids, where small size and high efficiency are important.

====Piezoelectric speakers====


Piezoelectric speakers are frequently used as beepers in watches and other electronic devices, and are sometimes used as tweeters in less-expensive speaker systems, such as computer speakers and portable radios. Piezoelectric speakers have several advantages over conventional loudspeakers: they are resistant to overloads that would normally destroy most high-frequency drivers, and they can be used without a crossover due to their electrical properties. There are also disadvantages: some amplifiers can oscillate when driving capacitive loads like most piezoelectrics, which results in distortion or damage to the amplifier. Additionally, their frequency response, in most cases, is inferior to that of other technologies. This is why they are generally used in single-frequency (beeper) or non-critical applications.

Piezoelectric speakers can have extended high-frequency output, and this is useful in some specialized circumstances; for instance, sonar applications in which piezoelectric variants are used as both output devices (generating underwater sound) and as input devices (acting as the sensing components of underwater microphones). They have advantages in these applications, not the least of which is simple and solid-state construction that resists seawater better than a ribbon or cone-based device would.

In 2013, Kyocera introduced piezoelectric ultra-thin medium-size film speakers with only one millimeter of thickness and seven grams of weight for their 55&quot; OLED televisions and they hope the speakers will also be used in PCs and tablets. Besides medium-size, there are also large and small sizes which can all produce relatively the same quality of sound and volume within 180 degrees. The highly responsive speaker material provides better clarity than traditional TV speakers.

====Magnetostatic loudspeakers====

Instead of a voice coil driving a speaker cone, a magnetostatic speaker uses an array of metal strips bonded to a large film membrane. The magnetic field produced by signal current flowing through the strips interacts with the field of permanent bar magnets mounted behind them. The force produced moves the membrane and so the air in front of it. Typically, these designs are less efficient than conventional moving-coil speakers.

====Magnetostrictive speakers====
Magnetostrictive transducers, based on magnetostriction, have been predominantly used as sonar ultrasonic sound wave radiators, but their use has spread also to audio speaker systems. Magnetostrictive speaker drivers have some special advantages: they can provide greater force (with smaller excursions) than other technologies; low excursion can avoid distortions from large excursion as in other designs; the magnetizing coil is stationary and therefore more easily cooled; they are robust because delicate suspensions and voice coils are not required. Magnetostrictive speaker modules have been produced by Fostex and FeONIC and subwoofer drivers have also been produced.

====Electrostatic loudspeakers====

Electrostatic loudspeakers use a high-voltage electric field (rather than a magnetic field) to drive a thin statically charged membrane. Because they are driven over the entire membrane surface rather than from a small voice coil, they ordinarily provide a more linear and lower-distortion motion than dynamic drivers. They also have a relatively narrow dispersion pattern that can make for precise sound-field positioning. However, their optimum listening area is small and they are not very efficient speakers. They have the disadvantage that the diaphragm excursion is severely limited because of practical construction limitations—the further apart the stators are positioned, the higher the voltage must be to achieve acceptable efficiency. This increases the tendency for electrical arcs as well as increasing the speaker&#x27;s attraction of dust particles. Arcing remains a potential problem with current technologies, especially when the panels are allowed to collect dust or dirt and are driven with high signal levels.

Electrostatics are inherently dipole radiators and due to the thin flexible membrane are less suited for use in enclosures to reduce low-frequency cancellation as with common cone drivers. Due to this and the low excursion capability, full-range electrostatic loudspeakers are large by nature, and the bass rolls off at a frequency corresponding to a quarter wavelength of the narrowest panel dimension. To reduce the size of commercial products, they are sometimes used as a high-frequency driver in combination with a conventional dynamic driver that handles the bass frequencies effectively.

Electrostatics are usually driven through a step-up transformer that multiplies the voltage swings produced by the power amplifier. This transformer also multiplies the capacitive load that is inherent in electrostatic transducers, which means the effective impedance presented to the power amplifiers varies widely by frequency. A speaker that is nominally 8 ohms may actually present a load of 1 ohm at higher frequencies, which is challenging to some amplifier designs.

====Ribbon and planar magnetic loudspeakers====
A ribbon speaker consists of a thin metal-film ribbon suspended in a magnetic field. The electrical signal is applied to the ribbon, which moves with it to create the sound. The advantage of a ribbon driver is that the ribbon has very little mass; thus, it can accelerate very quickly, yielding a very good high-frequency response. Ribbon loudspeakers are often very fragile. Most ribbon tweeters emit sound in a dipole pattern. A few have backings that limit the dipole radiation pattern. Above and below the ends of the more or less rectangular ribbon, there is less audible output due to phase cancellation, but the precise amount of directivity depends on the ribbon length. Ribbon designs generally require exceptionally powerful magnets, which makes them costly to manufacture. Ribbons have a very low resistance that most amplifiers cannot drive directly. As a result, a step down transformer is typically used to increase the current through the ribbon. The amplifier &quot;sees&quot; a load that is the ribbon&#x27;s resistance times the transformer turns ratio squared. The transformer must be carefully designed so that its frequency response and parasitic losses do not degrade the sound, further increasing cost and complication relative to conventional designs.

Planar magnetic speakers (having printed or embedded conductors on a flat diaphragm) are sometimes described as ribbons, but are not truly ribbon speakers. The term planar is generally reserved for speakers with roughly rectangular flat surfaces that radiate in a bipolar (i.e. front and back) manner. Planar magnetic speakers consist of a flexible membrane with a voice coil printed or mounted on it. The current flowing through the coil interacts with the magnetic field of carefully placed magnets on either side of the diaphragm, causing the membrane to vibrate more or less uniformly and without much bending or wrinkling. The driving force covers a large percentage of the membrane surface and reduces resonance problems inherent in coil-driven flat diaphragms.

====Bending wave loudspeakers====
Bending wave transducers use a diaphragm that is intentionally flexible. The rigidity of the material increases from the center to the outside. Short wavelengths radiate primarily from the inner area, while longer waves reach the edge of the speaker. To prevent reflections from the outside back into the center, long waves are absorbed by a surrounding damper. Such transducers can cover a wide frequency range (80 Hz to 35,000 Hz) and have been promoted as being close to an ideal point sound source. This uncommon approach is being taken by only a very few manufacturers, in very different arrangements.

The Ohm Walsh loudspeakers use a unique driver designed by Lincoln Walsh, who had been a radar development engineer in WWII. He became interested in audio equipment design and his last project was a unique, one-way speaker using a single driver. The cone faced down into a sealed, airtight enclosure. Rather than move back and forth as conventional speakers do, the cone rippled and created sound in a manner known in RF electronics as a &quot;transmission line&quot;. The new speaker created a cylindrical sound field. Lincoln Walsh died before his speaker was released to the public. The Ohm Acoustics firm has produced several loudspeaker models using the Walsh driver design since then. German Physiks, an audio equipment firm in Germany, also produces speakers using this approach.

The German firm Manger has designed and produced a bending wave driver that at first glance appears conventional. In fact, the round panel attached to the voice coil bends in a carefully controlled way to produce full-range sound. Josef W. Manger was awarded with the Rudolf-Diesel-Medaille for extraordinary developments and inventions by the German institute of inventions.

====Flat panel loudspeakers====
There have been many attempts to reduce the size of speaker systems, or alternatively to make them less obvious. One such attempt was the development of &quot;exciter&quot; transducer coils mounted to flat panels to act as sound sources, most accurately called exciter/panel drivers. These can then be made in a neutral color and hung on walls where they are less noticeable than many speakers, or can be deliberately painted with patterns, in which case they can function decoratively. There are two related problems with flat panel techniques: first, a flat panel is necessarily more flexible than a cone shape in the same material, and therefore moves as a single unit even less, and second, resonances in the panel are difficult to control, leading to considerable distortions. Some progress has been made using such lightweight, rigid, materials such as Styrofoam, and there have been several flat panel systems commercially produced in recent years.

====Heil air motion transducers====

Oskar Heil invented the air motion transducer in the 1960s. In this approach, a pleated diaphragm is mounted in a magnetic field and forced to close and open under control of a music signal. Air is forced from between the pleats in accordance with the imposed signal, generating sound. The drivers are less fragile than ribbons and considerably more efficient (and able to produce higher absolute output levels) than ribbon, electrostatic, or planar magnetic tweeter designs. ESS, a California manufacturer, licensed the design, employed Heil, and produced a range of speaker systems using his tweeters during the 1970s and 1980s. Lafayette Radio, a large US retail store chain, also sold speaker systems using such tweeters for a time. There are several manufacturers of these drivers (at least two in Germany—one of which produces a range of high-end professional speakers using tweeters and mid-range drivers based on the technology) and the drivers are increasingly used in professional audio. Martin Logan produces several AMT speakers in the US and GoldenEar Technologies incorporates them in its entire speaker line.

====Transparent ionic conduction speaker====
In 2013, a research team introduced a transparent ionic conduction speaker which has two sheets of transparent conductive gel and a layer of transparent rubber in between to make high voltage and high actuation work to reproduce good sound quality. The speaker is suitable for robotics, mobile computing and adaptive optics fields.

===Digital speakers===
Digital speakers have been the subject of experiments performed by Bell Labs as far back as the 1920s. The design is simple; each bit controls a driver, which is either fully &#x27;on&#x27; or &#x27;off&#x27;. Problems with this design have led manufacturers to abandon it as impractical for the present. First, for a reasonable number of bits (required for adequate sound reproduction quality), the physical size of a speaker system becomes very large. Secondly, due to inherent analog-to-digital conversion problems, the effect of aliasing is unavoidable, so that the audio output is &quot;reflected&quot; at equal amplitude in the frequency domain, on the other side of the Nyquist limit (half the sampling frequency), causing an unacceptably high level of ultrasonics to accompany the desired output. No workable scheme has been found to adequately deal with this.

===Without a diaphragm===

====Plasma arc speakers====

Plasma arc loudspeakers use electrical plasma as a radiating element. Since plasma has minimal mass, but is charged and therefore can be manipulated by an electric field, the result is a very linear output at frequencies far higher than the audible range. Problems of maintenance and reliability for this approach tend to make it unsuitable for mass market use. In 1978 Alan E. Hill of the Air Force Weapons Laboratory in Albuquerque, NM, designed the Plasmatronics Hill Type I, a tweeter whose plasma was generated from helium gas. This avoided the ozone and NOx produced by RF decomposition of air in an earlier generation of plasma tweeters made by the pioneering DuKane Corporation, who produced the Ionovac (marketed as the Ionofane in the UK) during the 1950s.

A less expensive variation on this theme is the use of a flame for the driver, as flames contain ionized (electrically charged) gases.

====Thermoacoustic speakers====
In 2008, researchers of Tsinghua University demonstrated a thermoacoustic loudspeaker (or &quot;thermophone&quot;) of carbon nanotube thin film, whose working mechanism is a thermoacoustic effect. Sound frequency electric currents are used to periodically heat the CNT and thus result in sound generation in the surrounding air. The CNT thin film loudspeaker is transparent, stretchable and flexible.
In 2013, researchers of Tsinghua University further present a thermoacoustic earphone of carbon nanotube thin yarn and a thermoacoustic surface-mounted device. They are both fully integrated devices and compatible with Si-based semiconducting technology.

====Rotary woofers====
A rotary woofer is essentially a fan with blades that constantly change their pitch, allowing them to easily push the air back and forth. Rotary woofers are able to efficiently reproduce subsonic frequencies, which are difficult to impossible to achieve on a traditional speaker with a diaphragm. They are often employed in movie theaters to recreate rumbling bass effects, such as explosions.

==See also==

* Audio power
* Audiophile
* Bandwidth extension
* Digital speaker
* Directional sound
* Earphone
* Echo cancellation
* Electronics
* Ferrofluid#Heat transfer
* Guitar speaker
* Headphones
* High-end audio
* Isobaric loudspeaker
* List of loudspeaker manufacturers
* Loudspeaker acoustics
* Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD)
* Music center
* Parabolic loudspeaker
* Phase plug
* Planephones
* Rotary woofer
* Shelf stereo
* Sound from ultrasound
* Soundbar
* Speaker driver
* Speaker stands
* Speaker wire
* Speakerphone
* Studio monitor
* Super tweeter
* Surround sound
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Conversion of sensitivity to energy efficiency in percent for passive loudspeakers
* Article on sensitivity and efficiency of loudspeakers (PDF)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="2" end="13" title="Loudspeaker" label="loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="41" end="48" title="Loudspeaker" label="speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="67" end="81" title="Loudspeaker" label="speaker system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530852" start="115" end="129" title="speaker driver" label="speaker driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q59123" start="135" end="144" title="Loudspeaker enclosure" label="enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455645" start="195" end="212" title="Audio crossover" label="crossover network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="240" end="255" title="Acoustical engineering#Electroacoustics" label="electroacoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215928" start="256" end="266" title="transducer" label="transducer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650799" start="295" end="307" title="audio signal" label="audio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="329" end="334" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164566" start="354" end="366" title="linear motor" label="linear motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271779" start="382" end="391" title="Diaphragm (acoustics)" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="747" end="757" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="869" end="887" title="dynamic microphone" label="dynamic microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="920" end="929" title="Electric generator" label="generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293995" start="976" end="993" title="Edward W. Kellogg" label="Edward W. Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093769" start="998" end="1013" title="Chester W. Rice" label="Chester W. Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369121" start="1083" end="1093" title="voice coil" label="voice coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981904" start="1096" end="1108" title="Electromagnetic coil" label="coil of wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="1211" end="1227" title="permanent magnet" label="permanent magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q181465" start="1285" end="1316" title="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law of induction" label="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law of induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271779" start="1337" end="1346" title="diaphragm (acoustics)" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="1461" end="1471" title="sound wave" label="sound wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564743" start="1736" end="1743" title="Sound baffle" label="baffled"/>
<link wikidata="Q59123" start="1878" end="1895" title="speaker enclosure" label="speaker enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q26674" start="2111" end="2124" title="high fidelity" label="high fidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413664" start="2242" end="2259" title="Audio frequency" label="audible frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q399793" start="2351" end="2358" title="tweeter" label="tweeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367025" start="2401" end="2410" title="Mid-range speaker" label="mid-range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324405" start="2460" end="2466" title="woofer" label="woofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="2535" end="2537" title="Hertz" label="Hz"/>
<link wikidata="Q770289" start="2563" end="2572" title="subwoofer" label="subwoofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455645" start="2780" end="2797" title="crossover network" label="crossover network"/>
<link wikidata="Q422841" start="2934" end="2949" title="powered speaker" label="powered speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="3191" end="3197" title="Radio receiver" label="radios"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="3199" end="3209" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347599" start="3212" end="3233" title="portable audio player" label="portable audio player"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="3236" end="3253" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209975" start="3256" end="3273" title="computer speakers" label="computer speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="3276" end="3286" title="headphones" label="headphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="3292" end="3301" title="earphones" label="earphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q622324" start="3311" end="3317" title="Loudness" label="louder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327500" start="3389" end="3418" title="electronic musical instrument" label="electronic musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q829504" start="3421" end="3440" title="Sound reinforcement system" label="sound reinforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="3479" end="3500" title="public address system" label="public address system"/>
<link wikidata="Q59123" start="3672" end="3681" title="Loudspeaker enclosure" label="enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068172" start="3873" end="3893" title="sound pressure level" label="sound pressure level"/>
<link wikidata="Q770289" start="4012" end="4021" title="subwoofer" label="subwoofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324405" start="4051" end="4057" title="woofer" label="woofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367025" start="4078" end="4095" title="mid-range speaker" label="mid-range speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q399793" start="4119" end="4126" title="tweeter" label="tweeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977653" start="4162" end="4175" title="supertweeters" label="supertweeters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455645" start="4515" end="4530" title="audio crossover" label="audio crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326952" start="5008" end="5027" title="moving iron speaker" label="moving iron speaker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5049" end="5062" title="Piezoelectric speakers#Piezo tweeter" label="piezoelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327626" start="5066" end="5079" title="Electrostatic loudspeaker" label="electrostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q77124" start="5102" end="5121" title="Johann Philipp Reis" label="Johann Philipp Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="5169" end="5178" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="5286" end="5292" title="speech" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="5294" end="5315" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q58577" start="5509" end="5522" title="Ernst Siemens" label="Ernst Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="5542" end="5555" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q150910" start="5891" end="5906" title="Charles Algernon Parsons" label="Charles Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470329" start="6002" end="6032" title="Victor Talking Machine Company" label="Victor Talking Machine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="6037" end="6042" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="6271" end="6285" title="public address" label="public address"/>
<link wikidata="Q379816" start="6586" end="6598" title="Oliver Lodge" label="Oliver Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143937" start="6690" end="6705" title="Peter L. Jensen" label="Peter L. Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60537" start="6736" end="6752" title="Napa, California" label="Napa, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="7000" end="7021" title="public address system" label="public address system"/>
<link wikidata="Q630670" start="7048" end="7056" title="Magnavox" label="Magnavox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293995" start="7242" end="7259" title="Edward W. Kellogg" label="Edward W. Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093769" start="7264" end="7279" title="Chester W. Rice" label="Chester W. Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054694" start="7433" end="7451" title="frequency response" label="frequency response"/>
<link wikidata="Q178032" start="7484" end="7497" title="electromagnet" label="electromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="7524" end="7540" title="permanent magnet" label="permanent magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q864746" start="7782" end="7792" title="choke coil" label="choke coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q204157" start="7808" end="7820" title="power supply" label="power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q758907" start="7828" end="7837" title="audio power amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q658684" start="8319" end="8325" title="alnico" label="alnico"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="8754" end="8773" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242895" start="8950" end="8971" title="John Kenneth Hilliard" label="John Kenneth Hilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3160959" start="8973" end="8995" title="James Bullough Lansing" label="James Bullough Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8651" start="9001" end="9016" title="Douglas Shearer" label="Douglas Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="9065" end="9096" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q745296" start="9167" end="9183" title="Flushing Meadows" label="Flushing Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377581" start="9243" end="9253" title="Rudy Bozak" label="Rudy Bozak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031258" start="9345" end="9361" title="Western Electric" label="Western Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q436492" start="9364" end="9377" title="Altec Lansing" label="Altec Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002690" start="9449" end="9455" title="Altec Lansing Duplex" label="Duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="9915" end="9925" title="Cinema (place)" label="film house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337507" start="9963" end="9977" title="Edgar Villchur" label="Edgar Villchur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505717" start="9992" end="10011" title="acoustic suspension" label="acoustic suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q705488" start="10170" end="10181" title="Henry Kloss" label="Henry Kloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674655" start="10193" end="10210" title="Acoustic Research" label="Acoustic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="10606" end="10612" title="magnet" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="10657" end="10678" title="computer-aided design" label="computer-aided design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371407" start="10729" end="10752" title="Thiele/Small parameters" label="Thiele/Small parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q540614" start="10831" end="10838" title="synergy" label="synergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="10981" end="10987" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="11158" end="11175" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674690" start="11355" end="11370" title="acoustic lobing" label="acoustic lobing"/>
<link wikidata="Q332774" start="11452" end="11468" title="anechoic chamber" label="anechoic chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209975" start="12724" end="12740" title="computer speaker" label="computer speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q26674" start="12747" end="12752" title="hi-fi" label="hi-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212758" start="14077" end="14088" title="clock radio" label="clock radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044630" start="14519" end="14522" title="THX" label="THX"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="14831" end="14842" title="diffraction" label="diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q758907" start="15568" end="15583" title="power amplifier" label="power amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q212082" start="15600" end="15608" title="Infrasound" label="subsonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q810553" start="16370" end="16381" title="bass reflex" label="bass reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q59123" start="16605" end="16622" title="speaker enclosure" label="speaker enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157037" start="17264" end="17282" title="compression driver" label="compression driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628295" start="17488" end="17492" title="Horn loudspeaker" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q436492" start="18393" end="18398" title="Altec Lansing" label="Altec"/>
<link wikidata="Q742568" start="18400" end="18406" title="Tannoy" label="Tannoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156034" start="18408" end="18415" title="Pioneer Corporation" label="Pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870568" start="18417" end="18420" title="KEF" label="KEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932290" start="18451" end="18458" title="Cabasse (company)" label="Cabasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088115" start="18463" end="18470" title="Genelec" label="Genelec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882278" start="18631" end="18645" title="frequency band" label="frequency band"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18921" end="18938" title="Audio crossover#Passive crossovers" label="passive crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="19003" end="19011" title="resistor" label="resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="19028" end="19037" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q254758" start="19637" end="19645" title="passband" label="passband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269719" start="19683" end="19697" title="damping factor" label="damping factor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19725" end="19741" title="Audio crossover#Active crossovers" label="active crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q947396" start="21153" end="21167" title="insertion loss" label="insertion loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q18433212" start="21691" end="21716" title="dynamic range compression" label="dynamic range compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613840" start="21721" end="21729" title="limiting" label="limiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="22023" end="22035" title="out of phase" label="out of phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993315" start="23358" end="23368" title="glass wool" label="glass wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q810553" start="23752" end="23763" title="bass reflex" label="bass reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628295" start="24726" end="24742" title="Horn loudspeaker" label="Horn loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512054" start="24798" end="24803" title="Horn (acoustic)" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q216217" start="24824" end="24833" title="megaphone" label="megaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="24905" end="24916" title="Phonograph" label="gramophones"/>
<link wikidata="Q11233438" start="24966" end="24975" title="waveguide" label="waveguide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295020" start="26212" end="26223" title="Sensitivity (electroacoustics)" label="sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041368" start="26567" end="26596" title="transmission line loudspeaker" label="transmission line loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q580871" start="26644" end="26670" title="acoustic transmission line" label="acoustic transmission line"/>
<link wikidata="Q159391" start="27153" end="27161" title="Receiver (radio)" label="receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q112225412" start="27230" end="27242" title="binding post" label="binding post"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="27363" end="27382" title="electrical polarity" label="electrical polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="28094" end="28103" title="PA system" label="PA system"/>
<link wikidata="Q107008558" start="28108" end="28128" title="instrument amplifier" label="instrument amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="28288" end="28302" title="1/4&amp;quot; jack" label="1/4&amp;quot; jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q776979" start="28402" end="28409" title="Speakon" label="Speakon"/>
<link wikidata="Q422841" start="28645" end="28661" title="powered speakers" label="powered speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q760929" start="29132" end="29142" title="full-range" label="full-range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367025" start="29164" end="29173" title="Mid-range speaker" label="mid-range"/>
<link wikidata="Q617965" start="29606" end="29611" title="Audio power" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="29981" end="29990" title="Electrical impedance" label="Impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353390" start="30321" end="30337" title="background music" label="background music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054694" start="31346" end="31364" title="Frequency response" label="Frequency response"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371407" start="31576" end="31599" title="Thiele/Small" label="Thiele/Small parameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269719" start="31761" end="31775" title="damping factor" label="damping factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295020" start="31877" end="31888" title="Sensitivity (electroacoustics)" label="Sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q177897" start="32661" end="32671" title="Electrical inductance" label="inductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q179043" start="33091" end="33111" title="electrical impedance" label="electrical impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q164399" start="33149" end="33159" title="Capacitance" label="capacitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q177897" start="33164" end="33173" title="Inductance" label="inductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q193972" start="33174" end="33183" title="Electrical reactance" label="reactance"/>
<link wikidata="Q106603432" start="33530" end="33539" title="resistive" label="resistive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686070" start="34185" end="34208" title="loudspeaker measurement" label="loudspeaker measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347355" start="34434" end="34442" title="harmonic distortion" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142232" start="34447" end="34473" title="intermodulation distortion" label="intermodulation distortion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34843" end="34870" title="Sound pressure#Sound pressure level" label="decibels relative to 20 μPa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588477" start="34967" end="34978" title="sound power" label="sound power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761108" start="35340" end="35358" title="impedance matching" label="impedance matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q975684" start="35371" end="35389" title="acoustic impedance" label="acoustic impedance"/>
<link wikidata="Q59123" start="36470" end="36485" title="infinite baffle" label="infinite baffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q622324" start="38424" end="38432" title="loudness" label="loudness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398821" start="39087" end="39100" title="rule of thumb" label="rule of thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406681" start="39152" end="39164" title="J. Anton Hofmann" label="J.A. Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812083" start="39175" end="39178" title="KLH (company)" label="KLH"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133384" start="39807" end="39826" title="resonant room modes" label="resonant room modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758948" start="40184" end="40194" title="Absorption (acoustics)" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224550" start="40199" end="40208" title="Diffusion (acoustics)" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558427" start="40524" end="40542" title="acoustic resonance" label="acoustic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="40738" end="40751" title="standing wave" label="standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182127" start="41501" end="41520" title="Schroeder frequency" label="Schroeder frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552709" start="41782" end="41794" title="point source" label="point source"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280043" start="42701" end="42707" title="Dipole speaker" label="dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q219637" start="44425" end="44440" title="Bessel function" label="Bessel function"/>
<link wikidata="Q543405" start="45382" end="45390" title="studio monitor" label="monitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q328568" start="45673" end="45677" title="Bose Corporation" label="Bose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45851" end="45872" title="Bose Corporation#Criticisms" label="high fidelity circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="47771" end="47780" title="earphones" label="earphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="47942" end="47947" title="watch" label="watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q133220" start="48840" end="48845" title="sonar" label="sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q798062" start="49011" end="49032" title="underwater microphone" label="underwater microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q745099" start="49223" end="49230" title="Kyocera" label="Kyocera"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="49376" end="49380" title="OLED" label="OLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q840970" start="50242" end="50258" title="magnetostriction" label="magnetostriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q133220" start="50292" end="50297" title="sonar" label="sonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439280" start="50824" end="50830" title="FeONIC" label="FeONIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360852" start="52253" end="52262" title="roll-off" label="rolls off"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="53306" end="53310" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q172137" start="54747" end="54813" title="Laplace force" label="current flowing through the coil interacts with the magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007160" start="55811" end="55824" title="Lincoln Walsh" label="Lincoln Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172237" start="56808" end="56830" title="Rudolf-Diesel-Medaille" label="Rudolf-Diesel-Medaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194725" start="57808" end="57817" title="Styrofoam" label="Styrofoam"/>
<link wikidata="Q78431" start="57943" end="57953" title="Oskar Heil" label="Oskar Heil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471503" start="58574" end="58589" title="Lafayette Radio" label="Lafayette Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276165" start="59469" end="59485" title="Digital speakers" label="Digital speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="59536" end="59545" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="59599" end="59602" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="59836" end="59854" title="Sound recording and reproduction" label="sound reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="59949" end="59977" title="analog-to-digital conversion" label="analog-to-digital conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q868732" start="60002" end="60010" title="aliasing" label="aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501757" start="60146" end="60159" title="Nyquist limit" label="Nyquist limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="60229" end="60240" title="Ultrasound" label="ultrasonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q123262" start="60395" end="60417" title="Plasma arc loudspeaker" label="Plasma arc loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="60434" end="60440" title="Plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="60550" end="60564" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201804" start="60847" end="60860" title="Plasmatronics" label="Plasmatronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="60916" end="60922" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="60945" end="60950" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="60955" end="60958" title="NOx" label="NOx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="60971" end="60973" title="Radio frequency" label="RF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420094" start="61390" end="61416" title="thermophone" label="thermoacoustic loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="61449" end="61464" title="carbon nanotube" label="carbon nanotube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370285" start="62013" end="62026" title="rotary woofer" label="rotary woofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212082" start="62198" end="62206" title="Infrasound" label="subsonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q617965" start="62422" end="62433" title="Audio power" label="Audio power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035081" start="62436" end="62446" title="Audiophile" label="Audiophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854770" start="62449" end="62468" title="Bandwidth extension" label="Bandwidth extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276165" start="62471" end="62486" title="Digital speaker" label="Digital speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280449" start="62489" end="62506" title="Directional sound" label="Directional sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="62509" end="62517" title="Earphone" label="Earphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q365756" start="62520" end="62537" title="Echo cancellation" label="Echo cancellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="62540" end="62551" title="Electronics" label="Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62554" end="62578" title="Ferrofluid#Heat transfer" label="Ferrofluid#Heat transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206668" start="62581" end="62595" title="Guitar speaker" label="Guitar speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="62598" end="62608" title="Headphones" label="Headphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348534" start="62611" end="62625" title="High-end audio" label="High-end audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085260" start="62628" end="62648" title="Isobaric loudspeaker" label="Isobaric loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626752" start="62651" end="62684" title="List of loudspeaker manufacturers" label="List of loudspeaker manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686069" start="62687" end="62708" title="Loudspeaker acoustics" label="Loudspeaker acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1927571" start="62711" end="62737" title="Long Range Acoustic Device" label="Long Range Acoustic Device"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888931" start="62747" end="62759" title="Music centre" label="Music center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133736" start="62762" end="62783" title="Parabolic loudspeaker" label="Parabolic loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231050" start="62786" end="62796" title="Phase plug" label="Phase plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201025" start="62799" end="62810" title="Planephones" label="Planephones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370285" start="62813" end="62826" title="Rotary woofer" label="Rotary woofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888931" start="62829" end="62841" title="Shelf stereo" label="Shelf stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490019" start="62844" end="62865" title="Sound from ultrasound" label="Sound from ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900397" start="62868" end="62876" title="Soundbar" label="Soundbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530852" start="62879" end="62893" title="Speaker driver" label="Speaker driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574320" start="62896" end="62910" title="Speaker stands" label="Speaker stands"/>
<link wikidata="Q922477" start="62913" end="62925" title="Speaker wire" label="Speaker wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231780" start="62928" end="62940" title="Speakerphone" label="Speakerphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q543405" start="62943" end="62957" title="Studio monitor" label="Studio monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977653" start="62960" end="62973" title="Super tweeter" label="Super tweeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q569874" start="62976" end="62990" title="Surround sound" label="Surround sound"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45876" wikidata="Q1208337" url="?curid=45876" title="First strike (nuclear strategy)">
<text>In nuclear strategy, a first strike or preemptive strike is a preemptive surprise attack employing overwhelming force. First strike capability is a country&#x27;s ability to defeat another nuclear power by destroying its arsenal to the point where the attacking country can survive the weakened retaliation while the opposing side is left unable to continue war. The preferred methodology is to attack the opponent&#x27;s strategic nuclear weapon facilities (missile silos, submarine bases, bomber airfields), command and control sites, and storage depots first. The strategy is called counterforce.

==Historical background==

&quot;First-strike attack&quot;, the use of a nuclear first strike capability, was greatly feared during the Cold War between NATO and the Soviet Bloc. At various points, fear of a first strike attack existed on both sides. Misunderstood changes in posture and well understood changes in technology used by either side often led to speculation regarding the enemy&#x27;s intentions.

=== 1948–1961 ===
In the aftermath of World War II, the leadership of the Soviet Union feared the United States would use its nuclear superiority to initiate a full-scale attack, as from 1945 to 1948 the U.S. was the only state possessing nuclear weapons and until the late 1960s preserved an overwhelming superiority. The USSR countered by rapidly developing their own nuclear weapons, surprising the US with their first test in 1949. In turn, the U.S. countered by developing the vastly more powerful thermonuclear weapon, testing their first hydrogen bomb in 1952 at Ivy Mike, but the USSR quickly countered by testing their own thermonuclear weapons, with a test in 1953 of a semi-thermonuclear weapon of the Sloika design, and in 1956, with the testing of Sakharov&#x27;s Third Idea – equivalent to the Castle Bravo device. Meanwhile, tensions between the two nations rose as 1956 saw Soviet invasion of Hungary; the U.S. and European nations drew certain conclusions from that event, while in the U.S., a powerful social backlash was afoot, prompted by Senator Joseph McCarthy, the House Un-American Activities Committee, and Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, U.S. citizens executed in 1953 after conviction of espionage. This atmosphere was further inflamed by the 1957 launch of Sputnik, which led to fears of Communists attacking from outer space, as well as concerns that if the Soviets could launch a device into orbit, they could equally cause a device to re-enter the atmosphere and impact any part of the planet. John F. Kennedy capitalized on this situation by emphasizing the bomber gap and the missile gap, areas in which the Soviets were (inaccurately) perceived as leading the United States, while heated Soviet rhetoric added to political pressure. The 1960 U-2 incident, involving Francis Gary Powers, as well as the Berlin Crisis, along with the test of the Tsar Bomba, escalated tensions still further.

=== Cuban Missile Crisis ===
This escalating situation came to a head with the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962. The arrival of Soviet missiles in Cuba was conducted by the Soviets on the rationale that the US already had nuclear missiles stationed in Turkey, as well as the desire by Fidel Castro to increase his power, his freedom of action, and to protect his government from US invasion, such as had been attempted during the Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961. During the crisis, Fidel Castro wrote Khrushchev a letter about the prospect that the &quot;imperialists&quot; would be &quot;extremely dangerous&quot; if they responded militarily to the Soviet stationing of nuclear missiles aimed at US territory, less than 90 miles away in Cuba. The following quotation from the letter suggests that Castro was calling for a Soviet first strike against the US if it responded militarily to the placement of nuclear missiles aimed at the US in Cuba:

If the second variant takes place and the imperialists invade Cuba with the aim of occupying it, the dangers of their aggressive policy are so great that after such an invasion the Soviet Union must never allow circumstances in which the imperialists could carry out a nuclear first strike against it. I tell you this because I believe that the imperialists&#x27; aggressiveness makes them extremely dangerous, and that if they manage to carry out an invasion of Cuba—a brutal act in violation of universal and moral law—then that would be the moment to eliminate this danger forever, in an act of the most legitimate self-defense. However harsh and terrible the solution, there would be no other.

The Cuban Missile Crisis resulted in Nikita Khrushchev publicly agreeing to remove the missiles from Cuba, while John F. Kennedy secretly agreed to remove his country&#x27;s missiles from Turkey. Both sides in the Cold War realized how close they came to nuclear war over Cuba, and decided to seek a reduction of tensions, resulting in US-Soviet détente for most of the 1960s and 1970s.

Nonetheless, this reduction of tensions only applied to the US and the USSR. Recently declassified interviews with high level former Soviet nuclear and military–industrial planners reveal that Fidel Castro continued to favour nuclear options, even during the later Cold War – according to former Soviet General Andrian Danilevich, &quot;(...in the early 1980s...) Cuban leader Fidel Castro pressed the USSR to take a tougher line against the United States, including possible nuclear strikes. The Soviet Union, in response, sent experts to spell out for Castro the ecological consequences for Cuba of nuclear strikes on the United States. Castro, according to the general, quickly became convinced of the undesirability of such outcomes.&quot;

=== 1970s/1980s ===
However, tensions were inflamed again in the late 1970s and early 1980s with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the Soviet deployment of the SS-20 Saber and the SS-18 Satan, and the decision of NATO to deploy the new Pershing II IRBM as well as the Tomahawk Ground Launched Cruise Missile, along with U.S. President Ronald Reagan&#x27;s talk of &#x27;limited&#x27; nuclear war. This increased Soviet fears that NATO was planning an attack. NATO&#x27;s deployment of these missiles was a response to the Soviet deployment of the SS-20 Saber, which could hit most European NATO bases within minutes of launch. These mutual deployments led to a destabilizing strategic situation, which was exacerbated by malfunctioning U.S. and Soviet missile launch early warning systems, a Soviet intelligence gap that prevented the Soviets from getting a &quot;read&quot; on the strategic intentions of U.S. leaders, as well as inflammatory U.S. rhetoric combined with classical Soviet mistrust of the NATO powers. This culminated in a war scare that occurred during 1983 due to the inopportune timing of a NATO exercise called Able Archer, which was a simulation of a NATO nuclear attack on the Soviet Union; this exercise happened to occur during a massive Soviet intelligence mobilization called VRYAN, that was designed to discover intentions of NATO to initiate a nuclear first-strike. This poor timing drove the world very close to nuclear war, possibly even closer than the Cuban Missile Crisis over 20 years before.

==Terms used==
*CEP – circular error probable; the radius within which a weapon aimed at a given point will land with a 50% confidence; for example, a CEP of 150 m indicates that 50% of the time, the weapon will impact within 150 m of the target. This measure of accuracy assumes that everything up to the point of impact works correctly.
*Range – the maximum distance from a target a weapon can be fired to successfully hit the point where it is targeted at. (When range is used without qualifiers, like maximum or minimum, it is assumed that it refers to maximum; however, many of these described weapons have minimum ranges as well, though they are not mentioned, or, in all likelihood, even known to the public.)
*kt/Mt – This is an approximate measure of how much energy is released by the detonation of a nuclear weapon; kt stands for kilotons TNT, Mt stands for megatons TNT. Conventional science of the period contemporary to the Manhattan project came up with these measures so as to reasonably analogize the incredible energy of a nuclear detonation in a form that would be understandable to the military, politicians, or civilians. Trinitrotoluene (TNT) was and is a high explosive with industrial and military uses, and is around 40% more powerfully explosive than an equivalent weight of gunpowder. A ton is equivalent to 1000 kg or approximately 2200 pounds. A 20 kt nuclear device, therefore, liberates as much energy as does the explosion of 20,000 tons of TNT (this is the origin of the term, for the exact definition see TNT equivalent). This is a large quantity of energy. In addition, unlike TNT, the detonation of a nuclear device also emits ionizing radiation that can harm living organisms, including humans; the prompt radiation from the blast itself and the fallout can persist for a long period of time, though within hours to weeks, the radiation from a single nuclear detonation will drop enough to permit humans to remain at the site of the blast indefinitely without incurring acute fatal exposure to radiation.

==Likely first strike weapons systems==
Because of the low accuracy (large circular error probable) of early generation intercontinental ballistic missiles (and especially submarine-launched ballistic missiles), counterforce strikes were initially only possible against very large, undefended targets like bomber airfields and naval bases. Later generation missiles with much improved accuracy made counterforce attacks against the opponent&#x27;s hardened military facilities (like missile silos and command and control centers) possible. This is due to the inverse-square law, which predicts that the amount of energy dispersed from a single point release of energy (such as a thermonuclear blast) dissipates by the inverse of the square of distance from the single point of release. The result is that the power of a nuclear explosion to rupture hardened structures is greatly decreased by the distance from the impact point of the nuclear weapon. So a near-direct hit is generally necessary, as only diminishing returns are gained by increasing bomb power.

* Pershing II MRBM. Single warhead, variable yield 5–50 kt, CEP 50 m with active radar terminal guidance. Short, 7-minute flight-time and range of 1,800 km, designed to strike C4ISTAR installations, bunkers, air fields, air defense sites, and ICBM silos in the European part of the Soviet Union. Decommissioned.
* R-36 (NATO designation SS-18 &quot;Satan&quot;), MIRV. Believed to be a first-strike weapon by some in the West, due to high accuracy of 220 m CEP, and high throw-weight of 8,800 kg; could deploy 40 penetration aids and deliver at least 10 warheads of at least 500 kt through independent, separate targets. Each warhead could probably take out even hardened nuclear silos, such as those used by the Minuteman III. Deployed in 1976, aimed at CONUS. Still in service.
* LGM-118 Peacekeeper. Similar in capability to the SS-18 Satan, the Peacekeeper had a throw-weight of 4,000 kg, and could carry only 10 MIRVed warheads of 300 kt each, as well as a CEP of 120 meters. Deployed in the mid-1980s. Decommissioned; however, guidance systems and re-entry vehicles moved to Minuteman III missiles.
* SS-20 Saber MIRV IRBM. Deployed by the Soviet Union in the late 1970s, this MIRVed IRBM could hide out behind the Urals in Asian Russia and strike NATO C4ISTAR facilities in Europe with scarcely any warning, due to very short flight time, high accuracy, and MIRV payload (rare on an intermediate-range missile). Decommissioned.

==First-strike enabling weapons systems==

Any missile defense system capable of wide-area (e.g., continental) coverage, and especially those enabling destruction of missiles in the boost phase, is a first-strike-enabling weapon because it allows for a nuclear strike to be launched with reduced fear of mutual assured destruction. Such a system has never been deployed, although a limited continental missile defense capability has been deployed by the U.S., but it is capable of defending against only a handful of missiles.

This does not apply, in general, to terminal missile defense systems, such as the former U.S. Safeguard Program or the Russian A-35/A-135 systems. Limited-area terminal missile defense systems, defending such targets as ICBM fields, or C4ISTAR facilities may, in fact, be stabilizing, because they ensure survivable retaliatory capacity, and/or survivable de-escalation capacity.

This also might not apply to a &quot;non-discriminatory&quot; space-based missile defense system, even if it is—actually, precisely because it is—of global reach. Such a system would be designed to destroy all weapons launched by any nation in a ballistic trajectory, negating any nation&#x27;s capability to launch any strike with ballistic missiles, assuming the system was sufficiently robust to repel attacks from all potential threats, and built to open standards openly agreed upon and adhered to. No such system has yet been seriously proposed.

==Other possible first-strike weapons systems==

*UGM-133 Trident II missiles may carry up to 8, 100 kt W76 (C4) or 12 (START-limited 8, SORT-limited 5) W76 or 475 kt W88 MIRVed warheads (D5). The circular error probability of the weapons is classified but is believed to be less than 120 m (C4) and 100 m (D5). The missile attains a temporary low altitude orbit only a few minutes after launch. The guidance system for the missile is an inertial guidance system with an additional star-sighting system, which is used to correct small positional errors that have accrued during the flight. GPS has been used on some test flights but is assumed not to be available for a real mission. Trident I-C4 has a range of over 4,000 nmi, and the Trident II-D5 can surpass 6,000 nmi; however, the absolute ranges of the missiles are classified and withheld from public domain for reasons of national security.
*R-36 (SS-18 Satan) Mod I/II 25 megaton variant. Although it is widely accepted that Soviets never had a first-strike strategy because of their conventional arms superiority in Europe, some experts believed that the single-warhead 25 megaton version of R36-M (SS-18, CEP 250 m) was a first-strike weapon targeted against Minuteman III silos. However, a much more logical explanation comes from retired Soviet military officers, who report that the 25 megaton SS-18 was targeted against heavily fortified command-and-control facilities. The reason is that a single 25 megaton warhead could take out only one hardened missile silo if the silos are sufficiently separated—probably by only 2–4 km, depending on the amount of hardening because of the inverse square law, which predicts that the amount of energy dispersed from a single point release of energy (such as a thermonuclear blast) dissipates by the inverse of the square of distance from the single point of release. Therefore, the power of a nuclear explosion to rupture hardened structures is greatly decreased by the distance from the impact point of the nuclear weapon. Therefore, a nearly direct hit is generally necessary, as only diminishing returns are gained by increasing bomb power. The only purpose for gigantic nuclear weapons like the SS-18 25 megaton variant is to take out extremely hardened targets, like command-and-control facilities, such as NORAD, located at the Cheyenne Mountain Complex; Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), located at Mount Weather; or Site R, located at Raven Rock. (The amount of energy needed to rupture missile silos is orders of magnitude greater than the amount necessary to destroy cities, which made the SS-18 25 megaton variant effective for the destruction of large urban centers, as well.) This could be a useful weapon for a decapitation strike, but that is a very risky move, and both the U.S. and Russia have extensive countermeasures against such methods.

==Anti-first-strike countermeasures==
According to the theories of nuclear deterrence and mutual assured destruction, full countervalue retaliation would be the likely fate for any state that unleashed a first strike. To maintain credible deterrence, nuclear-weapons states have taken measures to give their enemies reason to believe that a first strike would lead to unacceptable results.

The main strategy relies on creating doubt among enemy strategists regarding nuclear capacity, weapons characteristics, facility and infrastructure vulnerability, early warning systems, intelligence penetration, strategic plans, and political will. In terms of military capabilities, the aim is to create the impression of the maximum possible force and survivability, which leads the enemy to make increased estimates of the probability of a disabling counterstrike, and in terms of strategy and politics, the aim is to cause the enemy to believe that such a second strike would be forthcoming in the event of a nuclear attack.

===Second strike===

One of the main reasons to deter a first strike is the possibility of the victim of the first-strike launching a retaliatory second strike on the attacker.

===Increasing SSBN deployment===
Nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) carrying submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), commonly known as &quot;boomers&quot; in the US and &quot;bombers&quot; in the UK, are widely considered the most survivable component of the nuclear triad. The depths of the ocean are extremely large, and nuclear submarines are highly mobile, are very quiet, have virtually unlimited range, and can generate their own oxygen and potable water. In essence, their undersea endurance is limited only by food supply. It is unlikely that any conceivable opponent of any nuclear power deploying ballistic missile submarines can locate and neutralize every ballistic missile submarine before it launches a retaliatory strike in the event of war. Therefore, to increase the percentage of nuclear forces surviving a first strike, a nation can simply increase SSBN deployment and the deployment of reliable communications links with SSBNs.

===Hardening or mobilizing land-based nuclear assets===
In addition, land-based ICBM silos can be hardened. No missile launch facility can really defend against a direct nuclear hit, but a sufficiently hardened silo could defend against a near miss, especially if the detonation is not from a multimegaton thermonuclear weapon. In addition, ICBMs can be placed on road or rail-mobile launchers (RT-23 Molodets, RT-2PM2 Topol-M, DF-31, Agni 5, Agni 6, MGM-134 Midgetman), which can then be moved around. As an enemy has nothing fixed at which to aim, that increases its survivability.

===Increasing alert state and readiness===

The effectiveness of a first strike is contingent upon the aggressor&#x27;s ability to deplete its enemy&#x27;s retaliatory capacity immediately to a level that would make a second strike impossible, mitigable, or strategically undesirable. Intelligence and early warning systems increase the probability that the enemy has the time to launch its own strike before its warmaking capacity has been significantly reduced, which renders a first strike pointless. Alert states such as DEFCON conditions, apart from serving a purpose in the internal management of a country&#x27;s military, can have the effect of advising a potential aggressor that an escalation towards first strike has been detected and therefore that effective retaliatory strikes could be made in the event of an attack.

===Maintaining survivable C4ISTAR links===
Looking Glass, Nightwatch, and TACAMO are US airborne nuclear command posts and represent survivable communication links with US nuclear forces. In the event of significant political-military tensions between the nuclear powers, they would take to the skies and provide survivable communications in the event of enemy attack. They are capable of the full exercise of all available MAOs (Major Attack Options), as well as the full SIOP, in the event of a first strike or the destruction of the NCA. They can directly initiate launch of all American ICBMs via radio and satellite communication, signal SLBMs to launch and send bombers on their strike missions. In addition to those airborne assets, the US government has several command and control bunkers, the most famous of which is that of NORAD, which is tunneled a few thousand feet into the granite of Cheyenne Mountain Complex, outside Colorado Springs, Colorado. It is believed to be able to withstand and to continue to operate after a nuclear direct hit. Other US C4ISTAR bunkers include an installation called Site R, located at Raven Rock, Pennsylvania, which is believed to be the Pentagon&#x27;s relocation site if Washington, DC, is destroyed, as well as Mount Weather, located in Virginia, which is believed to be the relocation site for top executive branch officials. The Greenbrier, located in West Virginia, was once the site of the Supreme Court of the United States and Congress&#x27;s relocation bunker, but it is no longer a secret but is now a tourist attraction.

The Russians have a system called SPRN (СПРН), which can detect nuclear launches and providing early warning so that any such strike would not be undetected until it is too late. However, their unique and special capability can be found with their Dead Hand fail-deadly computerized nuclear release system, which is based at Kosvinsky Kamen in the Urals. Apparently, Dead Hand, named for either the dead man&#x27;s hand in poker or the dead man&#x27;s switch in dangerous or deadly machinery, can be turned on whenever the Russian leadership fears a nuclear attack. Allegedly, once Dead Hand is activated, if it detects a loss of communications with Moscow as well as nuclear detonations inside Russian territory, it can give final authority for the release of nuclear weapons to military officers in a bunker under Kosvinsky Kamen, who can then, if they so determine, launch Russia&#x27;s arsenal.

===Decreasing tensions by mutual adoption of minimum credible deterrent posture===
Instead of relying on sophisticated communications links and launch-on-warning postures, the French, the British, and the Chinese have chosen to assume different nuclear postures more suited to minimum credible deterrence or the capability to inflict unacceptable losses to prevent the use of nuclear weapons against them, rather than pursuing types of nuclear weapons suitable to first-strike use.

China is believed to pursue a minimum credible deterrent/second strike strategy with regards to the US. That may or may not be true with regards to China&#x27;s stance with regard to Russia, as few Chinese nuclear platforms are intercontinental, and most of the platforms are deployed on the Russian-Chinese border. Unlike relations of the US and China, Russia and China have had military conflicts in the past. In recent years, China has improved its early warning systems and has renovated certain of its platforms for intercontinental strike, which may or may not be due to the US missile defense system. In general, it appears that China&#x27;s leaders do not greatly fear a first strike, because of their posture of inflicting unacceptable losses upon an adversary, as opposed to the American and Russian policy of trying to &quot;win&quot; a nuclear war. The Chinese arsenal is considered to suffice in ensuring that such a first strike would not go unavenged.

The United Kingdom and France have sophisticated nuclear weapons platforms, and their nuclear strategies are minimum credible deterrent-based. Both have ballistic missile submarines, armed with intercontinental submarine-launched ballistic missiles, to ensure a second-strike retaliation anywhere in the world. France also has a number of nuclear capable fighter aircraft. Both have nuclear policies that are believed to be effective deterrence towards a would-be nuclear strike against themselves, NATO, European Union members, and other allies.

== Destabilizing role of land-based MIRVed ICBMs ==

MIRVed land-based ICBMs are generally considered suitable for a first strike or a counterforce strike, due to:
# Their high accuracy (small circular error probable), compared to submarine-launched ballistic missiles which used to be less accurate, and more prone to defects;
# Their fast response time, compared to bombers which are considered too slow;
# Their ability to carry multiple MIRV warheads at once, useful for destroying a whole missile field with one missile.

Unlike a decapitation strike or a countervalue strike, a counterforce strike might result in a potentially more constrained retaliation. Though the Minuteman III of the mid-1960s was MIRVed with 3 warheads, heavily MIRVed vehicles threatened to upset the balance; these included the SS-18 Satan which was deployed in 1976, and was considered to threaten Minuteman III silos, which led some neoconservatives (&quot;Team B&quot;) to conclude a Soviet first strike was being prepared for. This led to the development of the aforementioned Pershing II, the Trident I and Trident II, as well as the MX missile, and the B-1 Lancer.

MIRVed land-based ICBMs are considered destabilizing because they tend to put a premium on striking first. When a missile is MIRVed, it is able to carry many warheads (up to 8 in existing U.S. missiles, limited by New START, though Trident II is capable of carrying up to 12) and deliver them to separate targets. If it is assumed that each side has 100 missiles, with 5 warheads each, and further that each side has a 95 percent chance of neutralizing the opponent&#x27;s missiles in their silos by firing 2 warheads at each silo, then the attacking side can reduce the enemy ICBM force from 100 missiles to about 5 by firing 40 missiles with 200 warheads, and keeping the rest of 60 missiles in reserve. As such, this type of weapon was intended to be banned under the START II agreement, however the START II agreement was never activated, and neither Russia nor the US has adhered to the agreement.

== Destabilizing role of missile defense ==

Any defense system against nuclear missiles such as SDI will be more effective against limited numbers of missiles launched. At very small numbers of targets, each defensive asset will be able to take multiple shots at each warhead, and a high kill ratio could be achieved easily. As the number of targets increases, the defensive network becomes &quot;saturated&quot; as each asset must target and destroy more and more warheads in the same window of time. Eventually the system will reach a maximum number of targets destroyed and after this point all additional warheads will penetrate the defenses. This leads to several destabilizing effects.

First, a state that is not building similar defenses may be encouraged to attack before the system is in place, essentially starting the war while there is no clear advantage instead of waiting until they will be at a distinct disadvantage after the defenses are completed. Second, one of the easiest ways to counter any proposed defenses is to simply build more warheads and missiles, reaching that saturation point sooner and hitting targets through a strategy of attrition. Third, and most importantly, since defenses are more effective against small numbers of warheads, a nation with a defense system is actually encouraged to engage in a counterforce first strike. The smaller retaliatory strike is then more easily destroyed by the defense system than a full attack would be. This undermines the doctrine of MAD by discrediting a nation&#x27;s ability to punish any aggressor with a lethal retaliatory second strike.

==See also==

* Dead Hand, a Soviet nuclear retaliation system
* Decapitation strike
* Second strike
* Cuban Missile Crisis
* Preemptive war
* Mutual assured destruction
* No first use
* Nuclear terrorism

==References==
==External links==
*Robert McNamara&#x27;s &quot;Mutual Deterrence&quot; speech from 1962
*First Strike from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1291690" start="3" end="19" title="nuclear strategy" label="nuclear strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208337" start="23" end="35" title="First strike (nuclear strategy)" label="first strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208337" start="39" end="56" title="First strike (nuclear strategy)" label="preemptive strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377327" start="62" end="88" title="Preemptive war" label="preemptive surprise attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208337" start="119" end="142" title="First strike (nuclear strategy)" label="First strike capability"/>
<link wikidata="Q189062" start="189" end="202" title="List of states with nuclear weapons" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q243760" start="286" end="306" title="second strike" label="weakened retaliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359863" start="422" end="446" title="strategic nuclear weapon" label="strategic nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176973" start="586" end="598" title="counterforce" label="counterforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="737" end="745" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="754" end="758" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="767" end="778" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Soviet Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1050" end="1062" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1172" end="1189" title="Preventive war#Case for preventive nuclear war" label="full-scale attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q586755" start="1428" end="1438" title="RDS-1" label="first test"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="1515" end="1535" title="thermonuclear weapon" label="thermonuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q248542" start="1582" end="1590" title="Ivy Mike" label="Ivy Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582085" start="1725" end="1731" title="Sloika" label="Sloika"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1773" end="1799" title="Thermonuclear weapons#Soviet Union" label="Sakharov&amp;#x27;s Third Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q304419" start="1820" end="1832" title="Castle Bravo" label="Castle Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="1902" end="1928" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Soviet invasion of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="2079" end="2094" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="2100" end="2138" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q769097" start="2144" end="2170" title="Julius and Ethel Rosenberg" label="Julius and Ethel Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="2293" end="2300" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="2350" end="2361" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940633" start="2598" end="2608" title="bomber gap" label="bomber gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916432" start="2617" end="2628" title="missile gap" label="missile gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q748379" start="2779" end="2796" title="1960 U-2 incident" label="1960 U-2 incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q309840" start="2808" end="2827" title="Francis Gary Powers" label="Francis Gary Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q708321" start="2844" end="2857" title="Berlin Crisis of 1961" label="Berlin Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188596" start="2886" end="2896" title="Tsar Bomba" label="Tsar Bomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="3012" end="3032" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="3076" end="3080" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="3181" end="3187" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="3214" end="3226" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q191721" start="3359" end="3379" title="Bay of Pigs Invasion" label="Bay of Pigs Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="3414" end="3426" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="4584" end="4604" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="4617" end="4634" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="4693" end="4708" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="4926" end="4933" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="5814" end="5844" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54287" start="5875" end="5886" title="RSD-10 Pioneer" label="SS-20 Saber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451506" start="5895" end="5906" title="SS-18 Satan" label="SS-18 Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203109" start="5951" end="5962" title="Pershing II" label="Pershing II"/>
<link wikidata="Q392893" start="5963" end="5967" title="IRBM" label="IRBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q150115" start="5983" end="5991" title="Tomahawk (missile family)" label="Tomahawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877027" start="5992" end="6022" title="BGM-109G Ground Launched Cruise Missile" label="Ground Launched Cruise Missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="6050" end="6063" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54287" start="6262" end="6273" title="RSD-10 Pioneer" label="SS-20 Saber"/>
<link wikidata="Q322260" start="6846" end="6857" title="Able Archer" label="Able Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634971" start="7017" end="7022" title="VRYAN" label="VRYAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q843368" start="7265" end="7288" title="circular error probable" label="circular error probable"/>
<link wikidata="Q786054" start="8038" end="8048" title="detonation" label="detonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="8084" end="8092" title="kilotons" label="kilotons"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="8093" end="8096" title="Trinitrotoluene" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="8112" end="8120" title="TNT equivalent" label="megatons"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="8181" end="8198" title="Manhattan project" label="Manhattan project"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="8386" end="8401" title="Trinitrotoluene" label="Trinitrotoluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="8421" end="8435" title="high explosive" label="high explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="8544" end="8553" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="8669" end="8675" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="8688" end="8697" title="explosion" label="explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="8782" end="8796" title="TNT equivalent" label="TNT equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="8906" end="8924" title="ionizing radiation" label="ionizing radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="9026" end="9033" title="fallout" label="fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="9262" end="9270" title="Ionizing radiation" label="exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q843368" start="9361" end="9384" title="circular error probable" label="circular error probable"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="9406" end="9440" title="intercontinental ballistic missile" label="intercontinental ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066330" start="9458" end="9494" title="submarine-launched ballistic missile" label="submarine-launched ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="9845" end="9863" title="inverse-square law" label="inverse-square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203109" start="10350" end="10361" title="Pershing II" label="Pershing II"/>
<link wikidata="Q369330" start="10362" end="10366" title="MRBM" label="MRBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="10524" end="10531" title="Command, control, and communications" label="C4ISTAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451506" start="10662" end="10666" title="R-36 (missile)" label="R-36"/>
<link wikidata="Q521297" start="10711" end="10715" title="MIRV" label="MIRV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438791" start="10861" end="10876" title="penetration aid" label="penetration aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q861662" start="11061" end="11074" title="Minuteman III" label="Minuteman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="11103" end="11108" title="CONUS" label="CONUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q907752" start="11130" end="11149" title="LGM-118 Peacekeeper" label="LGM-118 Peacekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q843368" start="11310" end="11313" title="Circular error probable" label="CEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q861662" start="11429" end="11442" title="Minuteman III" label="Minuteman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q54287" start="11455" end="11466" title="SS-20 Saber" label="SS-20 Saber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="11602" end="11606" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155630" start="11831" end="11846" title="missile defense" label="missile defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q637802" start="12088" end="12114" title="mutual assured destruction" label="mutual assured destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q338745" start="12406" end="12423" title="Safeguard Program" label="Safeguard Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093254" start="12439" end="12443" title="A-35 anti-ballistic missile system" label="A-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q277754" start="12444" end="12449" title="A-135 anti-ballistic missile system" label="A-135"/>
<link wikidata="Q484374" start="13296" end="13314" title="UGM-133 Trident II" label="UGM-133 Trident II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451506" start="14146" end="14150" title="R-36 (missile)" label="R-36"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="14177" end="14184" title="TNT equivalent" label="megaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451506" start="14398" end="14403" title="R-36 (missile)" label="R36-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="14891" end="14909" title="inverse square law" label="inverse square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q748010" start="15563" end="15568" title="NORAD" label="NORAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q21767547" start="15585" end="15610" title="Cheyenne Mountain Complex" label="Cheyenne Mountain Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="15612" end="15647" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950803" start="15667" end="15680" title="Mount Weather" label="Mount Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q821195" start="15704" end="15714" title="Raven Rock Mountain Complex" label="Raven Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344887" start="15986" end="16005" title="decapitation strike" label="decapitation strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177048" start="16244" end="16256" title="countervalue" label="countervalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q757554" start="17353" end="17397" title="Nuclear submarine" label="Nuclear-powered ballistic missile submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066330" start="17415" end="17452" title="submarine-launched ballistic missiles" label="submarine-launched ballistic missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731619" start="17604" end="17617" title="nuclear triad" label="nuclear triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q853409" start="18405" end="18428" title="missile launch facility" label="missile launch facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="18600" end="18620" title="thermonuclear weapon" label="thermonuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201524" start="18689" end="18703" title="RT-23 Molodets" label="RT-23 Molodets"/>
<link wikidata="Q477059" start="18705" end="18720" title="RT-2PM2 Topol-M" label="RT-2PM2 Topol-M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024423" start="18722" end="18727" title="DF-31" label="DF-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046130" start="18729" end="18735" title="Agni 5" label="Agni 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742868" start="18737" end="18743" title="Agni 6" label="Agni 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357625" start="18745" end="18762" title="MGM-134 Midgetman" label="MGM-134 Midgetman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695" start="19404" end="19410" title="DEFCON" label="DEFCON"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869702" start="19755" end="19768" title="Looking Glass (airplane)" label="Looking Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q499179" start="19770" end="19780" title="Boeing E-4B" label="Nightwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383532" start="19786" end="19792" title="TACAMO" label="TACAMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661053" start="20136" end="20163" title="Single Integrated Operations Plan" label="MAOs (Major Attack Options)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661053" start="20185" end="20189" title="Single Integrated Operational Plan" label="SIOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q458048" start="20248" end="20251" title="National Command Authority (United States)" label="NCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="20456" end="20469" title="US government" label="US government"/>
<link wikidata="Q91122" start="20502" end="20508" title="bunker" label="bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q748010" start="20547" end="20552" title="NORAD" label="NORAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="20601" end="20608" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q21767547" start="20612" end="20637" title="Cheyenne Mountain Complex" label="Cheyenne Mountain Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="20647" end="20663" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="20665" end="20673" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q821195" start="20825" end="20831" title="Site R" label="Site R"/>
<link wikidata="Q821195" start="20844" end="20854" title="Raven Rock, Pennsylvania" label="Raven Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="20856" end="20868" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="20894" end="20906" title="the Pentagon" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="20933" end="20947" title="Washington, DC" label="Washington, DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950803" start="20974" end="20987" title="Mount Weather" label="Mount Weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="21000" end="21008" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="21062" end="21078" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q473553" start="21090" end="21104" title="The Greenbrier" label="The Greenbrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="21117" end="21130" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="21157" end="21191" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="21196" end="21204" title="Congress of the United States" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q12955943" start="21328" end="21332" title="Russian missile attack early warning system" label="SPRN"/>
<link wikidata="Q907393" start="21542" end="21551" title="Dead Hand (nuclear war)" label="Dead Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738410" start="21552" end="21563" title="fail-deadly" label="fail-deadly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235842" start="21619" end="21634" title="Kosvinsky Kamen" label="Kosvinsky Kamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="21642" end="21647" title="Urals" label="Urals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180826" start="21693" end="21713" title="dead man&amp;#x27;s hand" label="dead man&amp;#x27;s hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153563" start="21730" end="21752" title="dead man&amp;#x27;s switch" label="dead man&amp;#x27;s switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="22677" end="22682" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183699" start="22707" end="22733" title="credible minimum deterrence" label="minimum credible deterrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q243760" start="22734" end="22747" title="second strike" label="second strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q683570" start="23798" end="23825" title="ballistic missile submarine" label="ballistic missile submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066330" start="23856" end="23892" title="submarine-launched ballistic missile" label="submarine-launched ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q243760" start="23907" end="23920" title="second-strike" label="second-strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="24150" end="24164" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q521297" start="24246" end="24252" title="Multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle" label="MIRVed"/>
<link wikidata="Q843368" start="24386" end="24409" title="circular error probable" label="circular error probable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344887" start="24729" end="24748" title="decapitation strike" label="decapitation strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177048" start="24754" end="24773" title="countervalue strike" label="countervalue strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176973" start="24777" end="24796" title="counterforce strike" label="counterforce strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451506" start="25003" end="25014" title="SS-18 Satan" label="SS-18 Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q861662" start="25074" end="25087" title="Minuteman III" label="Minuteman III"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="25110" end="25126" title="neoconservatives" label="neoconservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516694" start="25134" end="25140" title="Team B" label="Team B"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="25162" end="25168" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203109" start="25256" end="25267" title="Pershing II" label="Pershing II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044751" start="25273" end="25282" title="Trident I" label="Trident I"/>
<link wikidata="Q484374" start="25287" end="25297" title="Trident II" label="Trident II"/>
<link wikidata="Q907752" start="25314" end="25324" title="MX missile" label="MX missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q218636" start="25334" end="25344" title="B-1 Lancer" label="B-1 Lancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="25365" end="25369" title="ICBM" label="ICBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q827512" start="25505" end="25512" title="warhead" label="warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002064" start="25561" end="25570" title="New START" label="New START"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187969" start="26118" end="26126" title="START II" label="START II"/>
<link wikidata="Q907393" start="27886" end="27895" title="Dead Hand" label="Dead Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344887" start="27935" end="27954" title="Decapitation strike" label="Decapitation strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q243760" start="27957" end="27970" title="Second strike" label="Second strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="27973" end="27993" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377327" start="27996" end="28010" title="Preemptive war" label="Preemptive war"/>
<link wikidata="Q637802" start="28013" end="28039" title="Mutual assured destruction" label="Mutual assured destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520989" start="28042" end="28054" title="No first use" label="No first use"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005754" start="28057" end="28074" title="Nuclear terrorism" label="Nuclear terrorism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45877" wikidata="Q416662" url="?curid=45877" title="Sigmoid">
<text>Sigmoid means resembling the lower-case Greek letter sigma (uppercase Σ, lowercase σ, lowercase in word-final position ς) or the Latin letter S. Specific uses include:

* Sigmoid function, a mathematical function
* Sigmoid colon, part of the large intestine or colon
* Sigmoid sinus, two structures that drain blood from the bottom of the brain
* Sigmoid arteries, a pair/trio of arteries in the lower abdomen

== See also ==
* Ogee, similar shape, term sometimes used for sigmoids</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q416662" start="0" end="7" title="Sigmoid" label="Sigmoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14413" start="53" end="58" title="sigma" label="sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="60" end="69" title="uppercase" label="uppercase"/>
<link wikidata="Q416662" start="70" end="71" title="Sigmoid" label="Σ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="73" end="82" title="lowercase" label="lowercase"/>
<link wikidata="Q416662" start="83" end="84" title="Sigmoid" label="σ"/>
<link wikidata="Q416662" start="119" end="120" title="Sigmoid" label="ς"/>
<link wikidata="Q9956" start="142" end="143" title="S" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q526668" start="171" end="187" title="Sigmoid function" label="Sigmoid function"/>
<link wikidata="Q677253" start="215" end="228" title="Sigmoid colon" label="Sigmoid colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292294" start="269" end="282" title="Sigmoid sinus" label="Sigmoid sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q707709" start="347" end="363" title="Sigmoid arteries" label="Sigmoid arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q339340" start="428" end="432" title="Ogee" label="Ogee"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45879" wikidata="Q1320033" url="?curid=45879" title="Line printer">
<text>A line printer prints one entire line of text before advancing to another line. Most early line printers were 
impact printers.

Line printers are mostly associated with unit record equipment and the early days of digital computing, but the technology is still in use. Print speeds of 600 lines per minute (approximately 10 pages per minute) were achieved in the 1950s, later increasing to as much as 1200 lpm. Line printers print a complete line at a time and have speeds in the range of 150 to 2500 lines per minute. 

Some types of impact line printers are drum printers, band-printers, and chain printers. Non-impact technologies have also been used, e.g., thermal line printers were popular in the 1970s and 1980s, some inkjet and laser printers produce output a line or a page at a time. 

==Designs==
Many impact printers, such as the daisywheel printer and dot matrix printer, used a print head that printed a character then moved on until an entire line was printed. Line printers were much faster, as each impact printed an entire line.

There have been five principal designs:
* Drum printers
* Chain (train) printers
* Bar printers
* Comb printers
* Wheel printers

Because all of these printing methods were noisy, line printers of all designs were enclosed in sound-absorbing cases of varying sophistication.

===Timing-sensitive designs===
Several designs of printers have similar characteristics.

====Drum printer====


In a typical drum printer design, a fixed font character set is engraved onto the periphery of a number of print wheels, the number matching the number of columns (letters in a line) the printer can print. The wheels, joined to form a large drum (cylinder), spin at high speed. Paper and an inked ribbon are stepped (moved) past the print position. As the desired character for each column passes the print position, a hammer strikes the paper from the rear and presses the paper against the ribbon and the drum, causing the desired character to be recorded on the continuous paper. Because the drum carrying the letterforms (characters) remains in constant motion, the strike-and-retreat action of the hammers has to be very fast. Typically, they are driven by voice coils mounted on the moving part of the hammer.

Large mechanical and electric stresses occur when the line to be printed requires firing all of the hammers simultaneously. With simple type layouts, this happens when the line consists of a single character repeated in all columns, such as a line of dashes (&quot;----...---&quot;) To avoid this problem, some printers use a staggered arrangement, with the characters in each column rotated around the drum by a different amount. Then simultaneous firing occurs only if the printed line matches the character layout on the drum, which should not happen in normal text.

Lower-cost printers do not use a hammer for each column. Instead, a hammer is provided for every other column, and the entire hammer bank is arranged to shift left and right, driven by an additional voice coil. For this style of printer, two complete revolutions of the character drum are required to print each line, with one revolution being used to print all the &quot;odd&quot; columns and another revolution being used to print all of the &quot;even&quot; columns. This requires only half (plus one) the number of hammers, magnets, and the associated channels of drive electronics.

At least one low-cost printer, made by CDC, achieves the same end by moving the paper laterally while keeping the hammer bank at rest.

Dataproducts was a typical vendor of drum printers, often selling similar models with both a full set of hammers (delivering, for example, 600 lines-per-minute of output) and a half set of hammers (delivering 300 LPM).

==== Printers with horizontally moving print elements ====

===== Chain printer =====

Chain Printers place the type on a horizontally-moving circular chain. As with the drum printer, as the correct character passes by each column, a hammer is fired from behind the paper. Compared to drum printers, chain printers have the advantage that the type chain can usually be changed by the operator. A further advantage is that vertical registration of characters in a line is much improved over drum printers, which need extremely precise hammer timing to achieve a reasonably straight line of print. By selecting chains that have a smaller character set (for example, just numbers and a few punctuation marks), the printer can print much faster than if the chain contains the entire upper- and lower-case alphabet, numbers, and all special symbols. This is because, with many more instances of the numbers appearing in the chain, the time spent waiting for the correct character to &quot;pass by&quot; is greatly reduced. Common letters and symbols appear more often on the chain, according to the frequency analysis of the likely input. IBM was probably the best-known chain printer manufacturer, and the IBM 1403 is probably the most famous example of a chain printer.

===== Train printer =====

Train printers place the type on a horizontally-moving circular train of print slugs. with multiple characters per slug, on a track, The technology is almost identical to print chains. 

===== Band printer =====


Band printers are a variation of chain printers in which a thin steel band is used instead of a chain, with the characters embossed or etched onto the band. Again, a selection of different bands are generally available with a different mix of characters so a character set best matched to the characters commonly printed can be chosen. Dataproducts was a well known manufacturer of band printers, with their B300, B600, and B1000 range, the model number representing the lines per minute rate of the printer. (The B300 is effectively a B600 with only half the number of hammers—one per two character positions. The hammer bank moves back and forth one character position, increasing the average number of band movements required for each line.)

===== Bar printer =====

Bar printers were similar to chain printers but were slower and less expensive. Rather than a chain moving continuously in one direction, the characters were on fingers mounted on a bar that moved left-to-right and then right-to-left in front of the paper. An example was the IBM 1443.

===== Common characteristics =====
In all four designs, timing of the hammers (the so-called &quot;flight time&quot;) was critical, and was adjustable as part of the servicing of the printer. For drum printers, incorrect timing of the hammer resulted in printed lines that wandered vertically, albeit with characters correctly aligned horizontally in their columns. For train and bar printers, incorrect timing of the hammers resulted in characters shifting horizontally, printed closer or farther from the next character, or blurred on one side, albeit on vertically-level printed lines. The vertical misalignment of drum printers is more noticeable and annoying to human vision (see the sample pictured in this article).

Most drum, chain, and bar printers were capable of printing up to 132 columns, but a few designs could only print 80 columns and some other designs as many as 160 columns.

===Comb printer===

Comb printers, also called line matrix printers, printed a matrix of dots instead of individual characters in the same way as single-character dot matrix printers, but using a comb of hammers to print a portion of an entire row of pixels at one time (for example, every eighth pixel). By oscillating the comb or &quot;print shuttle&quot; left and right a short distance, the entire pixel row could be printed (continuing the example, in eight cycles). The paper then advanced and the next pixel row was printed. Because far less print head motion was involved than in a conventional dot matrix printer, these printers were much faster, and competitive in speed with formed-character line printers without being restricted to a set of available characters, thus being able to print dot-matrix graphics and variable-sized characters.

Printronix and TallyGenicom are well-known vendors of comb printers. In 2009, TallyGenicom was acquired by Printronix.

===Wheel printers===
In 1949 IBM introduced the IBM 407 Accounting Machine with a wheel print mechanism that could print 150 alphanumeric lines a minute. Each of the 120 print positions had its own type wheel which rotated under electromechanical control. Once all were in position, print hammers struck the wheels against a ribbon and the paper. The 407 or its wheel line printer mechanism was attached to a variety of early IBM computers, including the IBM 650, most members of the IBM 700/7000 series and the IBM 1130, the last introduced in 1965.

== Paper (forms) handling ==

All line printers used continuous form paper provided in boxes of continuous fan-fold forms rather than cut-sheets. The paper was usually perforated to tear into cut sheets if desired and was commonly printed with alternating white and light-green areas, allowing the reader to easily follow a line of text across the page. This was the iconic &quot;green bar&quot;, &quot;blue bar&quot; or &quot;music-ruled&quot; form paper that dominated the early computer age in several variants. Standard &quot;green bar&quot; page sizes included portrait-format pages of 8½ × 11 inches (letter size), usually printed at 80 columns by 66 lines of characters (at 6 lines per inch) or 88 lines (at 8 LPI), and landscape-format pages of 14 × 11 inches, usually printed at 132 columns by 66 or 88 lines. Also common were landscape-format pages of 14 × 8½ inches (legal size), allowing for 132 columns by 66 lines (at 8 LPI) on a more compact page.

Pre-printed forms were also commonly used (for printing cheques, invoices, etc.). A common task for the system operator was to change from one paper form to another as one print job completed and another was to begin. Some line printers had covers that opened automatically when the printer required attention. These continuous forms were advanced through the printer by means of &quot;tractors&quot; (sprockets or sprocket belts). Depending on the sophistication of the printer, there might simply be two tractors at the top of the printer (pulling the paper) or tractors at the top and bottom (thereby maintaining paper tension within the printer). The horizontal position of the tractors was usually adjustable to accommodate different forms. The earliest printers by IBM used a hydraulic motor to move the forms. In later line printers, high-speed servomechanisms usually drove the tractors, allowing very rapid positioning of the paper, both for advancing line-by-line and slewing to the top of the next form. The faster line printers, of necessity, also used &quot;stackers&quot; to re-fold and stack the fan-fold forms as they emerged from the printer.

The high-speed motion of the paper often developed large electrostatic charges. Line printers frequently used a variety of discharge brushes and active (corona discharge-based) static eliminators to discharge these accumulated charges.

Many printers supported ASA carriage control characters which provided a limited degree of control over the paper, by specifying how far to advance the paper between printed lines. Various means of providing vertical tabulation were provided, ranging from a paper carriage control tape loop to fully electronic (software-controllable) tab simulation.

== Origins ==
Tabulators built by the U.S. Census Bureau for the 1910 census could print their results. Prior to that, tabulator operators had to write down totals from counter wheels onto tally sheets. IBM developed a series of printing accounting machines, beginning in 1920. The 285 Numeric Printing Tabulator could read 150 cards per minute. The 405, introduced in 1934, could print at 80 lines per minute. It had 88 type bars, one for each print position, with 43 alphanumeric bars on the left, followed by 45 numeric-only bars. The IBM 402 series, introduced after World War II, had a similar print arrangement and was used by IBM in early computing devices, including the IBM Card-Programmed Electronic Calculator.

IBM&#x27;s first commercial computer, the IBM 701, introduced in 1952, used a line printer, the IBM 716, that was based on the type wheel IBM 407 accounting machine. The 716 was incorporated in subsequent mainstream computers in the IBM 700/7000 series.

An early drum printer was the &quot;Potter Flying Typewriter&quot;, in 1952. &quot;Instead of working laboriously, one character at a time, it prints whole lines at once, 300 lines per minute, on a paper band. ... Heart of the machine is a continuously spinning disk with the necessary letters and numbers on its rim. ... As the disk revolves, 80 electrically operated hammers tap the back of the paper against an inked ribbon in contact with the disk, thus printing the proper characters in the proper places on the line.&quot;

== Influence on hardware and software ==
The names of the codice_1 and codice_2 commands in Unix were derived from the term &quot;line printer&quot;. Analogously, many other systems call their printing devices &quot;LP&quot;, &quot;LPT&quot;, or some similar variant, whether these devices are in fact line printers or other types of printers. These references served to distinguish formatted final output from normal interactive output from the system, which in many cases in line printer days was also printed on paper (as by a teletype) but not by a line printer. Line printers printed characters, letters and numbers line by line. The parallel ports of computers so equipped were usually designated LPTx, for line printer.

== See also ==
* IBM Machine Code Printer Control Characters
* Characters per line
* lp0 on fire
* Page printer
* Typewriter
* Edgeline printing

== References ==

== External links ==
* Animation of the print chain on the IBM 1403 printer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1320033" start="2" end="14" title="Line printer" label="line printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82" start="15" end="21" title="Printer (computing)" label="prints"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="111" end="126" title="printer (computing)#Impact printers" label="impact printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927915" start="170" end="191" title="unit record equipment" label="unit record equipment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="560" end="573" title="#Drum printer" label="drum printers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="575" end="588" title="#Band printer" label="band-printers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="594" end="608" title="#Chain printer" label="chain printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166429" start="661" end="682" title="thermal printing" label="thermal line printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196607" start="842" end="860" title="daisywheel printer" label="daisywheel printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q584101" start="865" end="883" title="dot matrix printer" label="dot matrix printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879301" start="1274" end="1295" title="Acoustic hood" label="sound-absorbing cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369121" start="2199" end="2209" title="voice coil" label="voice coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129191" start="3452" end="3455" title="Control Data Corporation" label="CDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227482" start="3549" end="3561" title="Dataproducts" label="Dataproducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q565636" start="4863" end="4881" title="frequency analysis" label="frequency analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968578" start="4971" end="4979" title="IBM 1403" label="IBM 1403"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740658" start="5143" end="5148" title="Slug (typesetting)" label="slugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227482" start="5614" end="5626" title="Dataproducts" label="Dataproducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977198" start="6325" end="6333" title="IBM 1443" label="IBM 1443"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553270" start="7280" end="7299" title="line matrix printer" label="line matrix printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047368" start="8086" end="8096" title="Printronix" label="Printronix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680199" start="8101" end="8113" title="TallyGenicom" label="TallyGenicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653069" start="8254" end="8261" title="IBM 407" label="IBM 407"/>
<link wikidata="Q628643" start="8661" end="8668" title="IBM 650" label="IBM 650"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265495" start="8690" end="8709" title="IBM 700/7000 series" label="IBM 700/7000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146513" start="8718" end="8726" title="IBM 1130" label="IBM 1130"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340619" start="8811" end="8832" title="Continuous stationery" label="continuous form paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340619" start="8865" end="8873" title="fan-fold" label="fan-fold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508510" start="8926" end="8936" title="Perforation" label="perforated"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="9324" end="9339" title="portrait format" label="portrait-format"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638138" start="9365" end="9376" title="letter size" label="letter size"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282315" start="9485" end="9501" title="landscape format" label="landscape-format"/>
<link wikidata="Q205299" start="9636" end="9646" title="legal size" label="legal size"/>
<link wikidata="Q80042" start="9778" end="9784" title="cheque" label="cheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q190581" start="9787" end="9794" title="invoice" label="invoice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154740" start="10124" end="10132" title="sprocket" label="sprocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q640815" start="10574" end="10588" title="servomechanism" label="servomechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="10940" end="10953" title="Electrostatics" label="electrostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q614467" start="11016" end="11021" title="brush" label="brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q165294" start="11036" end="11052" title="corona discharge" label="corona discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654067" start="11144" end="11175" title="ASA carriage control characters" label="ASA carriage control characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046122" start="11384" end="11405" title="carriage control tape" label="carriage control tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968668" start="12010" end="12017" title="IBM 402" label="IBM 402"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968792" start="12151" end="12192" title="IBM CPC" label="IBM Card-Programmed Electronic Calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653104" start="12237" end="12244" title="IBM 701" label="IBM 701"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253636" start="12291" end="12298" title="IBM 716" label="IBM 716"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653069" start="12333" end="12340" title="IBM 407" label="IBM 407"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265495" start="12428" end="12447" title="IBM 700/7000 series" label="IBM 700/7000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="13072" end="13076" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13510" end="13518" title="teleprinter#Teleprinters in computing" label="teletype"/>
<link wikidata="Q190440" start="13619" end="13633" title="Parallel port" label="parallel ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041284" start="13725" end="13768" title="IBM Machine Code Printer Control Characters" label="IBM Machine Code Printer Control Characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073843" start="13771" end="13790" title="Characters per line" label="Characters per line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694723" start="13793" end="13804" title="lp0 on fire" label="lp0 on fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738033" start="13807" end="13819" title="Page printer" label="Page printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="13822" end="13832" title="Typewriter" label="Typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337777" start="13835" end="13852" title="Edgeline printing" label="Edgeline printing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45882" wikidata="Q3376" url="?curid=45882" title="Trento">
<text>Trento ( ; Ladin and ; ; ; ; ; ), also known in English as Trent, is a city on the Adige River in Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol in Italy. It is the capital of the autonomous province of Trento. In the 16th century, the city was the location of the Council of Trent. Formerly part of Austria and Austria-Hungary, it was annexed by Italy in 1919. With 118,142 inhabitants, Trento is the third largest Italian city in the Alps and second largest in the historical region of Tyrol.

Trento is an educational, scientific, financial and political centre in Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol, in Tyrol and Northern Italy in general. The city contains a picturesque Medieval and Renaissance historic centre, with ancient buildings such as Trento Cathedral and the Castello del Buonconsiglio.

Together with other Alpine towns Trento engages in the Alpine Town of the Year Association for the implementation of the Alpine Convention to achieve sustainable development in the Alpine Arc. Trento was awarded the title of Alpine Town of the Year 2004.

The city often ranks highly among Italian cities for quality of life, standard of living, and business and job opportunities, being ranked 3rd in 2023. Trento is also one of the nation&#x27;s wealthiest and most prosperous cities, with its province being one of the richest in Italy, with a GDP per capita of €46,100 and a nominal GDP of €25.5 billion in 2023.

The University of Trento, founded in 1962 as a Higher University Institute of Social Sciences, is one of the most prestigious medium-small Italian universities, with a strong international vocation. It ranks 1st among &#x27;medium-sized&#x27; Universities in the &quot;Censis&quot; ranking and 2nd in the ranking of Italian universities. 

The School of International Studies of the University of Trento is a member of the Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs (Apsia), a selected group of institutions for higher education in the field of international relations. It is the first, and currently unique, Italian institute and one of the few Europeans present in the club of the best international study schools in the world that form policy makers.

In the last twenty years, thanks to the gradual creation of various research centers (FBK, FEM) and laboratories in the IT, engineering and sciences fields, Trento and its university have been nicknamed the &quot;Silicon Valley of the Alps&quot;.

== History ==
The origins of this city on the river-route to Bolzano and the low Alpine passes of Brenner and the Reschen Pass over the Alps are disputed. Some scholars maintain it was a Rhaetian settlement: the Adige area was however influenced by neighbouring populations, including the (Adriatic) Veneti, the Etruscans and the Gauls (a Celtic population). According to other theories, the latter instead founded the city during the 4th century BC.

Trento was conquered by the Romans in the 1st century BC, after several clashes with the Rhaetian tribes. Before the Romans, Trento was a Celtic village. Julius Caesar re-founded it as a Roman municipality when Rome extended citizenship to the part of Cisalpine Gaul north of the River Po. The Latin name given to the settlement was &quot;Tridentum,&quot; meaning &quot;Three-tooth place&quot; or &quot;Trident-town&quot; ( &quot;three&quot; + &quot;tooth&quot;). The reason for the name is uncertain: the new town may have been consecrated to the god Neptune, or possibly named after the three hills that surround the city (known in Italian as &quot;Doss Trento&quot;, &quot;Doss di Sant&#x27;Agata&quot; and &quot;Doss di San Rocco&quot;). The Latin name is the source of the adjective &quot;tridentine&quot;. On the old city hall, a Latin inscription is still visible: &quot;Montes argentum mihi dant nomenque Tridentum&quot; (&quot;Mountains give me silver and the name of Trento&quot;), attributed to Fra&#x27; Bartolomeo da Trento (died in 1251). Tridentum became an important stop on the Roman road that led from Verona to Innsbruck.


After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the independent bishopric of Trento was conquered by Ostrogoths, Byzantines, Lombards and Franks, finally becoming part of the Holy Roman Empire. In 1027, Emperor Conrad II created the Prince-Bishops of Trento, who wielded both temporal and religious powers. In the following centuries, however, the sovereignty was divided between the Bishopric of Trent and the County of Tyrol (from 1363 part of the Habsburg monarchy). Around 1200, Trento became a mining center of some significance: silver was mined from the Monte Calisio – Khalisperg, and Prince-Bishop Federico Wanga issued the first mining code of the alpine region.

In the 14th century, the Habsburg Family that ruled as dukes of Austria were also the counts of Tyrol.

A dark episode in the history of Trento was the murder of a 3-year-old Christian boy, Simonino, later known as Simon of Trent, disappeared in 1475 on the eve of Good Friday, the city&#x27;s small Jewish community was accused of killing him and draining his blood for Jewish ritual purposes. Eight Jews were tortured and burned at the stake, and their families forced to convert to Christianity. The bishop of Trento, Johannes Hinderbach, sought (without success) to have Simonino canonized and published the first book printed in Trento, &quot;Story of a Christian Child Murdered at Trento&quot;, embellished with 12 woodcuts. In a governmental ceremony in the 1990s, Trento apologized to the Jewish community for this dark episode and unveiled a plaque commemorating the formal apology.


In the 16th century, Trento became notable for the Council of Trent (1545–1563) which gave rise to the Counter-Reformation. The adjective &quot;Tridentine&quot; (as in &quot;Tridentine Mass&quot;) literally means pertaining to Trento, but can also refer to that specific event. Among the notable prince-bishops of this time were Bernardo Clesio (who governed the city from 1514 to 1539 and managed to steer the council to Trento) and Cristoforo Madruzzo (who governed from 1539 to 1567), both able European politicians and Renaissance humanists, who greatly expanded and embellished the city.

During this period, and as an expression of this Humanism, Trento was also known as the site of a Jewish printing press. In 1558 Cardinal Madruzzo granted the privilege of printing Hebrew books to Joseph Ottolengo, a German rabbi. The actual printer was Jacob Marcaria, a local physician; after his death in 1562, the activity of the press of Riva di Trento ceased. Altogether, 34 works were published in the period from 1558 to 1562, most of them bearing the coat of arms of Madruzzo.

Prince-bishops governed Trento until the Napoleonic era, when it changed hands among various states. Under the reorganization of the Holy Roman Empire in 1802, the Bishopric was secularized and annexed to the Habsburg territories. The Treaty of Pressburg in 1805 ceded Trento to Bavaria, and the Treaty of Schönbrunn four years later gave it to Napoleon&#x27;s Kingdom of Italy.

The population staged armed resistance to French domination. The resistance leader was Andreas Hofer. During his youth, he lived in Italian Tyrol, where he learned the Italian language. When Hofer recovered Trento for the Austrians (1809), he was welcomed with enthusiasm by the population of Trento. Approximately 4,000 Trentinian volunteers (&quot;Sìzzeri&quot; or &quot;Schützen&quot;) died in battle against the French and Bavarian troops. In 1810, Hofer was captured and brought to Mantua, and was shot by French soldiers on the express order of Napoleon.

With Napoleon&#x27;s defeat in 1814, Trento was annexed by the Habsburg Empire. Church government was finally extinguished, and Trento was henceforth governed by the secular administration of Tyrol. In the following decades, Trento experienced a modernization of administration and economy with the first railroad in the Adige valley opening in 1859. The entire Mediterranean basin was at risk of malaria, a factor that affected the entire Italian peninsula and this Alpine region was not spared. Even Tuscany was particularly hard hit; malaria existed far inland into the Veneto area, reaching the Italian Alps. From 1918 to 1940, government figures show Italy&#x27;s malaria deaths decreased by 96%, due to the efforts of the Rockefeller Foundation and Italy&#x27;s own malaria experts, who themselves were international leaders in malariology.

During the late 19th century, Trento and Trieste, cities with ethnic Italian majorities still belonging to the Austrians, became icons of the Italian irredentist movement. Benito Mussolini briefly joined the staff of a local newspaper in 1909, but left Trento because they could not create an anti-Austrian group. There was dissatisfaction with the lack of provincial autonomy and the failure to establish a university for the region. Feelings of loyalty were focused on the &#x27;father-figure&#x27; emperor, not for Austria. 

The nationalist cause led Italy into World War I. Damiano Chiesa and the deputy in the Austrian parliament Cesare Battisti were two well-known local irredentists who had joined the Italian Army to fight against Austria-Hungary with the aim of bringing the territory of Trento into the new Kingdom of Italy. The two men were taken prisoners at the nearby southern front. They were put on trial for high treason and executed in the courtyard of Castello del Buonconsiglio.

The region was greatly affected during the war, and some of its fiercest battles were fought on the surrounding mountains in the southernmost regions and the southeast. Of a population of just less than 400,000 in the province, 55,000 men served in the Imperial and Royal Army of whom 11,000 died. Most served on the Galician front; 700 served with the Italian Army. After World War I, Trento and its Italian-speaking province, along with Bolzano (Bozen) and the part of Tyrol that stretched south of the Alpine watershed (which was primarily German-speaking, as still is to this day), were annexed by Italy.

In July 1943 Mussolini was removed as Prime Minister when the allies invaded Sicily. Italy surrendered to the Allies, and declared war on Germany. German troops promptly invaded northern Italy and the provinces of Trento, Belluno and South Tyrol became part of the Operation Zone of the Alpine Foothills, annexed to Germany. Some German-speakers wanted revenge upon Italian-speakers living in the area, but were mostly prevented by the occupying German troops, who still considered Mussolini head of the Italian Social Republic and wanted to preserve good relations with the Italians. From November 1944 to April 1945, Trento was bombed as part of the so-called &quot;Battle of the Brenner&quot;. War supplies from Germany to support the Gothic Line were for the most part routed via the rail line through the Brenner Pass. Over 6,849 sorties were flown by the Allies over targets from Verona to the Brenner Pass, with 10,267 tons of bombs dropped. Parts of the city were hit by the Allied bombings, including the church of S. Maria Maggiore, the Church of the Annunciation and several bridges over the Adige river. In spite of the bombings, most of the medieval and renaissance city center was spared. It was finally liberated on 3 May 1945.

In 1947, Trento became the host of the Rally Stella Alpina.

Since the 1950s, the region has enjoyed prosperous growth, thanks in part to its special autonomy from the central Italian government.

On 4 August 2015, the cathedral tower caught fire by &quot;spontaneous combustion&quot;. The clock stopped at 10:50 AM, a matter of minutes after the fire began.

In 2020, Trento was listed as the most sustainable city in Italy, according to the Smart City Index.

== Geography ==
The township of Trento encompasses the city centre as well as many suburbs of extremely varied geographical and population conditions (from the industrial suburb of Gardolo, just north of the city, to tiny mountain hamlets on Monte Bondone). Various distinctive suburbs still retain their traditional identity of rural or mountain villages.

Trento lies in a wide glacial valley known as the Adige valley, just south of the Dolomite Mountains, where the Fersina River and Avisio rivers join the Adige River (the second longest river in Italy). River Adige is one of the three primary south-flowing Alpine rivers; its broadly curving course alongside Trento was straightened in 1850. The valley is surrounded by mountains, including Vigolana (), Monte Bondone (), Paganella (), Marzola () and Monte Calisio (). Nearby lakes include Lake Caldonazzo, Lake Levico, Lake Garda and Lake Toblino.

=== &quot;Frazioni&quot; ===
&quot;Frazioni&quot;, or subdivisions of Trento:
* Povo
* Villazzano
* Gardolo
* Roncafort
* Mattarello
* Martignano
* Cognola
* Ravina
* Romagnano
* Montevaccino
* Vela
* Meano
* Sardagna
* Sopramonte
* Vigo Meano
* Cortesano
* Gazzadina
* Candriai
* Vaneze
* Cadine
* Vigolo Baselga
=== Climate ===
The municipality of Trento stretches across a wide range of altitude levels, going from just under 200 m above sea level at the city centre, to 400 m in Povo and Cognola, to 2000 m above sea level at Monte Bondone, boroughs at higher elevation, for instance Viote, have a colder alpine climate (&quot;Dw&quot;). Urban Trento has a humid subtropical-continental climate (&quot;Cfa&quot;-&quot;Dfa&quot;) according to the Köppen climate classification. Monthly average temperatures range between 1.6 °C (January) and 23.4 °C (July). Average annual precipitation exceeds 900 mm spread out on an average of 87 days, with peaks in late spring (May–June, 90 mm monthly average in 9–10 rain days) and autumn (October–November: 100–110 mm monthly average in 7–8 days), and lows in winter (January–February, 30–40 mm monthly average in 3–4 rain days). Winters are cold to freezing, with infrequent snowfall but usual frost from mid-November to mid-March. In winter, daytime highs may not exceed 5 °C and lows may rarely dip down to -10 °C, but the former usually stand around 8°C, while the latter usually hover between -3 °C to 0 °C. Spring brings unpredictable weather with wind blowing north to south or vice-versa through the valley. Many spring days are pleasant, but the transition may be very quick, for example going from frosty mornings to 30 °C in two months. In May, it is possible to have either rainy days with daytime highs below 18 °C, or sunny days with the temperature soaring up to 30 °C. Summers are hot, sometimes sweltering, with highs getting to 35 °C at least for a week a year and more rarely to 38 °C. Summer nights can be hot as well, with overnight lows hovering around 22-24 °C (in the hilly suburbs east, north and west of Trento summer nights can be much cooler, with overnight temperature differing by up to 6 °C from the ones experienced in the city centre). Early fall is pleasant, with foliage starting around mid-October at higher elevations, late October in the uphill suburbs and in November downtown. Fall days can be humid, grey and dim, with temperatures rapidly declining through October and November. The first snowfall in the suburbs may occur as early as late November, with December and early January being the snowiest period of the year.

== Demographics ==
As of December 2023, there were 119.180 people residing in Trento, of whom 48% were male and 52% were female. Children (ages 14 and younger) totalled 12.6 percent of the population compared to the elderly (ages 65 and above) who numbered 24.4 percent. The average age of Trento residents is 45.5 compared to the Italian average of 46.8. In the five years between 2018 and 2023, the population of Trento grew by 0.72 percent, while Italy as a whole declined by 1.51 percent. The current birth rate of Trento is 9.61 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.

, 92.68% of the population was Italian. The largest immigrant group came from other European countries (mostly Albania, Romania): 4.13%, North Africa: 1.08%, and the Americas: 0.85%.

== Economy ==
The city owes much of its unique economy to its position along the main communication route between Italy and Northern Europe and to the Adige river which, prior to its diversion in the mid-19th century, ran through the center of the city. The Adige river was formerly a navigable river and one of the main commercial routes in the Alps. The original course of the river is now covered by the Via Torre Vanga, Via Torre Verde and the Via Alessandro Manzoni.

As late as World War II, Trento depended on wine-making and silk. Sparkling wine made in the Trentino province is part of the Trento DOC classification. The manufacturing industry installed in the post-war period has been mostly dismantled. Today, Trento thrives on commerce, services, tourism, high-quality agriculture and food industry (including wine and fruit), as a research and conference center thanks to a small but renowned university and internationally renowned research centers such as &quot;Fondazione Bruno Kessler&quot;, active in both fundamental and applied research, the Italian-German Historical Institute, the Centre for Computational and Systems Biology and ECT*, active in theoretical nuclear studies and part of FBK, and as logistics and transportation thoroughfare.

Valued pink and white porphyry are still excavated from some surrounding areas (Pila). This stone can be seen in many of Trento&#x27;s buildings, both new and old.

The city has two long-running annual sporting events: the Giro al Sas (a professional road running competition) was first held in the city in 1907 and continues to the present, while the Giro del Trentino is an annual road cycling race which the city has hosted every year since 1963.

=== Economy Festival of Trento ===

The Festival dell’Economia di Trento (Economy Festival of Trento) was brought into being in 2006 in order to enable and facilitate discussions between economists and a broad public. The aim of this festival is to put economic terminology across to everyone. The festival takes place every year at the end of May on the historic Palazzi of the old town in Trento. Well known economists explain and interpret current economic issues, both from an economic-scientific as well as from a social and entrepreneurial viewpoint. In the course of recent years, numerous economic scholars and managers such as Sir Anthony Atkinson, Fan Gang, Zygmunt Bauman and the Nobel Prize winner Gary Becker took an active part.

== Politics ==
=== Government ===

Trento is governed by the City Council of Trento. Voters elect directly 40 councilors and the mayor of Trento every five years. The current mayor of Trento is Franco Ianeselli, elected for the first time on 21 September 2020. Ianeselli, a former trade unionist, was elected as a left-leaning independent with the support of a wide coalition of parties. These parties ranged from the left (as in the case of Europa Verde) to the Catholic centre (including Partito Autonomista Trentino Tirolese, and Insieme per Trento). When determining the composition of his Giunta (the equivalent of a City Cabinet), Ianeselli selected seven members of the City Council: Monica Baggia, Elisabetta Bozzarelli, Mariachiara Franzoia, Chiara Maule, Salvatore Panetta, Roberto Stanchina, and Paolo Zanella. However, in late November 2020 Paolo Zanella announced he would leave his position as a member of the Giunta, in order to fill a vacancy in one of the 35 seats of the legislative assembly of the Trentino province, upon the resignation of member Paolo Ghezzi. Shortly after, mayor Ianeselli announced Ezio Facchin as Zanella&#x27;s successor.

=== Euroregion Tyrol-South Tyrol-Trentino ===
In 1996, a joint session between the states, further cultural and economic integration between the Austrian province of Tyrol and the Italian autonomous provinces of South Tyrol and Trentino was mutually agreed on. This activity was steadily extended, eventually followed by the creation of the Euroregion Tyrol-South Tyrol-Trentino in 2011.

== Main sights ==


Although off the beaten path of mass tourism, Trento offers rather interesting monuments. Its architecture has a unique feel, with both Italian Renaissance and Roman influences. The city center is small, and most Late-Medieval and Renaissance buildings have been restored to their original pastel colours and wooden balconies. Part of the medieval city walls is still visible in Piazza Fiera, along with a circular tower. Once, these walls encircled the entire city and were connected to the Castello del Buonconsiglio.
The main monuments of the city include:
* Cattedrale di San Vigilio (Cathedral of Saint Vigilius), also known as Duomo di Trento (12th–13thcentury) is a Romanesque-Gothic cathedral built on top of a late-Roman basilica (viewable in an underground crypt).
* Piazza Duomo (1767–1768), on the side of the cathedral, has frescoed Renaissance buildings and the Late Baroque Fountain of Neptune (&quot;Fontana di Nettuno&quot;).
* Church of Santa Maria Maggiore (1520), site of the preparatory congregations of the Third Council of Trent (April 1562 – December 1563). It was built for Bishop Bernardo Clesio by the architect Antonio Medaglia in Renaissance-Gothic style. The façade has a notable 16th-century portal, while the interior has works by Giambettino Cignaroli and Moroni.
* Castello del Buonconsiglio (Buonconsiglio Castle) (13th century), which includes a museum and the notable Torre dell&#x27;Aquila, with a cycle of fine Gothic frescoes depicting the months, was commissioned by the prince-bishop Georg von Lichtenstein.
* Church of San Pietro (12th century) features a neo-Gothic façade added in 1848–1850.
* Church of Sant&#x27;Apollinare (13th century) is a Gothic church.
* Church of San Lorenzo (12th century) features a Romanesque apse.
* Torre Verde (Green Tower), along the former transit path of the Adige river, is said to be where persons executed in the name of the Prince-Bishop were deposited in the river.
* Palazzo delle Albere (Palace of the Trees), a Renaissance villa next to the Adige river built around 1550 by the Madruzzo family, now hosting a modern art museum.
* Palazzo Pretorio (12th century), next to the Duomo, with a bell tower (&quot;Torre Civica&quot;) of the 13th century that now hosts a collection of baroque paintings of religious themes. It was the main Bishops&#x27; residence until the mid-13th century.
* Palazzo Salvadori (1515) is one of the first examples of Renaissance civil architecture in the city.
* Palazzo Geremia (15th century) features a Renaissance exterior and Gothic interiors.
* Palazzo Lodron, built during the Council of Trent. The interior has a large fresco cycle.
* Various underground remains of the streets and villas of the Roman city (in Via Prepositura and Piazza Cesare Battisti).

Trento also sports modernist architecture, including the train station and the central post office, both by rationalist architect Angiolo Mazzoni. In particular, the train station (1934–36) is considered a landmark building of Italian railways architecture and combines many varieties of local stone with the most advanced building materials of the time: glass, reinforced concrete, metal. The post office was once decorated with colored windows by Fortunato Depero, but these were destroyed during bombings in World War II. Other buildings of that time include the Grand Hotel by Giovanni Lorenzi with some guest rooms furnished with futurist furniture by Depero, and the &quot;R. Sanzio&quot; Primary School built in 1931–34 and designed by Adalberto Libera.

=== Gallery ===
== Culture ==
=== Museums ===

* MUSE - Museo delle Scienze, museum of science and natural history. The museum was planned by Renzo Piano and opened in 2013.
*Municipal Gallery, part of the Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art of Trento and Rovereto (MART).
* Regional Museum of Art, in the Castello del Buonconsiglio, former seat of the Prince-Bishops of Trento.
* The Tridentine Diocesan Museum, located in the , next to the Cathedral Square of Trento, shows the artistic treasures of the diocese of Trento as well as the influence of the council on the city.
* Viote Alpine Botanical Garden, located on Monte Bondone in &quot;Le Viote&quot;, founded in 1938. Trento&#x27;s surroundings are known for the mountain landscapes and are a destination of both summer and winter tourism.
* Museo dell&#x27;Aeronautica Gianni Caproni, an aeronautical museum located in Mattarello, near Trento&#x27;s airport.

=== Theatre ===
* Teatro Sociale, realized in 1819
* Teatro Auditorium
* Teatro San Marco
* Teatro di Meano, located in the frazione of Meano

=== Events ===
* Economy Festival Trento
* Mountain Film Festival
* Christmas Market of Trento
* A Tutto Nosiola – Food and Wine Event
* Gemme di Gusto – Food and Wine Event
* DiVin Ottobre – Food and Wine Event

== Education ==

The University of Trento was founded in 1962 and has its headquarters in the city of Trento. The other university location is in Rovereto. In total, over 16,000 students study in Trento. Through the Euroregion Tyrol-South Tyrol-Trentino, the university also works closely together with the universities of Innsbruck and Bolzano.

== Transport ==
The Autostrada A22 (part of the European route E45) highway connects Trento to Verona and to Bolzano, Innsbruck and Munich.

Trento railway station, opened in 1859, forms part of the Brenner railway (Verona–Innsbruck), which is the main rail connection between Italy and Germany. The station is also a junction with the Valsugana railway, which connects Trento to Venice. Trento has several other railway stations, including Trento FTM railway station, terminus of the Trento-Malè-Marilleva railway (FTM).

Bus or train services operate to the main surrounding valleys: Fassa, Fiemme, Gudicarie, Non, Primiero, Rendena, Sole, Tesino, Valsugana.

The public transport network within the city consists of 20 bus lines operated by Trentino Trasporti and a cable car service to Sardagna. The various railway stations within Trento&#x27;s city limits are integrated into the public transport network.

== Sport ==
=== Local teams ===

* Trentino Volley, one of the top teams in Italian volleyball, has won the Italian championship four times, three times the CEV Champions League title and five times the club world cup.
* Aquila Basket Trento has been playing regularly in the highest Italian basketball league for several years and reached the final of the play-offs in the 2016/17 season and 2017/18 season.
* A.C. Trento S.C.S.D. is one of the oldest football clubs in the region of Trentino Alto Adige since its foundation in 1921. Starting in 2021, the club is to play in the third highest Italian league, the Serie C.

=== Sports venues ===
PalaTrento, now known as BLM Group Arena, opened in 2000, is an indoor arena with a capacity of 4300 seats. Trentino Volley and Aquila Basket Trento play their respective games there.
* Stadio Briamasco is a football stadium with a capacity of 4277 seats and is currently the home stadium of AC Trento.

== People ==

Notable people born in or associated with Trento include:
* Jacopo Aconcio (), Italian jurist, theologian, philosopher and engineer 
* Beniamino Andreatta (1928–2007), Italian economist and politician
* Cesare Battisti (1875–1916), Italian patriot during the Italian irredentism
* Francesco Antonio Bonporti (1672–1749), Italian priest and amateur composer
* Aliprando Caprioli, engraver of the 16th century
* Alcide De Gasperi (1881–1954), 30th Prime Minister of Italy and one of the founding fathers of the European Union
* Ernest von Koerber (1850–1919), Austrian liberal statesman, prime minister of the Austrian portion of Austria-Hungary from 1900 to 1904
* Johann Baptist von Lampi the Younger (1775–1837), Austrian portrait painter
* Chiara Lubich (1920–2008), Italian teacher and author. She founded the Focolare Movement.
* Martino Martini (1614–1661), Jesuit missionary, geographer, historian and missionary
* Paolo Oss Mazzurana (1833–1895), Trento&#x27;s most notable mayor, with progressive economic policies that impacted Trento&#x27;s commercial sector and its eventual independence
* Francesca Neri (born 1964), Italian actress
* Aldo Pancheri (born 1940), painter and printmaker
* Antonio Pedrotti (1901–1975), Italian conductor and composer
* Andrea Pozzo (1642–1709), Jesuit Brother, baroque painter and architect
* Galeas von Thun und Hohenstein (1850–1931), the Prince and Grand Master of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta from 1905 to 1931
* Alessandro Vittoria (1525–1608), Italian Mannerist sculptor of the Venetian school
* Hermann Zingerle (1870–1935), Austrian neurologist, psychiatrist and neuropathologist

=== Sport ===

* Lorenzo Bernardi (born 1968), Italian volleyball coach and former player, team silver medallist at the 1996 Summer Olympics 
* Attilio Bettega (1953–1985), rally driver 
* Alessandro Bonetti (born 1985), racing driver 
*Mirko Bortolotti (born 1990), racing driver
*Thomas Degasperi (born 1981), water skier, two time World Champion
*Cesare Maestri (1929–2021), Italian mountaineer and writer
*Amos Mosaner (born 1995), Italian curler, team gold medallist at the 2022 Winter Olympics
*Marvin Vettori (born 1993), Italian professional mixed martial artist
*Renzo Videsott (1904–1974), Italian alpinist and conservationist

== International relations ==
=== Twin towns – sister cities ===
Trento is twinned with:

* Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf (Berlin), Germany (1966)
* San Sebastián, Spain (1987)
* Kempten, Germany (1987)
* Prague 1, Czech Republic (2002)
Districts of Trento are twinned with:

* Schwaz, Austria
* Fließ, Austria
* Ergolding, Germany
* Herrsching, Germany
* Neufahrn bei Freising, Germany
* Znojmo, Czech Republic
=== Partner cities ===
* Prijedor, Bosnia and Herzegovina
* Sławno, Poland

== See also ==

* Trentino
* Val d&#x27;Adige (territory)

== References ==

=== Notes ===
== Further reading ==
*

== External links ==
* Official homepage of Trento</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3376" start="0" end="6" title="Trento" label="Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q36202" start="11" end="16" title="Ladin language" label="Ladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376" start="59" end="64" title="Trento" label="Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13696" start="83" end="94" title="Adige" label="Adige River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237" start="98" end="126" title="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol" label="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q16289" start="162" end="191" title="Trentino" label="autonomous province of Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="247" end="263" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="282" end="289" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="294" end="309" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="329" end="334" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="418" end="422" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q153809" start="470" end="475" title="Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237" start="550" end="578" title="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol" label="Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol"/>
<link wikidata="Q153809" start="583" end="588" title="Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="593" end="607" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627825" start="640" end="651" title="picturesque" label="picturesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q621060" start="725" end="741" title="Trento Cathedral" label="Trento Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q247451" start="750" end="776" title="Castello del Buonconsiglio" label="Castello del Buonconsiglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q314320" start="834" end="857" title="Alpine Town of the Year" label="Alpine Town of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q83514" start="900" end="917" title="Alpine Convention" label="Alpine Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="1088" end="1103" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q175850" start="1105" end="1123" title="standard of living" label="standard of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001907" start="1129" end="1159" title="business opportunity" label="business and job opportunities"/>
<link wikidata="Q16289" start="1275" end="1283" title="Trentino" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1326" end="1340" title="GDP per capita" label="GDP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="1366" end="1369" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q930528" start="1401" end="1421" title="University of Trento" label="University of Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810007" start="1820" end="1880" title="Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs" label="Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810007" start="1882" end="1887" title="Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs" label="Apsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526" start="2479" end="2486" title="Bolzano" label="Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q212946" start="2516" end="2523" title="Brenner Pass" label="Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q222860" start="2532" end="2544" title="Reschen Pass" label="Reschen Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q156789" start="2605" end="2612" title="Rhaetia" label="Rhaetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220379" start="2707" end="2724" title="Adriatic Veneti" label="(Adriatic) Veneti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="2730" end="2739" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="2748" end="2752" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2757" end="2761" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2898" end="2904" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="3024" end="3037" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831426" start="3081" end="3106" title="Lex Roscia" label="Rome extended citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954" start="3422" end="3429" title="Neptune (mythology)" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3706" end="3711" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="3965" end="3975" title="Roman road" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="3990" end="3996" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="4000" end="4009" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="4035" end="4055" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="4110" end="4120" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4122" end="4132" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="4134" end="4142" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="4147" end="4153" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="4184" end="4201" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q152256" start="4220" end="4229" title="Conrad II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Conrad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231403" start="4242" end="4266" title="Prince-Bishops of Trento" label="Prince-Bishops of Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231403" start="4393" end="4411" title="Prince-Bishopric of Trent" label="Bishopric of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543832" start="4420" end="4435" title="County of Tyrol" label="County of Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741937" start="4616" end="4630" title="Federico Wanga" label="Federico Wanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="4708" end="4716" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="4747" end="4754" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543832" start="4779" end="4784" title="County of Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q544321" start="4898" end="4912" title="Simon of Trent" label="Simon of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="4948" end="4959" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="5628" end="5644" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="5680" end="5699" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q826269" start="5906" end="5921" title="Bernardo Clesio" label="Bernardo Clesio"/>
<link wikidata="Q683106" start="6011" end="6030" title="Cristoforo Madruzzo" label="Cristoforo Madruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="6112" end="6121" title="humanism" label="humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="6269" end="6275" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="6352" end="6358" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117603" start="6359" end="6364" title="Rabbinic literature" label="books"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="6395" end="6400" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118975" start="6425" end="6439" title="Jacob Marcaria" label="Jacob Marcaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27333644" start="6769" end="6808" title="Reichsdeputationshauptschluss" label="reorganization of the Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="6867" end="6875" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q154102" start="6893" end="6912" title="Treaty of Pressburg (1805)" label="Treaty of Pressburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="6937" end="6944" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q694767" start="6954" end="6974" title="Treaty of Schönbrunn" label="Treaty of Schönbrunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q223936" start="7019" end="7035" title="Kingdom of Italy (Napoleonic)" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11697" start="7125" end="7138" title="Andreas Hofer" label="Andreas Hofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="7206" end="7222" title="Italian language" label="Italian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247" start="7525" end="7531" title="Mantua" label="Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="7663" end="7678" title="Austrian Empire" label="Habsburg Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118268" start="7792" end="7797" title="German Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="8434" end="8445" title="malariology" label="malariology"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="8489" end="8496" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="8598" end="8609" title="irredentist" label="irredentist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="8620" end="8636" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9014" end="9025" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q78782" start="9084" end="9099" title="Cesare Battisti (politician)" label="Cesare Battisti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257793" start="9158" end="9170" title="Royal Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="9266" end="9282" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q247451" start="9420" end="9446" title="Castello del Buonconsiglio" label="Castello del Buonconsiglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="9822" end="9833" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526" start="9888" end="9895" title="Bolzano" label="Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="9992" end="9998" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q16126" start="10281" end="10288" title="Province of Belluno" label="Belluno"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="10293" end="10304" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q239556" start="10324" end="10362" title="Operation Zone of the Alpine Foothills" label="Operation Zone of the Alpine Foothills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="10375" end="10382" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q153660" start="10563" end="10586" title="Italian Social Republic" label="Italian Social Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q696810" start="10797" end="10808" title="Gothic Line" label="Gothic Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="10945" end="10951" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q212946" start="10959" end="10971" title="Brenner Pass" label="Brenner Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q13696" start="11162" end="11167" title="Adige" label="Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q20685235" start="11342" end="11361" title="Rally Stella Alpina" label="Rally Stella Alpina"/>
<link wikidata="Q649266" start="12145" end="12159" title="glacial valley" label="glacial valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13696" start="12173" end="12185" title="Adige" label="Adige valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283" start="12205" end="12223" title="Dolomite Mountains" label="Dolomite Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q791146" start="12253" end="12259" title="Avisio River" label="Avisio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13696" start="12276" end="12287" title="Adige" label="Adige River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046117" start="12544" end="12553" title="Paganella" label="Paganella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861272" start="12573" end="12586" title="Monte Calisio" label="Monte Calisio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026494" start="12612" end="12627" title="Lake Caldonazzo" label="Lake Caldonazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414" start="12642" end="12652" title="Lake Garda" label="Lake Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785339" start="12752" end="12756" title="Povo" label="Povo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12759" end="12769" title="Villazzano" label="Villazzano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12772" end="12779" title="Gardolo" label="Gardolo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12782" end="12791" title="Roncafort" label="Roncafort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095712" start="12794" end="12804" title="Mattarello" label="Mattarello"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12807" end="12817" title="Martignano, Trento" label="Martignano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618564" start="12820" end="12827" title="Cognola" label="Cognola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12830" end="12836" title="Ravina, Trento" label="Ravina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12839" end="12848" title="Romagnano, Trento" label="Romagnano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12851" end="12863" title="Montevaccino" label="Montevaccino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12866" end="12870" title="Vela, Trento" label="Vela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12873" end="12878" title="Meano, Trento" label="Meano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12881" end="12889" title="Sardagna, Trento" label="Sardagna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12892" end="12902" title="Sopramonte" label="Sopramonte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12905" end="12915" title="Vigo Meano" label="Vigo Meano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12918" end="12927" title="Cortesano" label="Cortesano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12930" end="12939" title="Gazzadina" label="Gazzadina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12942" end="12950" title="Candriai" label="Candriai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12953" end="12959" title="Vaneze" label="Vaneze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12962" end="12968" title="Cadine, Trento" label="Cadine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12971" end="12985" title="Vigolo Baselga" label="Vigolo Baselga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558600" start="13260" end="13265" title="Viote Alpine Botanical Garden" label="Viote"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="13333" end="13350" title="Humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="13351" end="13362" title="Humid continental climate" label="continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="13422" end="13451" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="15729" end="15734" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="15922" end="15929" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="15975" end="15981" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="16002" end="16009" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="16011" end="16018" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="16028" end="16040" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="16057" end="16065" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838522" start="16674" end="16684" title="Trento DOC" label="Trento DOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q930528" start="16981" end="16991" title="University of Trento" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q337238" start="17361" end="17369" title="porphyry (geology)" label="porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403483" start="17562" end="17573" title="Giro al Sas" label="Giro al Sas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401183" start="17691" end="17708" title="Giro del Trentino" label="Giro del Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609" start="17722" end="17739" title="road cycling race" label="road cycling race"/>
<link wikidata="Q564905" start="18430" end="18446" title="Tony Atkinson" label="Anthony Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015490" start="18448" end="18456" title="Fan Gang" label="Fan Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q158092" start="18458" end="18472" title="Zygmunt Bauman" label="Zygmunt Bauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q191020" start="18500" end="18511" title="Gary Becker" label="Gary Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q97924784" start="18728" end="18744" title="Franco Ianeselli" label="Franco Ianeselli"/>
<link wikidata="Q153809" start="19865" end="19870" title="Tyrol" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="19911" end="19922" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q16289" start="19927" end="19935" title="Trentino" label="Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q698456" start="20040" end="20077" title="Euroregion Tyrol-South Tyrol-Trentino" label="Euroregion Tyrol-South Tyrol-Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q621060" start="20670" end="20695" title="Trento Cathedral" label="Cattedrale di San Vigilio"/>
<link wikidata="Q194395" start="20710" end="20724" title="Saint Vigilius" label="Saint Vigilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673483" start="21053" end="21083" title="Church of Santa Maria Maggiore, Trento" label="Church of Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q826269" start="21214" end="21229" title="Bernardo Clesio" label="Bernardo Clesio"/>
<link wikidata="Q327262" start="21371" end="21392" title="Giambettino Cignaroli" label="Giambettino Cignaroli"/>
<link wikidata="Q504949" start="21397" end="21403" title="Gian Battista Moroni" label="Moroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q247451" start="21435" end="21455" title="Buonconsiglio Castle" label="Buonconsiglio Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13696" start="21946" end="21951" title="Adige" label="Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891498" start="22060" end="22080" title="Palazzo delle Albere" label="Palazzo delle Albere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127005" start="22482" end="22499" title="Palazzo Salvadori" label="Palazzo Salvadori"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="22905" end="22914" title="modernist" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q535532" start="23016" end="23031" title="Angiolo Mazzoni" label="Angiolo Mazzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125077" start="23335" end="23351" title="Fortunato Depero" label="Fortunato Depero"/>
<link wikidata="Q348036" start="23629" end="23645" title="Adalberto Libera" label="Adalberto Libera"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057316" start="23697" end="23723" title="MUSE - Museo delle Scienze" label="MUSE - Museo delle Scienze"/>
<link wikidata="Q190148" start="23790" end="23801" title="Renzo Piano" label="Renzo Piano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23823" end="23840" title="Trento Municipal Gallery" label="Municipal Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q642603" start="23854" end="23921" title="Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art of Trento and Rovereto" label="Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art of Trento and Rovereto (MART)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23925" end="23947" title="Regional Museum of Art (Trento)" label="Regional Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q247451" start="23956" end="23982" title="Castello del Buonconsiglio" label="Castello del Buonconsiglio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24031" end="24061" title="The Tridentine Diocesan Museum" label="The Tridentine Diocesan Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558600" start="24229" end="24258" title="Viote Alpine Botanical Garden" label="Viote Alpine Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q946065" start="24451" end="24493" title="Museo dell&amp;#x27;Aeronautica Gianni Caproni" label="Museo dell&amp;#x27;Aeronautica Gianni Caproni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095712" start="24529" end="24539" title="Mattarello" label="Mattarello"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24588" end="24602" title="Teatro Sociale (Trento)" label="Teatro Sociale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24730" end="24753" title="Economy Festival Trento" label="Economy Festival Trento"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24756" end="24778" title="Mountain Film Festival" label="Mountain Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q930528" start="24947" end="24967" title="University of Trento" label="University of Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q279373" start="25072" end="25080" title="Rovereto" label="Rovereto"/>
<link wikidata="Q698456" start="25142" end="25179" title="Euroregion Tyrol-South Tyrol-Trentino" label="Euroregion Tyrol-South Tyrol-Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q875788" start="25249" end="25258" title="University of Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231433" start="25263" end="25270" title="Free University of Bolzano" label="Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q635208" start="25293" end="25307" title="Autostrada A22 (Italy)" label="Autostrada A22"/>
<link wikidata="Q276570" start="25321" end="25339" title="European route E45" label="European route E45"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="25368" end="25374" title="Verona, Italy" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526" start="25382" end="25389" title="Bolzano" label="Bolzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="25391" end="25400" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="25405" end="25411" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404881" start="25414" end="25436" title="Trento railway station" label="Trento railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q509496" start="25472" end="25506" title="Brenner railway" label="Brenner railway (Verona–Innsbruck)"/>
<link wikidata="Q336764" start="25591" end="25599" title="junction (rail)" label="junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743665" start="25609" end="25626" title="Trento–Venice railway" label="Valsugana railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q801567" start="25653" end="25659" title="Venezia Santa Lucia railway station" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408026" start="25758" end="25787" title="Trento-Malè-Marilleva railway" label="Trento-Malè-Marilleva railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683655" start="25923" end="25932" title="Valsugana" label="Valsugana"/>
<link wikidata="Q498002" start="26042" end="26051" title="Aerial tramway" label="cable car"/>
<link wikidata="Q56540580" start="26063" end="26071" title="Sardagna" label="Sardagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632686" start="26221" end="26236" title="Trentino Volley" label="Trentino Volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572190" start="26262" end="26280" title="Italian Volleyball League" label="Italian volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q300098" start="26343" end="26363" title="CEV Champions League" label="CEV Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584896" start="26389" end="26403" title="FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s Club World Championship" label="club world cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q51167" start="26407" end="26427" title="Aquila Basket Trento" label="Aquila Basket Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q929124" start="26470" end="26495" title="Lega Basket Serie A" label="Italian basketball league"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886058" start="26560" end="26574" title="2016-17 LBA season" label="2016/17 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594476" start="26579" end="26593" title="2017-18 LBA season" label="2017/18 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q638882" start="26597" end="26617" title="A.C. Trento S.C.S.D." label="A.C. Trento S.C.S.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1237" start="26671" end="26690" title="Trentino Alto Adige" label="Trentino Alto Adige"/>
<link wikidata="Q607965" start="26800" end="26807" title="Serie C" label="Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889172" start="26832" end="26842" title="PalaTrento" label="PalaTrento"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889172" start="26857" end="26872" title="PalaTrento" label="BLM Group Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q641226" start="26896" end="26908" title="indoor arena" label="indoor arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967754" start="27018" end="27034" title="Stadio Briamasco" label="Stadio Briamasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245769" start="27210" end="27224" title="Jacopo Aconcio" label="Jacopo Aconcio"/>
<link wikidata="Q734294" start="27285" end="27304" title="Beniamino Andreatta" label="Beniamino Andreatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q78782" start="27353" end="27368" title="Cesare Battisti (politician)" label="Cesare Battisti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299884" start="27409" end="27428" title="Italian irredentism" label="Italian irredentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q918530" start="27431" end="27457" title="Francesco Antonio Bonporti" label="Francesco Antonio Bonporti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726827" start="27509" end="27527" title="Aliprando Caprioli" label="Aliprando Caprioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q153832" start="27560" end="27577" title="Alcide De Gasperi" label="Alcide De Gasperi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="27596" end="27619" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Prime Minister of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523985" start="27635" end="27673" title="founding fathers of the European Union" label="founding fathers of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q72242" start="27676" end="27694" title="Ernest von Koerber" label="Ernest von Koerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="27778" end="27793" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q698097" start="27814" end="27850" title="Johann Baptist von Lampi the Younger" label="Johann Baptist von Lampi the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q168479" start="27892" end="27905" title="Chiara Lubich" label="Chiara Lubich"/>
<link wikidata="Q727837" start="27963" end="27980" title="Focolare Movement" label="Focolare Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243676" start="27984" end="27999" title="Martino Martini" label="Martino Martini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795144" start="28071" end="28090" title="Paolo Oss Mazzurana" label="Paolo Oss Mazzurana"/>
<link wikidata="Q241154" start="28251" end="28265" title="Francesca Neri" label="Francesca Neri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8287805" start="28297" end="28310" title="Aldo Pancheri" label="Aldo Pancheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082616" start="28349" end="28365" title="Antonio Pedrotti" label="Antonio Pedrotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q380103" start="28412" end="28424" title="Andrea Pozzo" label="Andrea Pozzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79019" start="28486" end="28516" title="Galeas von Thun und Hohenstein" label="Galeas von Thun und Hohenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q952136" start="28534" end="28557" title="List of grand masters of the Knights Hospitaller" label="Prince and Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="28565" end="28598" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Sovereign Military Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347426" start="28619" end="28638" title="Alessandro Vittoria" label="Alessandro Vittoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="28660" end="28669" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q610687" start="28686" end="28701" title="Venetian painting" label="Venetian school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741092" start="28704" end="28720" title="Hermann Zingerle" label="Hermann Zingerle"/>
<link wikidata="Q168742" start="28808" end="28824" title="Lorenzo Bernardi" label="Lorenzo Bernardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="28911" end="28931" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q780902" start="28935" end="28950" title="Attilio Bettega" label="Attilio Bettega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609865" start="28980" end="28998" title="Alessandro Bonetti" label="Alessandro Bonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q513020" start="29028" end="29044" title="Mirko Bortolotti" label="Mirko Bortolotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990607" start="29073" end="29089" title="Thomas Degasperi" label="Thomas Degasperi"/>
<link wikidata="Q323226" start="29141" end="29155" title="Cesare Maestri" label="Cesare Maestri"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713874" start="29201" end="29213" title="Amos Mosaner" label="Amos Mosaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q193074" start="29270" end="29290" title="2022 Winter Olympics" label="2022 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q26509559" start="29292" end="29306" title="Marvin Vettori" label="Marvin Vettori"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="29341" end="29361" title="Mixed martial arts" label="mixed martial artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933084" start="29363" end="29377" title="Renzo Videsott" label="Renzo Videsott"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="29504" end="29511" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q158095" start="29521" end="29556" title="Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf" label="Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf (Berlin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10313" start="29575" end="29588" title="San Sebastián" label="San Sebastián"/>
<link wikidata="Q3994" start="29605" end="29612" title="Kempten" label="Kempten"/>
<link wikidata="Q973974" start="29631" end="29639" title="Prague 1" label="Prague 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q583485" start="29704" end="29710" title="Schwaz" label="Schwaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q665521" start="29722" end="29727" title="Fließ" label="Fließ"/>
<link wikidata="Q264256" start="29739" end="29748" title="Ergolding" label="Ergolding"/>
<link wikidata="Q170020" start="29760" end="29770" title="Herrsching" label="Herrsching"/>
<link wikidata="Q31658" start="29782" end="29803" title="Neufahrn bei Freising" label="Neufahrn bei Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q214956" start="29815" end="29821" title="Znojmo" label="Znojmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q323986" start="29863" end="29871" title="Prijedor" label="Prijedor"/>
<link wikidata="Q161967" start="29898" end="29904" title="Sławno" label="Sławno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16289" start="29932" end="29940" title="Trentino" label="Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7909172" start="29943" end="29971" title="Val d&amp;#x27;Adige (territory)" label="Val d&amp;#x27;Adige (territory)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45883" wikidata="Q2977" url="?curid=45883" title="Cathedral">
<text>A cathedral is a church that contains the of a bishop, thus serving as the central church of a diocese, conference, or episcopate. Churches with the function of &quot;cathedral&quot; are usually specific to those Christian denominations with an episcopal hierarchy, such as the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Anglican, and some Lutheran churches. Church buildings embodying the functions of a cathedral first appeared in Italy, Gaul, Spain, and North Africa in the 4th century, but cathedrals did not become universal within the Western Catholic Church until the 12th century, by which time they had developed architectural forms, institutional structures, and legal identities distinct from parish churches, monastic churches, and episcopal residences. The cathedral is more important in the hierarchy than the church because it is from the cathedral that the bishop governs the area under his or her administrative authority.

Following the Protestant Reformation, the Christian church in several parts of Western Europe, such as Scotland, the Netherlands, certain Swiss Cantons and parts of Germany, adopted a presbyterian polity that did away with bishops altogether. Where ancient cathedral buildings in these lands are still in use for congregational worship, they generally retain the title and dignity of &quot;cathedral&quot;, maintaining and developing distinct cathedral functions, but void of hierarchical supremacy. From the 16th century onwards, but especially since the 19th century, churches originating in Western Europe have undertaken vigorous programmes of missionary activity, leading to the founding of large numbers of new dioceses with associated cathedral establishments of varying forms in Asia, Africa, Australasia, Oceania and the Americas. In addition, both the Catholic Church and Orthodox churches have formed new dioceses within formerly Protestant lands for converts and migrant co-religionists. Consequently, it is not uncommon to find Christians in a single city being served by three or more cathedrals of differing denominations.

==Etymology and definition==


The word &quot;cathedral&quot; is derived, possibly via the French , from the Latin and from the Latin (&#x27;seat&#x27;), and ultimately from the Ancient Greek (), &#x27;seat, bench&#x27;, from () &#x27;down&#x27; and () &#x27;seat, base, chair&#x27;.

The word refers to the presence and prominence of the bishop&#x27;s or archbishop&#x27;s chair or throne, raised above both clergy and laity, and originally located facing the congregation from behind the high altar. In the ancient world, the chair, on a raised dais, was the distinctive mark of a teacher or rhetor and thus symbolises the bishop&#x27;s role as teacher. A raised throne within a basilican hall was also definitive for a Late Antique presiding magistrate; and so the &quot;cathedra&quot; also symbolises the bishop&#x27;s role in governing his diocese.

The word &quot;cathedral&quot;, as the seat of a bishop, is found in most languages; however in Europe a cathedral church can be referred to as a (in Italian) or (e.g. German, Dutch, etc.), from the Latin term (house of the church) or (episcopal house). While the terms are not synonymous (a &quot;duomo&quot; is a collegiate church, similar to the English &quot;Minster&quot;) many cathedral churches are also collegiate churches, so that , and , have become the common names for a cathedral in those countries. It is also common in parts of the Iberian Peninsula to use &quot;Sé&quot; (in Portuguese), and &quot;Seu&quot; (in Catalan, with its Spanish form &quot;Seo&quot;), all of them from the Latin term , meaning &quot;episcopal seat&quot;.

In the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Latin word &quot;cathedral&quot; commonly translates as ( in Slavic languages), meaning &#x27;assembly&#x27;, but this title is also applied to monastic and other major churches without episcopal responsibilities. When the church at which an archbishop or &quot;metropolitan&quot; presides is specifically intended, the term () is used.

The episcopal throne embodies the principle that only a bishop makes a cathedral, and this still applies even in those churches that no longer have bishops, but retain cathedral dignity and functions in ancient churches over which bishops formerly presided. But the throne can also embody the principle that a cathedral makes a bishop; both specifically, in that the bishop is elected within the cathedral and is inaugurated by being enthroned within the cathedral by acclamation of clergy and laity; and also generally, in that the bishops&#x27; essential qualifications of regular prayer, higher learning and musical worship were for many centuries, primarily accessible through cathedral functions. In this there is a distinction between those church traditions, predominantly those of Eastern Orthodox Christianity but formerly also including Celtic churches in Ireland, Scotland and Wales, whose bishops came to be made in monasteries; and those church traditions whose bishops have tended predominantly to arise through the ranks of cathedral clergy.

In the Catholic or Roman Catholic tradition, the term &quot;cathedral&quot; correctly applies only to a church that houses the seat of the bishop of a diocese. The abbey church of a territorial abbey serves the same function (that is, houses the seat of the abbot), but does not acquire the title. In any other jurisdiction canonically equivalent to a diocese but not canonically erected as such (prelature, vicariate, ordinariate, prefecture, apostolic administration), the church that serves this function is correctly called the &quot;principal church&quot; of the respective entity—though some have coopted the term &quot;cathedral&quot; anyway. The Catholic Church also uses the following terms.

* A pro-cathedral is a parish or other church used temporarily as a cathedral, usually while the cathedral of a diocese is under construction, renovation, or repair. This designation applies only as long as the temporary use continues.
* A co-cathedral is a second cathedral in a diocese that has two sees. This situation can arise in various ways such as a merger of two former dioceses, preparation to split a diocese, or perceived need to perform cathedral functions in a second location due to the expanse of the diocesan territory.
* A proto-cathedral () is the former cathedral of a transferred see.
The cathedral church of a metropolitan bishop is called a &quot;metropolitan cathedral&quot;.

The term &quot;cathedral&quot; actually carries no implication as to the size or ornateness of the building, although many cathedrals are impressive edifices simply because diocesan celebrations typically require the capacity of one of the larger churches in the diocese. Thus, the term &quot;cathedral&quot; is often applied colloquially to large and impressive churches that do not function as cathedrals (e.g. the Arctic Cathedral in Tromsø, Norway). Simon Jenkins&#x27; guidebook on European cathedrals intentionally includes several churches that have never been cathedrals (Ulm Minster and the Sagrada Família, a minor basilica in Barcelona) or that were formerly designated so (Westminster Abbey and Basel Minster).

==History and organization of the Early Church==

===Origins and characteristics of the first cathedrals in Europe===

The history of cathedrals commenced in the year 313, when the emperor Constantine the Great personally adopted Christianity and initiated the Peace of the Church. Indeed, in strict terminology, there could not have been &quot;cathedrals&quot; before that date, as before the 4th century there were no Christian &quot;cathedrae&quot;; bishops were never seated when leading congregational worship, but instead presided standing on a raised platform or &quot;pulpitum&quot;. In the third century, the phrase &quot;ascending the platform&quot;, &quot;ad pulpitum venire&quot;, becomes the standard term for Christian ordination. During the siege of Dura Europos in 256, a complete Christian house church, or &quot;domus ecclesiae&quot; was entombed in a defensive bank, surviving when excavated, in places to wall-top height. The Dura church had been converted out of a large urban courtyard house of standard form, in which two rooms had been knocked together to make an assembly hall, capable of holding 60-75 standing; while a tank had been inserted in a room on the opposite side of the courtyard as a baptistery, with rich wall paintings above it. The large room was indeed found to have a raised pulpitum at one end, big enough for one person in turn to read, preach and preside from; but too low to have been surmounted by a throne, and too small to have contained an altar. Otherwise the large room had no decoration or distinctive features at all.

In 269, soon after Dura fell to the Persian army, a body of clerics assembled a charge sheet against the bishop of Antioch, Paul of Samosata, in the form of an open letter. Amongst the accusations was that Paul, who had received the civil rank of &quot;ducenarius&quot; due to contacts in the imperial court, had improperly erected an enclosure, or &quot;secretum&quot;, for himself in the church of Antioch; that within this enclosure he had erected a throne from which he presided in worship; and that he had trained a female choir to sing hymns of his own devising. These practices were all condemned as innovations, improperly importing the symbols of his secular Roman magistracy into church ritual; while presumptuously and blasphemously asserting that the person of the bishop in eucharistic worship is seated in the place of Christ himself. Still in a hundred years, all bishops in the Mediterranean world had cathedrals, all sat on thrones within an enclosed sanctuary space, and all had established trained choirs to enhance eucharistic worship.

The driving principle underlying this change was the acceptance by bishops, more or less willingly, of an imperial invitation to adopt and maintain the duties, dignity and insignia proper to a public magistrate. Characteristically a Roman magistrate presided from a raised throne in a large, richly decorated and aisled rectangular hall called a &quot;basilica&quot;; and now bishops would do the same. The earliest of these new basilican cathedrals of which substantial remains are still visible (and maybe amongst the very earliest to be built) is below the Cathedral of Aquileia on the northern tip of the Adriatic sea. Dated from a mosaic inscription between 313 and 319, the complex consisted of two parallel east–west aisled halls of similar size; with a third smaller north–south cross-hall connecting them, which has been interpreted as the presence hall of the &quot;episcopium&quot; or bishop&#x27;s residence. The three halls create an open courtyard, in which was originally located a separate baptistery. Surviving from both large basilican halls are rich mosaic pavements showing (amongst other scenes) Jonah and the Whale, and a series of, mainly female, donor portraits. It appears that similar cathedrals of double-basilica and baptistry were soon afterwards erected in Milan, Trier and Pavia; but that subsequently single-basilican churches became the more common cathedral model.

Constantine&#x27;s declaration of imperial favour towards Christianity transformed all aspects of Christian life in the Roman Empire. From being a minority religion, largely confined to urban areas and restricted social groupings, and subject to official hostility and occasional persecution; Christianity acquired greatly expanded numbers of potential adherents of all classes, initially still within city areas, but eventually extending out to the &quot;pagus&quot;, the city&#x27;s rural hinterland. The consequence was a radical expansion in the buildings, funding and personnel of associated Church establishments throughout the 4th century. The first cathedrals represent this expansion in material form.

==== Buildings ====

The location and layout of the first cathedrals varied substantially from city to city, although most, as at Aquileia, tended to be sited within the city walls but away from the urban centre; certain elements are almost always found.

==== Basilicas ====

Basilican halls had previously been characteristic of major civic complexes and military headquarters buildings; but now became the standard structure for accommodating large Christian congregations. From now on, the term basilica denotes any substantial church building. These new basilicas were wholly different in scale from earlier Christian assembly halls, as they were also different in form from any Roman non-Christian temple or religious structure. The halls were longitudinal, aisled, and flooded with light from large clerestory windows. Floors and walls were richly decorated with mosaic and inlay – usually in abstract or floral patterns. The two original double basilicas at Aquileia had both been about 37m by 17m in size, but within 30 years one hall was quadrupled to 73m by 31m. This expanded basilica now demonstrated three additional features that became characteristic of early cathedrals: an enclosure at the eastern end of the church surrounding the altar; a &quot;&quot; east of the altar facing west, and consisting of a raised dais with a centrally place bishop&#x27;s throne and benches either side for the clergy of his &quot;familia&quot;; and a partitioned-off &quot;narthex&quot; at the western end into which &quot;catechumens&quot; would withdraw during the central act of the Eucharistic liturgy.

==== Baptisteries ====

The baptistery in the Dura church was about 1m square and 1m deep; baptismal candidates could stand in it, but could not be immersed. In the new cathedrals, as had been the case before, only bishops baptised; and ceremonies were held not more than twice a year to allow for suitable periods of instruction. So baptisteries needed to be greatly increased in size, with associated accommodation to ensure privacy in undressing, anointing and redressing; and the baptismal tank, commonly octagonal, was now fully deep enough for total immersion, and wide enough to accommodate both the candidate and an assisting male or female deacon. Baptisteries commonly adopted centralised plan forms derived from funerary chapels; and are invariably separate from the congregational basilica.
==== Episcopium ====

No one lived in the house church at Dura; such residential facilities as the latrine and kitchen were removed in the conversion. But cathedral complexes always included an episcopal residence. Prominent amongst the charges that had been directed against Paul of Samosata had been his alleged over-familiarity with pious women. As was common, Paul had been married when elected bishop; and again, as was universally expected for a bishop, he had then ceased sexual contact with his wife and no longer cohabited with her. But his accusers charged that, by continuing to associate with other women (even without any indication of actual impropriety) he was creating an unacceptable potential for scandal. To avoid similar such occasions arising, it was necessary for the new cathedrals to create male-only living quarters for the bishop and his entire establishment; and since, in churches in the West, all presbyters and deacons were also expected to live apart from their wives after ordination, these living quarters, the &quot;episcopium&quot;, were necessarily substantial in extent. In addition to eating and sleeping quarters for ordained boys and men, the episcopium also commonly provided private dining halls for the hospitality expected of the bishop&#x27;s enhanced social status, a private oratory or chapel for the bishop, and often a bath house.

===Finances===
Just as the episcopal residence was integral within the complex of cathedral buildings, so too there was no distinction between episcopal, diocesan and cathedral property and endowments. In principle, all diocesan income was paid into a common fund, and divided into four fixed shares for each main area of expenditure; the Bishop himself; the cathedral clergy; the fabric and lighting of cathedral and city churches; and charitable donations. Many diocese already held substantial endowments, but income increased enormously with the Peace of the Church; partly due to imperial subsidies in kind, but mainly from private bequests and regular private benefactions (often called &#x27;first fruits&#x27;); although at this date, tithe was never paid to the church. In addition, many individual landowners supported private chapels and oratories on their own property; and endowed independent charitable institutions, and eventually monasteries and nunneries too.

====Bishop&#x27;s share====

Augustine of Hippo estimated his personal income as being 20 times that of his father, a minor civil servant; and Augustine was by no means the wealthiest bishop in North Africa. But in accepting from Constantine the status of civil magistrates, bishops were now also committed to substantial expenditure to maintain their new style and status; and also to fulfil the associated duties, for instance in employing qualified legal assessors to support them when sitting as civil judges.

====Clergy share====

All ordained clerics attached to the cathedral were paid through stipends from the general fund. This applied both to the clergy working directly within the cathedral itself, and also to the clergy, called &quot;canonici&quot; attached to churches founded by the bishop within the city. From the end of the 4th century, as the mission of the church extended more into rural areas, &#x27;baptistery churches&#x27; were founded in more distant villages, so that rural populations could receive the bishop&#x27;s baptism locally; and the clergy in these churches also counted as &quot;canonici&quot; and drew a regular stipend.

====Fabric share====
Plentiful donor inscriptions show that most new church building programmes; mosaics, roofs, furnishings, were financed by private donations. The costs of maintenance and lighting, however, fell on the general fund. This also applied to the churches, known as &quot;tituli&quot;, served directly by the bishop&#x27;s clergy, generally also including any surviving house churches from the period before the Peace of the Church and the rural baptistery churches; but not to the chapels, called &quot;parochiae&quot;, established by rural landowners for the convenience of their tenants. The bishop, in respect of his civil status, was expected to contribute to public works of general benefit; aqueducts, bridges, watercourses.

====Charitable share====

In all cities, bishops dedicated substantial sums to the support of widows, orphans and the poor. Such donations had been a strong feature of the church in earlier centuries, but tended then to be specifically directed to the Christian needy. Now the charitable compass became general. Bishops were especially expected to take responsibility for raising ransom funds, where local persons had fallen captive. In addition, it was expected that each diocese would support a &quot;xenodochium&quot;, a hostel for the homeless and strangers.

===Personnel===

Just as the status of the bishop was transformed at the Peace of the Church; so too was that of the male clergy. With the bishop now resident in the &quot;episcopium&quot; the other male clergy came to be recognised as his formal &quot;familia&quot;, in mark of which male clergy now received the tonsure by shaving of their heads; this being originally a Roman badge of adoption. The early church had recognised the orders of bishop, presbyter (priest) and deacon, but a range of minor orders had since grown up in addition; and all were tonsured. These orders now tended to be understood as clerical &#x27;ranks&#x27;, equivalent to those in the military, such that the male clergy are now often referred to as a &quot;clerical militia&quot;. And as in the Roman military or civil service, promotion was expected to follow the principle of &quot;cursus honorum&quot;, rising through the ranks, with the expectation that ideally, a minimum period would be served in each. The female orders of virgin, widow and (female) deacon remained explicitly outside the bishop&#x27;s familia; and so they did not receive the tonsure and nor did they progress through the &quot;cursus honorum&quot;. But all orders of cathedral clergy, male and female, increased dramatically in numbers. Around 540 Justinian ordered that the clerical payroll of Hagia Sophia be strictly limited to 60 presbyters, 100 male deacons, 90 subdeacons, 110 lectors, 25 singers, 100 doorkeepers and 40 female deacons; 525 in all.

====Bishops====
Bishops were at the head of the local church; but not explicitly within the &quot;cursus honorum&quot;, as appointment was by election from the local clergy and people. The clergy tended to favour appointment of bishops from within the ranks of cathedral presbyters; but local lay choice often tended rather to outsiders, either a spectacular holy man, hermit or ascetic; or otherwise a senior civil servant or diplomat, who might have favourable contacts to exploit at court. But most bishops came from the &quot;curial&quot; class, that is those holding the hereditary rank of decurion with the obligation to serve on the city council, as only persons of this class and above would be likely to have a full rhetorical education in Greek and Latin grammar; without which it was not possible for a boy raised with a knowledge only of Late Antique vernacular speech to express himself in approved classical linguistic forms.

====Priests and archpriests====

It was expected that the normal president at both the Eucharist and Baptism would be the bishop, who would celebrate in the cathedral and in titular churches in turn. However, in practice, the bishop needed deputies for the Eucharist and also for the Divine Office of daily prayer, and this duty fell to the priests. The bishop selected a senior priest as archpriest who acted as his official deputy in all ritual matters and as head of the familia. The archpriest was also responsible for the cathedral school. After the 5th century, there were no longer state-supported secular teachers of rhetoric and grammar in the West (other than in parts of Italy) and so the church would have to educate its own.

====Deacons, subdeacons and archdeacons====

Just as the presbyters deputised for the bishop in ritual matters, so the deacons deputised in administrative and financial matters, especially in the raising and delivering of charity. At the head of the diaconate was the archdeacon; the bishop&#x27;s main deputy in managerial affairs. Originally inferior in rank to the archpriest, the archdeacon by the sixth century had established clear pre-eminence. Subdeacons assisted the deacons, but unlike them were allowed to marry after ordination; consequently many clerics stopped the cursus honorum at this point, and it was not unusual for a subdeacon to be elected bishop; and even Pope.

====Doorkeepers, exorcists, lectors, acolytes and primicerius====
In practice, the first three of these orders tended to be given together, and were typically applied to boys as young as seven. These boy lectors were too young for the grammar school, but were valued as choristers, and so were included in the &quot;Schola Cantorum&quot; or choir school. Originally under the responsibility of the deacons, the organisation of choirs was reformed by Pope Gregory the Great, who introduced the office of &quot;primicerius&quot; or head cantor for this purpose. This proved a vital reform; as without any comprehensive system of musical notation, the only way that sacred music could be maintained and passed on was through professional choirs of sound musical training undertaking cathedral worship – and such skills are not guaranteed to be present in high-ranking ecclesiastics.

====Women&#x27;s orders: virgins, widows and deaconesses====

These orders had been of considerable importance in earlier centuries; but tended to be sidelined in cathedrals from the 4th century onwards. So long as adult baptism continued as a regular occurrence, female deacons would continue to be needed for that service; but otherwise the main factor maintaining these orders was a knock-on effect from the rule of continence applied to bishops, presbyters and deacons. When a man became ordained, and moved into the episcopium with the rest of the bishop&#x27;s &quot;familia&quot;; then there would usually also be a requirement for support to their mothers, wives and daughters; and the orders of widows and virgins respectively continued largely for this purpose.

===Functions===

Notwithstanding wide differences over time in institutional structures and wider historical contexts; the key functions established for the first cathedrals have tended to remain as distinctive cathedral functions down the centuries; a regular cycle of choral prayer; providing a forum for civic leadership; a commitment to higher learning; and the promotion and dissemination of music.

==Cathedral churches since 800 AD==

===Rule of the clergy===

====Early Middle Ages: religious communities====
The history of the body of clergy attached to the cathedral church is obscure, and in each case local considerations affected its development, however the main features were more or less common to all.

Originally the bishop and cathedral clergy formed a kind of religious community, which, while not in the true sense a monastery, was nevertheless often called a &quot;monasterium&quot;, the word not having the restricted meaning that it afterwards acquired. In this lies the reason for the apparent anomaly that churches like York Minster and Lincoln Cathedral, which never had any monks attached to them, have inherited the name of minster or monastery. In these early communities the clergy often lived apart in their own dwellings, and were not infrequently married.

In the 8th century Chrodegang, Bishop of Metz (743–766), compiled a code of rules for the clergy of the cathedral churches, which, though widely accepted in Germany and other parts of the continent, gained little acceptance in England.

According to Chrodegang&#x27;s rule, the cathedral clergy were to live under a common roof, occupy a common dormitory and submit to the authority of a special officer. The rule of Chrodegang was, in fact, a modification of the Benedictine rule. Gisa, a native of Lorraine, who was bishop of Wells from 1061 to 1088, introduced it into England, and imposed its observance on the clergy of his cathedral church, but it was not followed for long there, or elsewhere in England.

====Late Middle Ages: monastic and secular cathedrals====
During the 10th and 11th centuries, the cathedral clergy became more definitely organised and were divided into two classes. One was that of a monastic establishment of some recognised order of monks, often the Benedictines, while the other class was that of a college of clergy, bound by no vows except those of their ordination, but governed by a code of statutes or canons: hence the name of &quot;canon&quot;. In this way arose the distinction between the monastic and secular cathedral churches. Outside Great Britain, monastic cathedrals are known only at Monreale in Sicily and Downpatrick in Ireland.

In the case of monastic cathedral churches, the internal government was that of the religious order to which the chapter belonged and all the members kept perpetual residence.

The alternative of this was the cathedral ruled by a secular chapter; the dignities of provost, dean, precentor, chancellor, treasurer, etc., came into being for the regulation and good order of the church and its services, while the non-residence of the canons, rather than their perpetual residence, became the rule, and led to their duties being performed by a body of &quot;vicars&quot;, who officiated for them at the services of the church.

===Reformation===
Prior to the Reformation all cathedrals of Western Europe were of the Roman Catholic Church. In England, much of the structure of the monastic and cathedral system was reconstituted during the English Reformation. Although the cathedrals were retained by the now independent and established Church of England, the monastic cathedral chapters were dissolved by King Henry VIII and, with the exceptions of Bath and Coventry, were refounded by him as chapters of canons with a dean as the head and other clergy as minor canons.

In Germany and other parts of Europe, with the spread of the Lutheran Church, some ancient churches, like Nidaros Cathedral, Norway, and Lübeck Cathedral, Germany, became the seats of Protestant bishops, as in England. Many new churches were built which serve the regional administrative function of a cathedral. However, not all churches that function as the seat of a bishop are known as &quot;cathedral&quot;, the custom varying from place to place, according to local tradition. Some are simply designated &quot;church&quot;, as occurs at Budolfi Church, the Lutheran cathedral of Aalborg in Denmark.

===Roles===

====Provosts====

In most of Europe, the earliest head of a secular church seems to have been the provost (&quot;praepositus&quot;, &quot;probst&quot;, etc.), who was charged not only with the internal regulation of the church and oversight of the members of the chapter and control of the services, but was also the steward or seneschal of the lands and possessions of the church. The latter often mainly engaged his attention, to the neglect of his domestic and ecclesiastical duties, and complaints were soon raised that the provost was too much mixed in worldly affairs, and was too frequently absent from his spiritual duties.

This led, in many cases, to the institution of a new officer called the &quot;dean&quot;, who had charge of that portion of the provost&#x27;s duties that related to the internal discipline of the chapter and the services of the church.

In some cases, the office of provost was abolished, but in others it was continued: the provost, who was occasionally an archdeacon as well, remaining head of the chapter. This arrangement was most commonly followed in Germany. In England the provost was almost unknown. Bishop Gisa introduced a provost as head of the chapter of Wells Cathedral, but the office was afterwards subordinated to the other dignities and the provost became simply the steward of certain of the prebendal lands. The provost of the collegiate church of Beverley Minster was the most notable instance of such an officer in England, but at Beverley he was an external officer with authority in the government of the church, no stall in the choir and no vote in chapter.

In Germany and Scandinavia, and in a few of the cathedral churches in the south of France, the provost was the ordinary head of the cathedral chapter, but the office was not common elsewhere. As regards France, of 136 cathedral churches existing at the Revolution, 38 only, and those either on the borders of Germany or in the extreme south, had a provost as the head of the chapter. In others the provost existed as a subordinate officer. There were two provosts at Autun, and Lyon and Chartres had four each, all as subordinate officers.

===Secular chapter===

The normal constitution of the chapter of a secular cathedral church comprised four dignitaries (there might be more), in addition to the canons. These are the dean, the precentor, the chancellor and the treasurer. These four dignitaries, occupying the four corner stalls in the choir, are called in many of the statutes the &quot;quatuor majores personae&quot; of the church.

====Deans====
The role of dean (from &quot;decanus&quot;) seems to have derived its designation from the Benedictine &quot;dean&quot; who had ten monks under his charge. The role of dean came into existence to supply the place of the provost in the internal management of the church and chapter. In England every secular cathedral church was headed by a dean who was originally elected by the chapter and confirmed in office by the bishop. The dean is president of the chapter, and within the cathedral has charge of the performance of the services, taking specified portions of them by statute on the principal festivals. The dean sits in the chief stall in the choir, which is usually at the west end of the south side.
====Precentors====
Next to the dean (as a rule) is the precentor (&quot;primicerius&quot;, &quot;cantor&quot;, etc.), whose special duty is that of regulating the musical portion of the services. The precentor presides in the dean&#x27;s absence, and occupies the corresponding stall on the north side, although there are exceptions to this rule, where, as at St Paul&#x27;s, the archdeacon of the cathedral city ranks second and occupies what is usually the precentor&#x27;s stall.

====Chancellors====
The third dignitary is the chancellor (&quot;scholasticus&quot;, &quot;écoldtre&quot;, &quot;capiscol&quot;, &quot;magistral&quot;, etc.), who must not be confounded with the chancellor of the diocese. The chancellor of the cathedral church is charged with the oversight of its schools, ought to read divinity lectures, and superintend the lections in the choir and correct slovenly readers. The chancellor is often the secretary and librarian of the chapter. In the absence of the dean and precentor, the chancellor is president of the chapter, and within the cathedral is usually assigned the easternmost stall, on the dean&#x27;s side of the choir.

====Treasurers====
The fourth dignitary is the treasurer (&quot;custo&quot;, &quot;sacrisla&quot;, &quot;cheficier&quot;) who is guardian of the fabric, and of all the furniture and ornaments of the church, and whose duty was to provide bread and wine for the Eucharist, and candles and incense. The treasurer also regulated such matters as the ringing of the bells. The treasurer&#x27;s stall is opposite to that of the chancellor.

====Other clergy====

In many cathedral churches are additional dignitaries, as the praelector, subdean, vice-chancellor, succentor-canonicorum, and others, whose roles came into existence to supply the places of the other absent dignitaries, for non-residence was the fatal blot of the secular churches, and in this they contrasted very badly with the monastic churches, where all the members were in continuous residence. Besides the dignitaries there were the ordinary canons, each of whom, as a rule, held a separate prebend or endowment, besides receiving his share of the common funds of the church.

For the most part the canons also speedily became non-resident, and this led to the distinction of residentiary and non-residentiary canons, until in most churches the number of resident canons became definitely limited in number, and the non-residentiary canons, who no longer shared in the common funds, became generally known as prebendaries only, although by their non-residence they did not forfeit their position as canons, and retained their votes in chapter like the others.

This system of non-residence led also to the institution of vicars choral, each canon having his own vicar, who sat in his stall in his absence, and when the canon was present, in the stall immediately below, on the second form. The vicars had no place or vote in chapter, and, though irremovable except for offences, were the servants of their absent canons whose stalls they occupied, and whose duties they performed. Outside Britain they were often called demi-prebendaries. As time went on the vicars were themselves often incorporated as a kind of lesser chapter, or college, under the supervision of the dean and chapter.

====Relationship of chapter and bishop====
There was no distinction between the monastic cathedral chapters and those of the secular canons, in their relation to the bishop or diocese. In both cases the chapter was the bishop&#x27;s consilium that he was bound to consult on all important matters and without doing so he could not act. Thus, a judicial decision of a bishop needed the confirmation of the chapter before it could be enforced. He could not change the service books, or &quot;use&quot; of the church or diocese, without capitular consent, and there are episcopal acts, such as the appointment of a diocesan chancellor, or vicar general, which still need confirmation by the chapter, but the older theory of the chapter as the bishop&#x27;s council in ruling the diocese has become a thing of the past, in Europe.

In its corporate capacity the chapter takes charge sede vacante of a diocese. In England, however (except as regards Salisbury and Durham), this custom has never obtained, the two archbishops having, from time immemorial, taken charge of the vacant dioceses in their respective provinces. When, however, either of the sees of Canterbury or York is vacant the chapters of those churches take charge, not only of the diocese, but of the province as well, and incidentally, therefore, of any of the dioceses of the province that may be vacant at the same time.

==Functions of a cathedral==

The role of the cathedral is chiefly to serve God in the community, through its hierarchical and organisational position in the church structure. The building itself, by its physical presence, symbolises both the glory of God and of the church. A cathedral, its bishop and dignitaries have traditional functions that are mostly religious in nature, but may also be closely associated with the civil and communal life of the city and region.

===Symbolic functions of the building===
The cathedral is frequently the most imposing building, and one of the most ancient buildings in its town. The great size and splendor of the cathedral may be out of all proportion to the town itself. The money and talents expended on the building are seen as honoring God, and may also demonstrate both the devotion and the status of the patrons.

Cathedrals are very often oriented east/west, so that the worshipers look towards the rising sun, symbolizing the Risen Christ. The architectural form of the building most frequently has the ground plan of a cross. This form is both functional and symbolic, its symbolism referring to the cross on which Jesus was crucified. The form is liturgically functional as it allows the building to be divided into sections where different activities take place, or that are occupied by different people, such as the clergy, the choir and the laity.

The main body of the building, making the longer arm of the cross, is called the nave, and is where worshipers congregate; the term is from the Latin word for ship. The cathedral is symbolically a ship bearing the people of God through the storms of life. The nave is also used for major processions, which gather or enter at the furthest door (liturgically generally called the West Door). The aisles on each side of the nave facilitate the movement of people within the building, without disrupting worshipers in the central space.

The arms of the cross are called the transepts and often contain a number of chapels. Farthest from the main entry is the &quot;sanctuary&quot; where the Blessed Sacrament is laid on the altar or communion table for the consecration. &quot;Sanctuary&quot; means &quot;Holy Place&quot;. The word has passed into modern English with an altered meaning because traditionally a criminal who could gain access to this area without capture was thereby given the sanctuary of the church.

Cathedral buildings of the Western European tradition symbolize the progression of the Christian soul towards Salvation. Many cathedrals of Eastern European tradition are centrally planned. These churches are almost always domed. The symbolism in these cathedral structures is of the hierarchy of Earth and Heaven, and often reveals its meaning through the internal decoration of the building with frescoes or mosaics.

===Religious functions===

Apart from its organisational function as the seat of the bishop, and the meeting place for the chapter of the diocese, the cathedral has a liturgical function in offering daily church services. Most cathedrals have at least three services of worship every day, often taking the form of matins, Holy Communion and an evening service which is often sung by the precentor and choir. There are often additional services on Sunday. Cathedrals generally have an area dedicated to the performance of choral services and with seating specifically for the choir and dignitaries of the church and town. This part of the building is called the Choir or Quire, and is generally located between the sanctuary and the nave. Because music often plays an important part in the performance of the liturgy, cathedrals generally have a pipe organ to accompany the choir.
Cathedrals always have a font or water basin at which the rite of baptism is performed, in which a person is formally accepted into the Christian church. The font is often placed towards the door because the Baptism signifies entry into the community of the church. In some cathedrals, most particularly in Italy, the rite of baptism is performed in a separate building. One of the functions of the cathedral is the reading and expounding upon the Holy Scripture. The cathedral generally has a lectern from which the scripture is read. This often takes the form of an eagle of brass or carved wood which supports the book on its outstretched wings and is the symbol of John the Evangelist. However, some cathedrals retain elaborate medieval structures on either side of the church, one for the reading of the Gospel and the other for the reading of the Epistle.

The function of expounding on the scriptures is traditionally performed from the pulpit, which is generally constructed in such a way that the voice of the preacher is projected out to the congregation. The pulpit is often decorated with the winged figures of a man, a lion, a bull and an eagle, representing the Gospel writers, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.

The services that are held within the cathedral follow an annual cycle. The designated scriptural readings for each day of the church&#x27;s year establish a pattern that alternates periods of introspection and penitence with periods of celebration, and is punctuated by the two great celebrations of Christmas and Easter.

Many cathedrals are places of pilgrimage to which people travel in order to worship or venerate a holy object or the reliquary of a saint. Many cathedrals are regarded as places that have provided rewarding religious experiences, where prayers have been answered or miracles have taken place. Pilgrimage was particularly popular in the late medieval period. Some cathedrals such as Santiago de Compostela continue to attract pilgrims.

===Civic and social functions===

The formal cathedral services are linked to the cycle of the year and respond to the seasons of the Northern Hemisphere, Christmas falling in the winter and Easter in the spring. Cathedrals often hold a service of thanksgiving called Harvest Festival in the autumn.

Births, marriages and deaths are often celebrated by services at cathedrals and the cathedral often acts as a repository of local history by recording these events. The cathedral marks times of national and local civic celebration and sadness with special services. The funerals of those famous within the community are invariably held at cathedrals. People who have served the community or the church are often buried within the cathedral with which they are associated. Alternatively, they may be commemorated by a memorial. Some cathedrals, such as Aachen and Reims are the traditional coronation places of monarchs.
Another civic function of the cathedral is the imparting of significant civil information. Announcements may be to the populace from the steps of the cathedral, or within the cathedral itself.

Most cathedrals have a bell or bells. These are used to announce that a service is soon to take place. They are also used to convey information and celebration. The ringing of peals signifies a time of rejoicing, such as a wedding. An extended ringing of peals or &quot;changes&quot; conveys a time of great civic celebration. The slow tolling of the deepest bell signifies a death or disaster. Many cathedrals have a clock with associated chimes that announce the time. The bells of a cathedral are traditionally used to signal the outbreak and the ending of war.

Cathedrals are often associated with significant secular organisations such as the office of the local mayor and council, the local court, the local regiment, schools, sporting organisations and service clubs. The cathedral often has its own school, primarily for the education of choristers, but often including other children as well.

The cathedral, often being a large building, serves as a meeting place for many people. The cathedral often forms a centre of different activities related to community service, youth activities, study, music and decorative arts.
==Buildings==
Cathedral buildings, especially those dating from the Medieval period, are frequently the grandest of churches in the diocese (and country). The ancient cathedrals of England, of Northern France, Belgium, Spain, Portugal, Germany and Sicily, the Baroque cathedrals of South America, and many individual cathedrals from Italy and other parts of Europe, are among the largest and finest religious buildings. Many are renowned for their architecture or their decorative features such as sculpture, stained glass and frescos.

While cathedral buildings, in general, tend to be large, size and grandeur have rarely been essential requirements. Early Celtic and Saxon cathedrals tended to be of diminutive size, as is the Byzantine so-called &quot;Little Metropole Cathedral&quot; of Athens. In Italy, with a few notable exceptions such as Florence Cathedral and Milan Cathedral, cathedrals are numerous and are often similar in form and size to monastic or large parish churches. In modern times, where functionality is the foremost consideration and where church attendance is low in many countries, a cathedral church may be a modest structure.

Cathedrals of monastic foundation, and some of secular clergy, have cloisters, which traditionally provided an open area where secular activities took place protected from wind and rain. Some cathedrals also have a chapter house where the chapter could meet. In England, where these buildings have survived, they are often octagonal. A cathedral may front onto the main square of a town, as in Florence, or it may be set in a walled &quot;close&quot; as at Canterbury. There may be a number of associated monastic or clergy buildings, a bishop&#x27;s palace and often a school to educate the choristers.
===Artworks, treasures and tourism===
Many cathedral buildings are very famous for their architecture and have local and national significance, both artistically and historically. Many are listed among the UNESCO World Heritage Sites.

Many cathedrals, because of their large size and the fact that they often have towers, spires or domes, have until the 20th century, been the major landmarks in cities or in views across the countryside. With highrise building, civil action has been taken in some cases, such as Cologne Cathedral to prevent the vista of the cathedral from being spoiled.

Because many cathedrals took centuries to build and decorate, they constitute a major artistic investment for the city in which they stand. Not only may the building itself be architecturally significant, but the church often houses treasures such as stained glass, stone and wood statues, historic tombs, richly carved furniture and objects of both artistic and religious significance such as reliquaries. Moreover, the cathedral often plays a major role in telling the story of the town, through its plaques, inscriptions, tombs, stained glass and paintings.

For these reasons, tourists have travelled to cathedrals for hundreds of years. Many cathedrals cater for tourists by charging a fee to any visitors outside service times or requesting a donation or making a charge to take photos. Cathedrals that are particularly popular tourist venues sometimes provide guides, leaflets, souvenirs and cafes.

==See also==

* Architecture of cathedrals and great churches
* Architecture of the medieval cathedrals of England
* Basilica
* Cathedral architects in England
* Cathedral floorplan
* Duomo
* Gothic cathedrals and churches
* French Gothic architecture
* English Gothic architecture
* List of Catholic basilicas
* Lists of cathedrals by country
* List of highest church naves
* List of largest church buildings
* List of regional characteristics of European cathedral architecture
* List of tallest church buildings
==References==
==Further reading==
* Carl F. Barnes Jr. &quot;Cathedral&quot;. In: Joseph Strayer, ed. &quot;Dictionary of the Middle Ages&quot;. New York: Scribner&#x27;s, 1938. Vol. III. pp. 191–92.
* Johnson, Paul. &quot;British Cathedrals&quot;. London: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1980. .
* Richard Utz. &quot;The Medieval Cathedral: From Spiritual Site to National Super-Signifier&quot;. &quot;The Year&#x27;s Work in Medievalism&quot; 15 (2001), 127–31.
* Richard Utz. &quot;The Cathedral as Time Machine: Art, Architecture, and Religion.&quot; In: &quot;The Idea of the Gothic Cathedral. Interdisciplinary Perspectives on the Meanings of the Medieval Edifice in the Modern Period&quot;, ed. Stephanie Glaser (Turnhout: Brepols, 2018). pp. 239–59.
* André Vauchez. &quot;La cathédrale&quot;. In: Pierre Nora, ed. &quot;Les Lieux de Mémoire.&quot; Paris: Gallimard, 1997. Vol. III. pp. 3122–34.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="2" end="11" title="Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="17" end="23" title="church (building)" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="47" end="53" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="95" end="102" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769649" start="104" end="114" title="Annual conferences within Methodism" label="conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="119" end="129" title="episcopate" label="episcopate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="278" end="286" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="288" end="304" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="306" end="314" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="325" end="333" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="418" end="423" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="425" end="429" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="431" end="436" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="534" end="549" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661523" start="607" end="625" title="architectural form" label="architectural form"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="689" end="702" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="706" end="714" title="monastery" label="monastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="940" end="962" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="1029" end="1037" title="Church of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="1043" end="1054" title="Dutch Reformed Church" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="1064" end="1077" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="Swiss Cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1091" end="1098" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="1110" end="1129" title="presbyterian polity" label="presbyterian polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="1574" end="1593" title="Mission (Christianity)" label="missionary activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1788" end="1803" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1808" end="1816" title="Orthodoxy#Christianity" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2156" end="2162" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2174" end="2179" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2193" end="2198" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2243" end="2256" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="2555" end="2565" title="high altar" label="high altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="2659" end="2665" title="rhetor" label="rhetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="2746" end="2754" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="2787" end="2799" title="Late Antique" label="Late Antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="2810" end="2820" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="3070" end="3077" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3088" end="3094" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="3096" end="3101" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3119" end="3124" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="3235" end="3252" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q618351" start="3283" end="3290" title="Minster (church)" label="Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="3467" end="3484" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="3511" end="3521" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="3548" end="3555" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3566" end="3573" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="3675" end="3698" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="3848" end="3856" title="monasticism" label="monastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="3946" end="3956" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q189854" start="3966" end="3978" title="Metropolitan bishop" label="metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="4831" end="4860" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="4889" end="4895" title="Celtic Christianity" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="4908" end="4915" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="4917" end="4925" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="4930" end="4935" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="4970" end="4981" title="monasteries" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649060" start="5806" end="5819" title="pro-cathedral" label="pro-cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577114" start="6042" end="6054" title="co-cathedral" label="co-cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q189854" start="6434" end="6453" title="metropolitan bishop" label="metropolitan bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319441" start="6920" end="6936" title="Arctic Cathedral" label="Arctic Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q42328401" start="6940" end="6946" title="Tromsø (city)" label="Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q587339" start="6957" end="6970" title="Simon Jenkins" label="Simon Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q44562" start="7083" end="7094" title="Ulm Minster" label="Ulm Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q48435" start="7103" end="7118" title="Sagrada Família" label="Sagrada Família"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846867" start="7122" end="7136" title="minor basilica" label="minor basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="7188" end="7205" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q666479" start="7210" end="7223" title="Basel Minster" label="Basel Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="7416" end="7437" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="7488" end="7507" title="Peace of the Church" label="Peace of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="7960" end="7970" title="ordination" label="ordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q464266" start="7992" end="8004" title="Dura Europos" label="Dura Europos"/>
<link wikidata="Q357771" start="8925" end="8941" title="Paul of Samosata" label="Paul of Samosata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="10058" end="10068" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="10210" end="10218" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q53216" start="10418" end="10439" title="Cathedral of Aquileia" label="Cathedral of Aquileia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="10467" end="10475" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468262" start="10975" end="10994" title="Jonah and the Whale" label="Jonah and the Whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="11145" end="11150" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="11152" end="11157" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="11162" end="11167" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436282" start="11714" end="11719" title="pagus" label="pagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="12247" end="12255" title="Basilica" label="Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q580731" start="12776" end="12786" title="clerestory" label="clerestory"/>
<link wikidata="Q208576" start="13444" end="13451" title="narthex" label="narthex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735729" start="13494" end="13505" title="catechumens" label="catechumens"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="13557" end="13566" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q357771" start="14658" end="14674" title="Paul of Samosata" label="Paul of Samosata"/>
<link wikidata="Q831474" start="15308" end="15318" title="presbyters" label="presbyters"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="15323" end="15330" title="deacons" label="deacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q580499" start="15704" end="15711" title="Oratory (worship)" label="oratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="16506" end="16511" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="16770" end="16788" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517445" start="19154" end="19165" title="xenodochium" label="xenodochium"/>
<link wikidata="Q273761" start="19529" end="19536" title="tonsure" label="tonsure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243077" start="19713" end="19725" title="minor orders" label="minor orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q27518" start="20080" end="20094" title="cursus honorum" label="cursus honorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="20520" end="20529" title="Justinian" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="20567" end="20579" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194738" start="21258" end="21264" title="curiales" label="curial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194738" start="21323" end="21331" title="decurion (administrative)" label="decurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q946731" start="21953" end="21966" title="Canonical hours" label="Divine Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190552" start="22058" end="22068" title="archpriest" label="archpriest"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="22294" end="22302" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="22307" end="22314" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407107" start="23410" end="23425" title="Schola Cantorum" label="Schola Cantorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="23549" end="23566" title="Gregory the Great" label="Gregory the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293580" start="23603" end="23614" title="primicerius" label="primicerius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="25586" end="25595" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q252575" start="25794" end="25806" title="York Minster" label="York Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q390169" start="25811" end="25828" title="Lincoln Cathedral" label="Lincoln Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q861511" start="26058" end="26068" title="Chrodegang" label="Chrodegang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528432" start="26070" end="26084" title="Bishop of Metz" label="Bishop of Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="26196" end="26203" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="26503" end="26514" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564860" start="26521" end="26525" title="Gisa" label="Gisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="26539" end="26547" title="Lorraine (province)" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212283" start="26567" end="26572" title="Wells, Somerset" label="Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104153" start="27211" end="27216" title="canon (priest)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207448" start="27372" end="27380" title="Monreale" label="Monreale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="27384" end="27390" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024917" start="27395" end="27406" title="Downpatrick" label="Downpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="27410" end="27417" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="28076" end="28087" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="28133" end="28154" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="28256" end="28275" title="English Reformation" label="English Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="28354" end="28371" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="28405" end="28438" title="Dissolution of the Monasteries" label="were dissolved by King Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="28650" end="28665" title="Lutheran Church" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q215023" start="28695" end="28712" title="Nidaros Cathedral" label="Nidaros Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916007" start="28726" end="28742" title="Lübeck Cathedral" label="Lübeck Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q601654" start="29132" end="29146" title="Budolfi Church" label="Budolfi Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q25410" start="29174" end="29181" title="Aalborg" label="Aalborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="29185" end="29192" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="29237" end="29243" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q519614" start="30409" end="30424" title="Wells Cathedral" label="Wells Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q851660" start="30609" end="30625" title="Beverley Minster" label="Beverley Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="30840" end="30851" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="30899" end="30914" title="south of France" label="south of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="31078" end="31088" title="French Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q611944" start="31292" end="31297" title="Autun Cathedral" label="Autun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521" start="31303" end="31307" title="Lyon Cathedral" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180274" start="31312" end="31320" title="Chartres Cathedral" label="Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="31872" end="31883" title="Benedictine order" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="32849" end="32856" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="33906" end="33915" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q273131" start="33933" end="33940" title="incense" label="incense"/>
<link wikidata="Q390150" start="36745" end="36754" title="Salisbury Cathedral" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="36759" end="36765" title="Durham Cathedral" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q124661523" start="38181" end="38199" title="architectural form" label="architectural form"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="38672" end="38676" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="39163" end="39172" title="transepts" label="transepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="39280" end="39297" title="Blessed Sacrament" label="Blessed Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="39718" end="39727" title="Salvation" label="Salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="39905" end="39910" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="39915" end="39921" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q281460" start="40873" end="40883" title="pipe organ" label="pipe organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q208820" start="40933" end="40937" title="baptismal font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="40974" end="40981" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="41356" end="41370" title="Holy Scripture" label="Holy Scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q390539" start="41402" end="41409" title="lectern" label="lectern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325313" start="41465" end="41481" title="Eagle lectern" label="form of an eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="41577" end="41596" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="41852" end="41858" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304773" start="43159" end="43175" title="Harvest Festival" label="Harvest Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="43744" end="43750" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="43755" end="43760" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="45637" end="45646" title="sculpture" label="sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="45648" end="45661" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="45666" end="45672" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="45798" end="45802" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="45809" end="45814" title="Saxon people" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="45931" end="45937" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="45987" end="46005" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q18068" start="46010" end="46025" title="Milan Cathedral" label="Milan Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="46364" end="46372" title="cloister" label="cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416310" start="46511" end="46524" title="chapter house" label="chapter house"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="46690" end="46698" title="Florence Cathedral" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="46753" end="46763" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="47106" end="47133" title="UNESCO World Heritage Sites" label="UNESCO World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176" start="47415" end="47432" title="Cologne Cathedral" label="Cologne Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270912" start="48415" end="48460" title="Architecture of cathedrals and great churches" label="Architecture of cathedrals and great churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438509" start="48463" end="48513" title="Architecture of the medieval cathedrals of England" label="Architecture of the medieval cathedrals of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="48516" end="48524" title="Basilica" label="Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052185" start="48527" end="48558" title="Cathedral Architect" label="Cathedral architects in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057509" start="48561" end="48580" title="Cathedral floorplan" label="Cathedral floorplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966" start="48583" end="48588" title="Duomo" label="Duomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379745" start="48591" end="48621" title="Gothic cathedrals and churches" label="Gothic cathedrals and churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245347" start="48624" end="48650" title="French Gothic architecture" label="French Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q750752" start="48653" end="48680" title="English Gothic architecture" label="English Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829597" start="48683" end="48709" title="List of Catholic basilicas" label="List of Catholic basilicas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748859" start="48712" end="48731" title="Lists of cathedrals" label="Lists of cathedrals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253271" start="48745" end="48773" title="List of highest church naves" label="List of highest church naves"/>
<link wikidata="Q683879" start="48776" end="48808" title="List of largest church buildings" label="List of largest church buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636236" start="48811" end="48878" title="List of regional characteristics of European cathedral architecture" label="List of regional characteristics of European cathedral architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q224969" start="48881" end="48913" title="List of tallest church buildings" label="List of tallest church buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q45997" start="49117" end="49130" title="Paul Johnson (writer)" label="Johnson, Paul"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45884" wikidata="Q25390" url="?curid=45884" title="Leeuwarden">
<text>Leeuwarden (; ; ; ) is a city and municipality in Friesland, Netherlands, with a population of 127,073 (2023). It is the provincial capital and seat of the Provincial Council of Friesland.

The region has been continuously inhabited since the 10th century. It came to be known as Leeuwarden in the early 9th century AD and was granted city privileges in 1435. It is the main economic hub of Friesland, situated in a green and water-rich environment. Leeuwarden is a former royal residence and has a historic city centre, many historically relevant buildings, and a large shopping centre with squares and restaurants. Leeuwarden was awarded the title European Capital of Culture for 2018. Also, Leeuwarden has been a UNESCO City of Literature since 2019.

The (Eleven Cities Tour), an ice skating tour passing the eleven cities of Friesland, starts and finishes in Leeuwarden.

The following towns and villages within the municipality have populations in excess of 1,000 people: Leeuwarden, Stiens, Grou, Goutum, Wergea, Jirnsum, Reduzum, and Wirdum. The municipality is governed by the mayor Sybrand van Haersma Buma and a coalition of the Labour Party, Christian Democratic Appeal, and GreenLeft.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Leeuwarden&quot; (or older variants of it) first came into use for Nijehove, the most important of the three villages (the other two being Oldehove and Hoek) which in the early 9th century merged into Leeuwarden (Villa Lintarwrde  825). There is much uncertainty about the origin of the city&#x27;s name. Historian and archivist Wopke Eekhoff summed up a total of over 200 different spelling variants, of which &quot;Leeuwarden&quot; (Dutch), &quot;Liwwadden&quot; (Stadsfries), and &quot;Ljouwert&quot; (West Frisian) are still in use.

The second part of the name is easily explained: &quot;Warden&quot;, West Frisian/Dutch/Low German for an artificial dwelling-hill, is a designation of terps, reflecting the historical situation.

The first part of the name, &quot;leeuw&quot;, means lion in modern standard Dutch. This interpretation corresponds with the coat of arms adopted by the city, which features a heraldic lion. However, modern standard Dutch was not used in this region in the Middle Ages, when the city was called &quot;Lintarwrde&quot;. Some scholars argue that the name of the city is derived from &quot;leeu-&quot;, a corruption of &quot;luw-&quot; (Dutch for &#x27;sheltered from the wind&#x27;, cf. the maritime term leeward) or from &quot;lee-&quot; (a Dutch word for waterway). &#x27;Sheltered landing place or harbour&#x27; could be the original meaning. This suits the watery province of Friesland and the position of the original three villages at the end of an important estuary called Middelzee.

The name is also similar to that of the French commune Lewarde, located in the Nord Department, an originally Flemish-speaking area annexed to France in the 17th century. Western Flemish was related to Frisian and also to Saxon up to the 11th century.

==History==
The oldest remains of houses date back to the 2nd century AD in the Roman era and were discovered during an excavation near the Oldehove. Inhabited continuously since the 10th century, the city&#x27;s first reference as a population centre is in German sources from 1285, and records exist of city privileges granted in 1435. Situated along the Middelzee, it was an active centre of maritime trade. The waterway silted-up in the 13th century.

The Grote of Jacobijnerkerk () is the oldest building in the city. The 15th century was the period of the two opposing Frisian factional parties Vetkopers and Schieringers. The bastions and a moat were built in the period 1481–1494. In 1747 William IV, Prince of Orange was the last stadtholder residing in the Stadhouderlijk Hof. In the first half of the 19th century the fortifications were demolished.

From 1580 to 1752, a provincial mint operated in the city, minting gold, silver and copper coins of Friesland.

The Jewish community of Leeuwarden was one of the earliest in the Netherlands aside from Amsterdam, and was first mentioned in 1645. By 1670, the city council granted a man referred to as &quot;Jacob the Jew&quot; (in Dutch) permission to build a Jewish cemetery, meaning that there were enough Jews living there to require a cemetery and other communal institutions. Land for &#x27;The Jodenkerkhof&#x27; (Jews&#x27; cemetery) was purchased in 1679, near the Oldehove tower.

The first synagogue in the city was built in the 17th century, and was also used by the city&#x27;s Catholics who were not allowed to build a house of worship of their own because of the Protestant city authorities. The Jewish community enjoyed generally good relations with authorities in the 18th century and continued to expand throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, reaching a peak population of 1,236 in 1860.

In 1901 the city&#x27;s population was 32,203.

Leeuwarden, like the rest of the Netherlands, was occupied by German forces in 1940–1945. This ended when elements of the Royal Canadian Dragoons seized the initiative and advanced into the heavily-defended city on 15 April 1945, ignoring direct orders to wait for supporting infantry. German forces had been driven out by the end of the next day. (The anniversary is marked by both the Dragoons and the city, by flying each other&#x27;s flags every 15 April.)

&quot;Kneppelfreed&quot; () was an incident on 16 November 1951 in front of the courthouse at Wilhelminaplein (Wilhelmina Square), when the police used batons against Frisian language activists during a protest against the exclusive use of Dutch in the courts. A committee of inquiry recommended that the Frisian language should receive legal status as a minority language.

On 19 October 2013, a fire broke out in a clothes shop on a busy pedestrian street. The fire started late in the afternoon and burned through the night, destroying five shops and eleven flats. The only casualty was a 24-year-old man who was living in one of the flats. The birthplace of Mata Hari was at first thought to be destroyed, but survived, albeit with considerable smoke and water damage.

==Heraldry==
The coat of arms of Leeuwarden is the official symbol of the municipality. It consists of a blue escutcheon, a golden lion, and a crown. The fact that Leeuwarden carries a lion in its seal seems logical, considering that &quot;Leeuw&quot; is Dutch for &quot;Lion&quot;. However, it is very plausible the oldest name of the city conceals an indication of water rather than an animal, and some sources suggest that the lion may have only been added after the name became official. It is also possible the coat of arms was a gift to the city from the powerful &quot;Minnema&quot; family.
==Geography==

Leeuwarden is located centrally in Friesland. The military Leeuwarden Air Base lies northwest of the city. East of the city lies recreational area and nature reserve &quot;De Groene Ster&quot;. It contains the windmill Himriksmole, a golf course and &quot;AquaZoo Friesland&quot;.

===Population centres===
On 1 January 2014 parts of the neighbouring Boarnsterhim municipality were added to Leeuwarden. On 1 January 2018 it was enlarged by Leeuwarderadeel and parts of former municipality of Littenseradiel.
===Hamlets===
The hamlets within the municipality are: Abbenwier, Angwier, Baarderbuorren, Bartlehiem (partially), De Him, De Hoek, De Trije Romers, Domwier, Finsterbuorren, Fûns, Groote Bontekoe, Goatum, Hesens, Hoarne, Hoptille, It Hoflân, It Wiel, Marwert, Midsbuorren, Narderbuorren, Noardein, Oude Schouw (partially), Poelhuzen, Rewert (partially), Skillaerd, Skrins, Suderbuorren, Suorein, Tichelwurk, Truerd, Tsienzerbuorren, Tsjaard, Tsjeintgum, Vierhuis, Vrouwbuurtstermolen (partially), Wammert and Wieuwens

===Climate===
== Demographics ==
As of 2020, Leeuwarden had a total population of 124,084.

=== Inhabitants by origin ===
==Culture==
===Museums===

Museums in the city of Leeuwarden: 
* Fries Museum. An art, culture and history museum. The building (2013) was designed by Hubert-Jan Henket.
** Fries Verzetsmuseum, a museum that documents the impact of World War II on Friesland. The museum is part of the Fries Museum.
* Princessehof Ceramics Museum, a ceramics museum.
* Pier Pander Museum, an art museum dedicated to the works of sculptor Pier Pander.
* Natuurmuseum Fryslân, a natural history museum.
* &quot;The Other Museum&quot;. Collections: old-timers, model trains, lace and photography, radio and Meccano.
* Tresoar, a historical centre and museum with archives about Friesland.
* Fries Landbouwmuseum, an agricultural museum.

===Architecture===
There are over 800 Rijksmonuments (national heritage sites) in the municipality of Leeuwarden. The Oldehove, a leaning unfinished church tower, is a symbol of the city. Other well-known buildings in the city centre include the &quot;Kanselarij&quot; (former chancellery), the Stadhouderlijk Hof (former residence of the stadtholders of Friesland), the city hall (1715), the &quot;Waag&quot; (old weigh house), the Saint Boniface church (an important part of the neogothic movement) and the &quot;Centraal Apotheek&quot;, a pharmacy in the Art Nouveau style. The &quot;Blokhuispoort&quot; is a former prison that has been transformed into a public library, hostel and restaurant.

The &quot;Froskepôlemolen&quot; (built in 1896), is the last surviving windmill to have stood in Leeuwarden. The remains of the &quot;Cammingha-Buurstermolen&quot; were demolished in 2000. The Slauerhoffbrug is a fully automatic bascule bridge named after the poet Jan Jacob Slauerhoff. It uses two arms to swing a section of road in and out of place within the road itself. This movable bridge is also known as the &#x27;Flying&#x27; Drawbridge.

The tallest building in the city is the Achmeatoren (Achmea insurance tower), built in 2001 and designed by Abe Bonnema – who also designed the second-tallest building, Averotoren at .

=== Cultural events and festivals ===

On 6 September 2013 Leeuwarden was voted European Capital of Culture for the year 2018. Many events were organised throughout the year. The largest art project was the &quot;11Fountains&quot;, fountains in the Frisian eleven cities. The &quot;Love Fountain&quot;, located in front of the train station, was designed by artist Jaume Plensa. The fountain is seven metres high and consists of two white heads of a boy and a girl, their eyes closed and dreaming.

Annual music festivals are &quot;Cityrock&quot;, &quot;Dancetour&quot;, &quot;Welcome To The Village&quot;, &quot;Into the Grave&quot;, &quot;Explore the North&quot; and &quot;Fries straatfestival&quot;. Other festivals are &quot;Noordelijk Film Festival&quot; (an event for film makers), photofestival &quot;Noorderlicht&quot; and the &quot;Media Art festival&quot;. Other events are &quot;Racing Expo&quot; and a large flower market (held on Ascension Day). There is also a weekly cattle market.

==Transport==

Leeuwarden railway station (opened on 27 October 1863) is the main railway station of Leeuwarden. It is a terminus station of the NS railway line from Zwolle. Regional trains, served by Arriva, operate to Groningen in the east, Harlingen in the west and Stavoren in the southwest. The other stations in the municipality are Leeuwarden Camminghaburen, and Grou-Jirnsum. A fourth station Leeuwarden Werpsterhoeke was planned to be opened after 2018.

Near the train station is the bus station. Arriva runs several city, regional and national buses. Route 66 Leeuwarden-Holwerd connects with the ferry to Ameland, bus route 50 to Lauwersoog connects with the departures of the ferry to Schiermonnikoog and route 350 via the Afsluitdijk connects to Alkmaar in North Holland.

The motorway A31 passes Leeuwarden and the A32 connects Leeuwarden to Meppel. The Van Harinxmakanaal is a major canal and connects Harlingen to Leeuwarden.

==Education==

Leeuwarden has a number of respected schools of applied science (HBO in Dutch), (21,480 students in 2017), such as the Van Hall Instituut (agricultural and life sciences) and the NHL Stenden University of Applied Sciences (hotel management, economical and media management). In addition to higher education, the city is also home to three regional vocational schools (MBO): the Friese Poort, Friesland College, and Nordwin College.

Although the city has no university of its own, several satellite campuses are located here, including &quot;Campus Fryslân&quot; (University of Groningen), &quot;Dairy Campus&quot; (Wageningen University and Research) and the &quot;Academie voor Popkultuur&quot; (Hanze University of Applied Sciences Groningen) 

Technological Top Institute Wetsus does research into water-related technologies. Centre of Expertise Water Technology (CEW) is the knowledge and innovation centre for applied research and product development in the field of water technology and the Wadden Academy to study and research the Wadden Sea.

==Economy==

Among the 10 largest employers in Leeuwarden are Medical Center Leeuwarden (MCL), ING, The Central Judicial Collection Agency (CJIB), Achmea, NHL Stenden University of Applied Sciences, Leeuwarden Air Base and FrieslandCampina. WTC Expo is the largest events complex in the Northern Netherlands.

==Sports==
The city&#x27;s local football team, SC Cambuur, are playing in the second tier Eerste Divisie. Their home ground is the Cambuurstadion, which has a capacity of 10,500. The city&#x27;s basketball team, Aris Leeuwarden, has played in the Dutch Basketball League since 2004.
The &quot;Elfstedenhal&quot; is a sport venue. The stadium is used for long track speed skating, short track speed skating, ice hockey, figure skating and curling. The 400m indoor speed skating oval is named after speed skater Atje Keulen-Deelstra. The ice hockey club is &quot;IJshockeyclub Capitals Leeuwarden&quot; (IJCCL).

Leeuwarden is the starting and finishing point for the celebrated , a speed skating race over the Frisian waterways that is held when winter conditions in the province allow. it last took place in January 1997, preceded by the races of 1986 and 1985. In 1986, the Dutch king Willem-Alexander participated in the Eleven cities tour, with the pseudonym W.A. van Buren, which is the pseudonym of the royal family of the Netherlands.

&quot;Loop Leeuwarden&quot; is an annual road running competition (5 km, 10 km and half marathon races). The race was first held in 1985 and takes place in May. It attracts amateur runners. The city of Leeuwarden has two sailing boats (skûtsje) racing in the yearly sailing competition Skûtsjesilen.

Leeuwarden was to be the host of the World Flying Disc Federation 2020 World Ultimate and Guts Championships from the 11th to the 18th of July. The event was expected to have over 2500 athletes from 40 countries. The event was cancelled (COVID-19 pandemic).

==Media==
The Leeuwarder Courant and Friesch Dagblad are daily newspapers mainly written in Dutch (published by the NDC Mediagroep). Omrop Fryslân is a public broadcaster with radio and TV programs mainly in Frisian.

==Notable residents==


* Lawrence Alma-Tadema (1836–1912), knighted painter
* Eva and Abraham Beem (1932/1934–1944), young Jewish Holocaust victims
* Cornelis Botke (1887–1954), painter and etcher
* Cisca Dresselhuys (born 1943), journalist and magazine editor
* Esmée van Eeghen (1918–1944), resistance fighter in World War II
* Dirk van Erp (1860–1933), artisan and metalsmith
* M. C. Escher (1898–1972), graphic artist
*Richard Hageman (1881–1966), conductor, pianist, composer, and actor
* Willem van Haren (1710–1768), poet
* Havank (1904–1964), writer, journalist, and translator
* Wilhelmina van Idsinga (1788–1819), painter
* Johannes Henricus Gerardus Jansen (1868–1936), archbishop
* Wijerd Jelckama ( 1490–1523), military commander
* Mata Hari (1876–1917), exotic dancer and courtesan, possible double agent
* Hendrik Niehoff (1495– 1561), pipe organ maker
* Piet Paaltjens (1835–1894), minister and romantic author
* Joachim van Plettenberg (1739–1793), colonial governor
* Tjitske Reidinga (born 1972), actress
*Jan Jacob Slauerhoff (1898–1936), poet and novelist
* Abraham Lambertsz van den Tempel (1622–1672), painter
* Pieter Jelles Troelstra (1860–1930), politician
* Cornelis Adriaan Lobry van Troostenburg de Bruyn (1857–1904), chemist
* Saskia van Uylenburg (1612–1642), wife of the painter Rembrandt van Rijn
* Lodewijk Caspar Valckenaer (1715–1785), classical scholar
* Rinskje Visscher (1868–1950), first female municipal archivist in the Netherlands
* Campegius Vitringa (1659–1722), theologian
* Hans Vredeman de Vries (1527– 1607), architect, painter, and engineer
* Harm Wiersma (born 1953), draughts player and politician
* William IV, Prince of Orange (1711–1751), stadtholder
* Joost Klein (born 1997), rapper/singer and Participant of the Eurovision Song Contest 2024

==Politics==

In the Netherlands, a municipality is governed by the college of mayor and aldermen and the municipal council. Sybrand van Haersma Buma of the CDA has been mayor of Leeuwarden since 26 August 2019. Since the 2014 municipal elections, the Labour Party (3 aldermen), Christian Democratic Appeal (2 aldermen), PAL GroenLinks (1 alderman) form a coalition. The municipal council of Leeuwarden has 39 seats.

As provincial capital, Leeuwarden is also the seat of the King&#x27;s Commissioner Arno Brok and the Provincial Council of Friesland.

==International relations==
The city of Leeuwarden is twinned with 
==References==
===Bibliography===
*
==External links==
* 
* Tourist information about Leeuwarden</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25390" start="0" end="10" title="Leeuwarden" label="Leeuwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947904" start="25" end="29" title="List of cities in the Netherlands by province" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039348" start="34" end="46" title="Municipalities of the Netherlands" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="50" end="59" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="61" end="72" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q117252794" start="156" end="187" title="Provincial Council of Friesland" label="Provincial Council of Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="335" end="350" title="Town privileges" label="city privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q129372" start="650" end="677" title="European Capital of Culture" label="European Capital of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467764" start="723" end="741" title="City of Literature" label="City of Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915794" start="990" end="996" title="Stiens" label="Stiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547681" start="998" end="1002" title="Grou" label="Grou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793903" start="1004" end="1010" title="Goutum" label="Goutum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469346" start="1012" end="1018" title="Wergea" label="Wergea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177737" start="1020" end="1027" title="Jirnsum" label="Jirnsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998422" start="1029" end="1036" title="Reduzum" label="Reduzum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005492" start="1042" end="1048" title="Wirdum, Friesland" label="Wirdum"/>
<link wikidata="Q377266" start="1092" end="1116" title="Sybrand van Haersma Buma" label="Sybrand van Haersma Buma"/>
<link wikidata="Q275441" start="1140" end="1152" title="Labour Party (Netherlands)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q273749" start="1154" end="1181" title="Christian Democratic Appeal" label="Christian Democratic Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q667680" start="1187" end="1196" title="GroenLinks" label="GreenLeft"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1295" end="1303" title=":nl:Nijehove" label="Nijehove"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1367" end="1375" title=":nl:Oldehove (Leeuwarden)" label="Oldehove"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1380" end="1384" title=":nl:Hoek (Leeuwarden)" label="Hoek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1557" end="1570" title=":nl:Wopke Eekhoff" label="Wopke Eekhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="1663" end="1668" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064173" start="1694" end="1704" title="Stadsfries" label="Stadsfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q27175" start="1733" end="1745" title="West Frisian language" label="West Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q505963" start="1918" end="1922" title="terp" label="terp"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="2016" end="2020" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="2088" end="2100" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q338814" start="2139" end="2152" title="Lion (heraldry)" label="heraldic lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2220" end="2231" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="2452" end="2460" title="Sea" label="maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="2466" end="2473" title="leeward" label="leeward"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="2641" end="2650" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q488029" start="2741" end="2750" title="Middelzee" label="Middelzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q644716" start="2808" end="2815" title="Lewarde" label="Lewarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12661" start="2832" end="2847" title="Nord (French department)" label="Nord Department"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2924" end="2939" title="Western Flemish" label="Western Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018608" start="3146" end="3154" title="Oldehove (tower)" label="Oldehove"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="3311" end="3326" title="Town privileges" label="city privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q488029" start="3363" end="3372" title="Middelzee" label="Middelzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533686" start="3466" end="3489" title="Grote of Jacobijnerkerk" label="Grote of Jacobijnerkerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521442" start="3607" end="3633" title="Vetkopers and Schieringers" label="Vetkopers and Schieringers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81851" start="3639" end="3646" title="bastion" label="bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="3654" end="3658" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q380949" start="3703" end="3731" title="William IV, Prince of Orange" label="William IV, Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="3745" end="3756" title="stadtholder" label="stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073999" start="3773" end="3791" title="Stadhouderlijk Hof" label="Stadhouderlijk Hof"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="4069" end="4078" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4984" end="4990" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522555" start="5044" end="5067" title="Royal Canadian Dragoons" label="Royal Canadian Dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510550" start="5390" end="5402" title="Kneppelfreed" label="Kneppelfreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q121650" start="5536" end="5542" title="baton (law enforcement)" label="batons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5551" end="5567" title="West Frisian language#Status" label="Frisian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q82180" start="6046" end="6055" title="Mata Hari" label="Mata Hari"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="6175" end="6187" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785501" start="6263" end="6267" title="Azure (heraldry)" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="6268" end="6278" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="escutcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q430099" start="6282" end="6288" title="Or (heraldry)" label="golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q338814" start="6289" end="6293" title="Lion (heraldry)" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170984" start="6301" end="6306" title="Crown (headgear)" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872473" start="6830" end="6849" title="Leeuwarden Air Base" label="Leeuwarden Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373386" start="6990" end="7001" title="Himriksmole" label="Himriksmole"/>
<link wikidata="Q840641" start="7122" end="7134" title="Boarnsterhim" label="Boarnsterhim"/>
<link wikidata="Q778989" start="7211" end="7226" title="Leeuwarderadeel" label="Leeuwarderadeel"/>
<link wikidata="Q851310" start="7263" end="7277" title="Littenseradiel" label="Littenseradiel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7334" end="7343" title="Abbenwier" label="Abbenwier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7345" end="7352" title="Angwier" label="Angwier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7354" end="7368" title="Baarderbuorren" label="Baarderbuorren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623928" start="7370" end="7380" title="Bartlehiem" label="Bartlehiem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7394" end="7400" title="De Him" label="De Him"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7402" end="7409" title="De Hoek, Friesland" label="De Hoek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7411" end="7426" title="De Trije Romers" label="De Trije Romers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7428" end="7435" title="Domwier" label="Domwier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7437" end="7451" title="Finsterbuorren" label="Finsterbuorren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7453" end="7457" title="Fûns" label="Fûns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7459" end="7474" title="Groote Bontekoe" label="Groote Bontekoe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7476" end="7482" title="Goatum" label="Goatum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7484" end="7490" title="Hesens" label="Hesens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7492" end="7498" title="Hoarne, Leeuwarden" label="Hoarne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7500" end="7508" title="Hoptille" label="Hoptille"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7510" end="7519" title="It Hoflân" label="It Hoflân"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7521" end="7528" title="It Wiel" label="It Wiel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7530" end="7537" title="Marwert" label="Marwert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7539" end="7550" title="Midsbuorren" label="Midsbuorren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7552" end="7565" title="Narderbuorren" label="Narderbuorren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7567" end="7575" title="Noardein" label="Noardein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7577" end="7588" title="Oude Schouw" label="Oude Schouw"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7602" end="7611" title="Poelhuzen" label="Poelhuzen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7613" end="7619" title="Rewert" label="Rewert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7633" end="7642" title="Skillaerd" label="Skillaerd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7644" end="7650" title="Skrins" label="Skrins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7652" end="7664" title="Suderbuorren, Hempens" label="Suderbuorren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7666" end="7673" title="Suorein" label="Suorein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7675" end="7685" title="Tichelwurk" label="Tichelwurk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7687" end="7693" title="Truerd" label="Truerd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7695" end="7710" title="Tsienzerbuorren" label="Tsienzerbuorren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7712" end="7719" title="Tsjaard" label="Tsjaard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7721" end="7731" title="Tsjeintgum" label="Tsjeintgum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7733" end="7741" title="Vierhuis, Leeuwarden" label="Vierhuis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7743" end="7762" title="Vrouwbuurtstermolen" label="Vrouwbuurtstermolen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7776" end="7783" title="Wammert" label="Wammert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7788" end="7796" title="Wieuwens" label="Wieuwens"/>
<link wikidata="Q848313" start="7985" end="7997" title="Fries Museum" label="Fries Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597266" start="8071" end="8088" title="Hubert-Jan Henket" label="Hubert-Jan Henket"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8152" end="8164" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324489" start="8221" end="8249" title="Princessehof Ceramics Museum" label="Princessehof Ceramics Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464614" start="8253" end="8261" title="ceramic art" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966895" start="8341" end="8352" title="Pier Pander" label="Pier Pander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970365" start="8380" end="8402" title="natural history museum" label="natural history museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353118" start="8449" end="8459" title="classic car" label="old-timers"/>
<link wikidata="Q231250" start="8475" end="8479" title="lace" label="lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183277" start="8507" end="8514" title="Meccano" label="Meccano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267622" start="8518" end="8525" title="Tresoar" label="Tresoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890860" start="8616" end="8635" title="agricultural museum" label="agricultural museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q916333" start="8676" end="8690" title="Rijksmonuments" label="Rijksmonuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018608" start="8756" end="8764" title="Oldehove (tower)" label="Oldehove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073999" start="8933" end="8951" title="Stadhouderlijk Hof" label="Stadhouderlijk Hof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317675" start="9071" end="9092" title="Saint Boniface church, Leeuwarden" label="Saint Boniface church"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="9119" end="9128" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="neogothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107184" start="9180" end="9188" title="Pharmacy (shop)" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="9196" end="9207" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096055" start="9347" end="9362" title="Froskepôlemolen, Leeuwarden" label="Froskepôlemolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024310" start="9425" end="9444" title="Windmills in Leeuwarden" label="stood in Leeuwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026867" start="9471" end="9494" title="Cammingha-Buurstermolen, Leeuwarden" label="Cammingha-Buurstermolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293779" start="9530" end="9544" title="Slauerhoffbrug" label="Slauerhoffbrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q911663" start="9566" end="9580" title="bascule bridge" label="bascule bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q561650" start="9602" end="9622" title="Jan Jacob Slauerhoff" label="Jan Jacob Slauerhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557928" start="9825" end="9836" title="Achmeatoren" label="Achmeatoren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673833" start="9838" end="9844" title="Achmea" label="Achmea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553161" start="9893" end="9904" title="Abe Bonnema" label="Abe Bonnema"/>
<link wikidata="Q129372" start="10051" end="10078" title="European Capital of Culture" label="European Capital of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396516" start="10336" end="10348" title="Jaume Plensa" label="Jaume Plensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q51638" start="10914" end="10927" title="Ascension Day" label="Ascension Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q17944" start="10984" end="11010" title="Leeuwarden railway station" label="Leeuwarden railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23076" start="11114" end="11116" title="Nederlandse Spoorwegen" label="NS"/>
<link wikidata="Q801852" start="11117" end="11129" title="Arnhem–Leeuwarden railway" label="railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q47350" start="11135" end="11141" title="Zwolle railway station" label="Zwolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q680991" start="11170" end="11176" title="Arriva" label="Arriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q17937" start="11189" end="11198" title="Groningen railway station" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q800889" start="11212" end="11221" title="Harlingen railway station" label="Harlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q373619" start="11238" end="11246" title="Stavoren railway station" label="Stavoren"/>
<link wikidata="Q17948" start="11308" end="11333" title="Leeuwarden Camminghaburen railway station" label="Leeuwarden Camminghaburen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490738" start="11339" end="11351" title="Grou-Jirnsum railway station" label="Grou-Jirnsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q947997" start="11370" end="11394" title="Leeuwarden Werpsterhoeke railway station" label="Leeuwarden Werpsterhoeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q611277" start="11551" end="11558" title="Holwerd" label="Holwerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q208259" start="11586" end="11593" title="Ameland" label="Ameland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007150" start="11611" end="11621" title="Lauwersoog" label="Lauwersoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q208011" start="11667" end="11682" title="Schiermonnikoog" label="Schiermonnikoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q240960" start="11705" end="11716" title="Afsluitdijk" label="Afsluitdijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q972" start="11729" end="11736" title="Alkmaar" label="Alkmaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q701" start="11740" end="11753" title="North Holland" label="North Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552352" start="11769" end="11772" title="A31 motorway (Netherlands)" label="A31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573208" start="11799" end="11802" title="A32 motorway (Netherlands)" label="A32"/>
<link wikidata="Q60425" start="11826" end="11832" title="Meppel" label="Meppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935956" start="11838" end="11856" title="Van Harinxmakanaal" label="Van Harinxmakanaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60475" start="11887" end="11896" title="Harlingen, Netherlands" label="Harlingen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11965" end="11991" title="Vocational university#Netherlands" label="schools of applied science"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028020" start="11993" end="11996" title="Hoger beroepsonderwijs" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800523" start="12047" end="12065" title="Van Hall Instituut" label="Van Hall Instituut"/>
<link wikidata="Q56682998" start="12107" end="12149" title="NHL Stenden University of Applied Sciences" label="NHL Stenden University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819632" start="12417" end="12433" title="satellite campus" label="satellite campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q850730" start="12492" end="12515" title="University of Groningen" label="University of Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q422208" start="12544" end="12578" title="Wageningen University and Research" label="Wageningen University and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q649163" start="12626" end="12672" title="Hanze University of Applied Sciences" label="Hanze University of Applied Sciences Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692484" start="12676" end="12703" title="Technological Top Institute" label="Technological Top Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q54864753" start="12704" end="12710" title="Wetsus" label="Wetsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="12967" end="12977" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299669" start="13042" end="13067" title="Medical Center Leeuwarden" label="Medical Center Leeuwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q645708" start="13075" end="13078" title="ING Group" label="ING"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673833" start="13127" end="13133" title="Achmea" label="Achmea"/>
<link wikidata="Q56682998" start="13135" end="13177" title="NHL Stenden University of Applied Sciences" label="NHL Stenden University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872473" start="13179" end="13198" title="Leeuwarden Air Base" label="Leeuwarden Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q248711" start="13203" end="13219" title="FrieslandCampina" label="FrieslandCampina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13425215" start="13221" end="13229" title="WTC Expo" label="WTC Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q875120" start="13338" end="13348" title="SC Cambuur" label="SC Cambuur"/>
<link wikidata="Q610823" start="13381" end="13395" title="Eerste Divisie" label="Eerste Divisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028392" start="13422" end="13436" title="Cambuur Stadion" label="Cambuurstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613550" start="13503" end="13518" title="Aris Leeuwarden" label="Aris Leeuwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400146" start="13538" end="13561" title="Dutch Basketball League" label="Dutch Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165362" start="13645" end="13669" title="long track speed skating" label="long track speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q193654" start="13671" end="13696" title="short track speed skating" label="short track speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="13698" end="13708" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38108" start="13710" end="13724" title="figure skating" label="figure skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="13729" end="13736" title="curling" label="curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q271945" start="13801" end="13821" title="Atje Keulen-Deelstra" label="Atje Keulen-Deelstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q192431" start="13972" end="13985" title="speed skating" label="speed skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q448936" start="14253" end="14267" title="W.A. van Buren" label="W.A. van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934817" start="14374" end="14386" title="road running" label="road running"/>
<link wikidata="Q215677" start="14416" end="14429" title="half marathon" label="half marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391887" start="14569" end="14576" title="skûtsje" label="skûtsje"/>
<link wikidata="Q13137923" start="14619" end="14631" title="Skûtsjesilen" label="Skûtsjesilen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948007" start="14671" end="14699" title="World Flying Disc Federation" label="World Flying Disc Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="14872" end="14889" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517039" start="14907" end="14925" title="Leeuwarder Courant" label="Leeuwarder Courant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464644" start="14930" end="14945" title="Friesch Dagblad" label="Friesch Dagblad"/>
<link wikidata="Q599009" start="15009" end="15023" title="NDC Mediagroep" label="NDC Mediagroep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299198" start="15026" end="15039" title="Omrop Fryslân" label="Omrop Fryslân"/>
<link wikidata="Q240526" start="15137" end="15157" title="Lawrence Alma-Tadema" label="Lawrence Alma-Tadema"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389751" start="15190" end="15210" title="Eva and Abraham Beem" label="Eva and Abraham Beem"/>
<link wikidata="Q28750197" start="15262" end="15276" title="Cornelis Botke" label="Cornelis Botke"/>
<link wikidata="Q447114" start="15311" end="15328" title="Cisca Dresselhuys" label="Cisca Dresselhuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153563" start="15375" end="15391" title="Esmée van Eeghen" label="Esmée van Eeghen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280894" start="15442" end="15454" title="Dirk van Erp" label="Dirk van Erp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470" start="15493" end="15505" title="M. C. Escher" label="M. C. Escher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375195" start="15535" end="15550" title="Richard Hageman" label="Richard Hageman"/>
<link wikidata="Q779978" start="15606" end="15622" title="Willem van Haren" label="Willem van Haren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479278" start="15643" end="15649" title="Havank" label="Havank"/>
<link wikidata="Q18093157" start="15700" end="15722" title="Wilhelmina van Idsinga" label="Wilhelmina van Idsinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q364144" start="15746" end="15779" title="Johannes Henricus Gerardus Jansen" label="Johannes Henricus Gerardus Jansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637404" start="15806" end="15821" title="Wijerd Jelckama" label="Wijerd Jelckama"/>
<link wikidata="Q82180" start="15857" end="15866" title="Mata Hari" label="Mata Hari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605081" start="15933" end="15948" title="Hendrik Niehoff" label="Hendrik Niehoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622461" start="15982" end="15996" title="Piet Paaltjens" label="Piet Paaltjens"/>
<link wikidata="Q380945" start="16041" end="16064" title="Joachim van Plettenberg" label="Joachim van Plettenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623382" start="16098" end="16114" title="Tjitske Reidinga" label="Tjitske Reidinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q561650" start="16137" end="16157" title="Jan Jacob Slauerhoff" label="Jan Jacob Slauerhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q330210" start="16191" end="16223" title="Abraham Lambertsz van den Tempel" label="Abraham Lambertsz van den Tempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q494665" start="16247" end="16270" title="Pieter Jelles Troelstra" label="Pieter Jelles Troelstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133494" start="16297" end="16345" title="Cornelis Adriaan Lobry van Troostenburg de Bruyn" label="Cornelis Adriaan Lobry van Troostenburg de Bruyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q109676" start="16369" end="16389" title="Saskia van Uylenburg" label="Saskia van Uylenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="16423" end="16441" title="Rembrandt van Rijn" label="Rembrandt van Rijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155572" start="16444" end="16470" title="Lodewijk Caspar Valckenaer" label="Lodewijk Caspar Valckenaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18093626" start="16504" end="16520" title="Rinskje Visscher" label="Rinskje Visscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q487874" start="16588" end="16606" title="Campegius Vitringa" label="Campegius Vitringa"/>
<link wikidata="Q944332" start="16633" end="16655" title="Hans Vredeman de Vries" label="Hans Vredeman de Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335" start="16705" end="16717" title="Harm Wiersma" label="Harm Wiersma"/>
<link wikidata="Q380949" start="16764" end="16792" title="William IV, Prince of Orange" label="William IV, Prince of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q42909787" start="16820" end="16831" title="Joost Klein" label="Joost Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109105" start="16980" end="17009" title="College van burgemeester en wethouders" label="college of mayor and aldermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014622" start="17018" end="17035" title="Municipal council (Netherlands)" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q377266" start="17037" end="17061" title="Sybrand van Haersma Buma" label="Sybrand van Haersma Buma"/>
<link wikidata="Q273749" start="17069" end="17072" title="Christian Democratic Appeal" label="CDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239417" start="17082" end="17101" title="mayor of Leeuwarden" label="mayor of Leeuwarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q13882355" start="17134" end="17158" title="Dutch municipal elections, 2014" label="2014 municipal elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q273749" start="17191" end="17218" title="Christian Democratic Appeal" label="Christian Democratic Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q667680" start="17237" end="17247" title="GroenLinks" label="GroenLinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014622" start="17283" end="17300" title="Municipal council (Netherlands)" label="municipal council"/>
<link wikidata="Q813403" start="17388" end="17412" title="King&amp;#x27;s Commissioner" label="King&amp;#x27;s Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894687" start="17413" end="17422" title="Arno Brok" label="Arno Brok"/>
<link wikidata="Q117252794" start="17431" end="17462" title="Provincial Council of Friesland" label="Provincial Council of Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="17519" end="17526" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45890" wikidata="Q612037" url="?curid=45890" title="1260s BC">
<text>The 1260s BC is a decade which lasted from 1269 BC to 1260 BC.

==Events and trends==

* c. 1263 BC—Ramses II, king of ancient Egypt, and Hattusilis III, king of the Hittites, sign the earliest known peace treaty.
* 1263 BC—The approximate date traditionally offered for the biblical Exodus of the Israelites from Egypt under the leadership of Moses.

==Significant people==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q612037" start="4" end="12" title="1260s BC" label="1260s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q196828" start="18" end="24" title="List of decades" label="decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q612037" start="92" end="99" title="1263 BC" label="1263 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="100" end="109" title="Ramses II" label="Ramses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="119" end="132" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q297588" start="138" end="152" title="Hattusilis III" label="Hattusilis III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="166" end="174" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q625298" start="200" end="212" title="peace treaty" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q612037" start="216" end="223" title="1263 BC" label="1263 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290338" start="284" end="290" title="The Exodus" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="298" end="308" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="314" end="319" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="344" end="349" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45891" wikidata="Q1406394" url="?curid=45891" title="Fermat pseudoprime">
<text>In number theory, the Fermat pseudoprimes make up the most important class of pseudoprimes that come from Fermat&#x27;s little theorem.

== Definition ==
Fermat&#x27;s little theorem states that if &quot;p&quot; is prime and &quot;a&quot; is coprime to &quot;p&quot;, then &quot;a&quot;&quot;p&quot;−1 − 1 is divisible by &quot;p&quot;. For a positive integer &quot;a&quot;, if a composite integer &quot;x&quot; divides &quot;a&quot;&quot;x&quot;−1 − 1, then &quot;x&quot; is called a Fermat pseudoprime to base &quot;a&quot;.

In other words, a composite integer is a Fermat pseudoprime to base &quot;a&quot; if it successfully passes the Fermat primality test for the base &quot;a&quot;. The false statement that all numbers that pass the Fermat primality test for base 2 are prime is called the Chinese hypothesis.

The smallest base-2 Fermat pseudoprime is 341. It is not a prime, since it equals 11·31, but it satisfies Fermat&#x27;s little theorem: 2340 ≡ 1 (mod 341) and thus passes the
Fermat primality test for the base 2.

Pseudoprimes to base 2 are sometimes called Sarrus numbers, after P. F. Sarrus who discovered that 341 has this property, Poulet numbers, after P. Poulet who made a table of such numbers, or Fermatians .

A Fermat pseudoprime is often called a pseudoprime, with the modifier Fermat being understood.

An integer &quot;x&quot; that is a Fermat pseudoprime for all values of &quot;a&quot; that are coprime to &quot;x&quot; is called a Carmichael number.

==Properties==

===Distribution===
There are infinitely many pseudoprimes to any given base &quot;a&quot; &gt; 1. In 1904, Cipolla showed how to produce an infinite number of pseudoprimes to base &quot;a&quot; &gt; 1: let &quot;A&quot; = (&quot;a&quot;&quot;p&quot; - 1)/(&quot;a&quot; - 1) and let &quot;B&quot; = (&quot;a&quot;&quot;p&quot; + 1)/(&quot;a&quot; + 1), where &quot;p&quot; is a prime number that does not divide &quot;a&quot;(&quot;a&quot;&quot;2&quot; - 1). Then &quot;n&quot; = &quot;AB&quot; is composite, and is a pseudoprime to base &quot;a&quot;. For example, if &quot;a&quot; = 2 and &quot;p&quot; = 5, then &quot;A&quot; = 31, &quot;B&quot; = 11, and &quot;n&quot; = 341 is a pseudoprime to base 2.

In fact, there are infinitely many strong pseudoprimes to any base greater than 1 (see Theorem 1 of
) and infinitely many Carmichael numbers, but they are comparatively rare. There are three pseudoprimes to base 2 below 1000, 245 below one million, and 21853 less than 25·109. There are 4842 strong pseudoprimes base 2 and 2163 Carmichael numbers below this limit (see Table 1 of ).

Starting at 17·257, the product of consecutive Fermat numbers is a base-2 pseudoprime, and so are all Fermat composites and Mersenne composites.

The probability of a composite number n passing the Fermat test approaches zero for formula_1. Specifically, Kim and Pomerance showed the following: The probability that a random odd number n ≤ x is a Fermat pseudoprime to a random base formula_2 is even, then formula_3 is a Fermat pseudoprime to the trivial base formula_4.
If composite formula_3 is odd, then formula_3 is a Fermat pseudoprime to the trivial bases formula_7.

For any composite formula_3, the &quot;number&quot; of distinct bases formula_9 modulo formula_3, for which formula_3 is a Fermat pseudoprime base formula_9, is

:formula_13
where formula_14 are the distinct prime factors of formula_3. This includes the trivial bases.

For example, for formula_16, this product is formula_17. For formula_18, the smallest such nontrivial base is formula_19.

Every odd composite formula_3 is a Fermat pseudoprime to at least two nontrivial bases modulo formula_3 unless formula_3 is a power of 3.

For composite &quot;n&quot; &lt; 200, the following is a table of all bases &quot;b&quot; &lt; &quot;n&quot; which &quot;n&quot; is a Fermat pseudoprime. If a composite number &quot;n&quot; is not in the table (or &quot;n&quot; is in the sequence ), then &quot;n&quot; is a pseudoprime only to the trivial base 1 modulo &quot;n&quot;.
For more information (&quot;n&quot; = 201 to 5000), see (Table of pseudoprimes 16–4999). Unlike the list above, that page excludes the bases 1 and &quot;n&quot;−1. When &quot;p&quot; is a prime, &quot;p&quot;2 is a Fermat pseudoprime to base &quot;b&quot; if and only if &quot;p&quot; is a Wieferich prime to base &quot;b&quot;. For example, 10932 = 1194649 is a Fermat pseudoprime to base 2, and 112 = 121 is a Fermat pseudoprime to base 3.

The number of the values of &quot;b&quot; for &quot;n&quot; are (For &quot;n&quot; prime, the number of the values of &quot;b&quot; must be &quot;n&quot; − 1, since all &quot;b&quot; satisfy the Fermat little theorem)
:1, 1, 2, 1, 4, 1, 6, 1, 2, 1, 10, 1, 12, 1, 4, 1, 16, 1, 18, 1, 4, 1, 22, 1, 4, 1, 2, 3, 28, 1, 30, 1, 4, 1, 4, 1, 36, 1, 4, 1, 40, 1, 42, 1, 8, 1, 46, 1, 6, 1, ... 

The least base &quot;b&quot; &gt; 1 which &quot;n&quot; is a pseudoprime to base &quot;b&quot; (or prime number) are
:2, 3, 2, 5, 2, 7, 2, 9, 8, 11, 2, 13, 2, 15, 4, 17, 2, 19, 2, 21, 8, 23, 2, 25, 7, 27, 26, 9, 2, 31, 2, 33, 10, 35, 6, 37, 2, 39, 14, 41, 2, 43, 2, 45, 8, 47, 2, 49, 18, 51, ... 

The number of the values of &quot;b&quot; for a given &quot;n&quot; must divide formula_23(&quot;n&quot;), or (&quot;n&quot;) = 1, 1, 2, 2, 4, 2, 6, 4, 6, 4, 10, 4, 12, 6, 8, 8, 16, 6, 18, 8, 12, 10, 22, 8, 20, 12, 18, 12, 28, 8, 30, 16, 20, 16, 24, 12, 36, 18, 24, 16, 40, 12, 42, 20, 24, 22, 46, 16, 42, 20, ... The quotient can be any natural number, and the quotient = 1 if and only if &quot;n&quot; is a prime or a Carmichael number (561, 1105, 1729, 2465, 2821, 6601, 8911, 10585, 15841, ... ) The quotient = 2 if and only if &quot;n&quot; is in the sequence: 4, 6, 15, 91, 703, 1891, 2701, 11305, 12403, 13981, 18721, ... .)

The least numbers which are pseudoprime to &quot;k&quot; values of &quot;b&quot; are (or 0 if no such number exists)
:1, 3, 28, 5, 66, 7, 232, 45, 190, 11, 276, 13, 1106, 0, 286, 17, 1854, 19, 3820, 891, 2752, 23, 1128, 595, 2046, 0, 532, 29, 1770, 31, 9952, 425, 1288, 0, 2486, 37, 8474, 0, 742, 41, 3486, 43, 7612, 5589, 2356, 47, 13584, 325, 9850, 0, ... (if and only if &quot;k&quot; is even and not totient of squarefree number, then the &quot;k&quot;th term of this sequence is 0.)

==Weak pseudoprimes==
A composite number &quot;n&quot; which satisfies formula_24 is called a weak pseudoprime to base &quot;b&quot;. For any given base &quot;b&quot;, all Fermat pseudoprimes are weak pseudoprimes, and all weak pseudoprimes coprime to &quot;b&quot; are Fermat pseudoprimes. However, this definition also permits some pseudoprimes which are &quot;not&quot; coprime to &quot;b&quot;. For example, the smallest even weak pseudoprime to base 2 is 161038 (see ).

The least weak pseudoprime to bases &quot;b&quot; = 1, 2, ... are:
:4, 341, 6, 4, 4, 6, 6, 4, 4, 6, 10, 4, 4, 14, 6, 4, 4, 6, 6, 4, 4, 6, 22, 4, 4, 9, 6, 4, 4, 6, 6, 4, 4, 6, 9, 4, 4, 38, 6, 4, 4, 6, 6, 4, 4, 6, 46, 4, 4, 10, ... 

Carmichael numbers are weak pseudoprimes to all bases, thus all terms in this list are less than or equal to the smallest Carmichael number, 561. Except for 561 = 3⋅11⋅17, only semiprimes can occur in the above sequence. Not all semiprimes less than 561 occur; a semiprime &quot;pq&quot; (&quot;p&quot; ≤ &quot;q&quot;) less than 561 occurs in the above sequences if and only if &quot;p&quot; − 1 divides &quot;q&quot; − 1 (see ). The least Fermat pseudoprime to base &quot;b&quot; (also not necessary exceeding &quot;b&quot;) () is &quot;usually&quot; semiprime, but not always; the first counterexample is (648) = 385 = 5 × 7 × 11.

If we require &quot;n&quot; &gt; &quot;b&quot;, the least weak pseudoprimes (for &quot;b&quot; = 1, 2, ...) are:
:4, 341, 6, 6, 10, 10, 14, 9, 12, 15, 15, 22, 21, 15, 21, 20, 34, 25, 38, 21, 28, 33, 33, 25, 28, 27, 39, 36, 35, 49, 49, 33, 44, 35, 45, 42, 45, 39, 57, 52, 82, 66, 77, 45, 55, 69, 65, 49, 56, 51, ... 

== Euler–Jacobi pseudoprimes ==

Another approach is to use more refined notions of pseudoprimality, e.g. strong pseudoprimes or Euler–Jacobi pseudoprimes, for which there are no analogues of Carmichael numbers. This leads to probabilistic algorithms such as the Solovay–Strassen primality test, the Baillie–PSW primality test, and the Miller–Rabin primality test, which produce what are known as industrial-grade primes. Industrial-grade primes are integers for which primality has not been &quot;certified&quot; (i.e. rigorously proven), but have undergone a test such as the Miller–Rabin test which has nonzero, but arbitrarily low, probability of failure.

==Applications==
The rarity of such pseudoprimes has important practical implications. For example, public-key cryptography algorithms such as RSA require the ability to quickly find large primes. The usual algorithm to generate prime numbers is to generate random odd numbers and test them for primality. However, deterministic primality tests are slow. If the user is willing to tolerate an arbitrarily small chance that the number found is not a prime number but a pseudoprime, it is possible to use the much faster and simpler Fermat primality test.

==References==
==External links==
*W. F. Galway and Jan Feitsma, Tables of pseudoprimes to base 2 and related data (comprehensive list of all pseudoprimes to base 2 below 264, including factorization, strong pseudoprimes, and Carmichael numbers)
*A research for pseudoprime</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="3" end="16" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406394" start="22" end="41" title="Fermat pseudoprime" label="Fermat pseudoprimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136176" start="78" end="89" title="pseudoprime" label="pseudoprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q188295" start="106" end="134" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s little theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s little theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q188295" start="154" end="182" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s little theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s little theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q104752" start="242" end="249" title="coprime" label="coprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="309" end="318" title="Divisor" label="divisible"/>
<link wikidata="Q737492" start="640" end="661" title="Fermat primality test" label="Fermat primality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100807" start="798" end="816" title="Chinese hypothesis" label="Chinese hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q737492" start="994" end="1015" title="Fermat primality test" label="Fermat primality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q983386" start="1099" end="1111" title="Pierre Frédéric Sarrus" label="P. F. Sarrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372032" start="1177" end="1186" title="Paul Poulet" label="P. Poulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q849530" start="1466" end="1483" title="Carmichael number" label="Carmichael number"/>
<link wikidata="Q389273" start="2245" end="2263" title="strong pseudoprime" label="strong pseudoprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q207264" start="2696" end="2713" title="Fermat prime" label="Fermat composites"/>
<link wikidata="Q186875" start="2718" end="2737" title="Mersenne prime" label="Mersenne composites"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="4292" end="4306" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q966601" start="4326" end="4341" title="Wieferich prime" label="Wieferich prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q188295" start="4674" end="4695" title="Fermat little theorem" label="Fermat little theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q190026" start="5243" end="5253" title="Euler phi function" label="formula_23"/>
<link wikidata="Q41118" start="5481" end="5489" title="quotient" label="quotient"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="5538" end="5552" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="5572" end="5577" title="Prime number" label="prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q849530" start="5583" end="5600" title="Carmichael number" label="Carmichael number"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="6155" end="6169" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="6187" end="6191" title="even number" label="even"/>
<link wikidata="Q190026" start="6200" end="6207" title="totient" label="totient"/>
<link wikidata="Q50706" start="6211" end="6228" title="squarefree number" label="squarefree number"/>
<link wikidata="Q765289" start="7170" end="7179" title="semiprime" label="semiprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="7357" end="7371" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q389273" start="8051" end="8069" title="strong pseudoprime" label="strong pseudoprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343104" start="8074" end="8098" title="Euler–Jacobi pseudoprime" label="Euler–Jacobi pseudoprime"/>
<link wikidata="Q849530" start="8137" end="8154" title="Carmichael number" label="Carmichael number"/>
<link wikidata="Q583461" start="8171" end="8194" title="randomized algorithm" label="probabilistic algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296113" start="8208" end="8239" title="Solovay–Strassen primality test" label="Solovay–Strassen primality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848469" start="8245" end="8271" title="Baillie–PSW primality test" label="Baillie–PSW primality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q980224" start="8281" end="8308" title="Miller–Rabin primality test" label="Miller–Rabin primality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979166" start="8342" end="8365" title="industrial-grade primes" label="industrial-grade primes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="8706" end="8729" title="public-key cryptography" label="public-key cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="8749" end="8752" title="RSA (algorithm)" label="RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q829546" start="8887" end="8891" title="primality test" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064349" start="8921" end="8934" title="deterministic algorithm" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q737492" start="9137" end="9158" title="Fermat primality test" label="Fermat primality test"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45893" wikidata="Q12432" url="?curid=45893" title="Michigan Technological University">
<text>Michigan Technological University (Michigan Tech, MTU, or simply Tech) is a public research university in Houghton, Michigan, United States, founded in 1885 as the Michigan Mining School, the first post-secondary institution in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.

Michigan Tech is classified as &quot;Research 1: Very High Research Spending and Doctorate Production&quot;. There are 12 research areas including Space Sciences, Electronics, Ecosystems, Energy, Health, Ocean Sciences, and Robotics. There are 18 research centers on and off campus including the Michigan Tech Research Institute. The university is governed by an eight-member board of trustees whose members are appointed by the governor of Michigan and confirmed by the Michigan Senate.

The university comprises five colleges and schools: the College of Engineering, the College of Computing, the College of Sciences and Arts, the College of Business, and the College of Forest Resources and Environmental Science. They offer more than 140 degree programs to nearly 7,000 graduate and undergraduate students. Its main campus sits on on a bluff overlooking Portage Lake. The campus consists of 36 buildings, the first of which was built in 1908.

Michigan Tech&#x27;s athletic teams are nicknamed the Huskies and compete primarily in the NCAA Division II Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (GLIAC). The men&#x27;s hockey team competes in Division I as a member of the Central Collegiate Hockey Association (CCHA), and has won three national championships. The women&#x27;s basketball team was national runners-up in 2011.

==History==

Michigan Tech was founded in 1885 as the Michigan Mining School. After much agitation by Jay Abel Hubbell, the state legislature established the school to train mining engineers. Hubbell donated land for the school&#x27;s first buildings.

The school started with four faculty members and twenty-three students. It was housed in the Houghton Fire Hall from 1886 through 1889.

MTU&#x27;s first president was Marshman E. Wadsworth (1887–1898). Enrollment grew to such a point that its name no longer reflected its purpose. The name was then changed to the Michigan College of Mines in 1897. This name lasted through World War I until 1925, but by this time the school had begun offering a wider variety of degrees and once again decided to change its name to the Michigan College of Mining and Technology in 1927.

Fred W. McNair (1899–1924) was the college&#x27;s second president. By 1931, enrollment had reached nearly 600. 

Under President Grover C. Dillman (1935–1956), the school underwent many notable changes, including the construction of the Memorial Union Building, the purchasing of an ice rink and a golf course as well as the procurement of the village of Alberta, Michigan.

In 1956, J. Robert Van Pelt became the new president of the university. He restarted many PhD programs and created a focus on research. This included the school&#x27;s first analog computation class in 1956–57.

In 1964, one of the final years of his presidency, the school changed from a college to a university, changing its name a final time to Michigan Technological University. The change from the Michigan College of Mining and Technology was necessary for two reasons, according to Van Pelt. First, the college had expanded too greatly and the current name was no longer an accurate title. Also, including &quot;mining&quot; in the name of the college was misleading. The name &quot;Michigan Technological University&quot; was chosen in order to retain the nickname &quot;Michigan Tech&quot; that had already been in use since 1927. Along with its new name, the school also gained new constitutional status in 1964. This gave responsibility for control of the university to its Board of Control rather than the state legislature.

The university has historically been focused on engineering, and as of November 2022, 57% of students are enrolled in the College of Engineering. Michigan Tech offers a broad range of programs beyond engineering, with 149 undergraduate programs and 103 graduate programs offered.

===Women at Michigan Tech===


Women began to attend classes at the Michigan College of Mines around 1890. The early female students were mostly daughters of professors or wealthy businessmen of the Houghton and Hancock area. They were allowed to take classes and were given special student status, which meant that they could be enrolled in courses, but were not able to receive a degree.

The first woman to receive a degree from the Michigan College of Mines was Margaret R. Holley, who was born in Lake Linden and who had received a liberal arts degree at a different university outside of the Upper Peninsula. She then moved back to Houghton to work on a chemistry degree, which she received in 1933. Two years later, she also received a master&#x27;s degree in chemistry from the Michigan College of Mines.

The first female faculty member of the Michigan College of Mines was Ella Wood, who was hired as an assistant professor for the Humanities department in 1927. She was made an associate professor by 1928, a full professor by 1935, and the head of geography and languages by 1937. Professor Wood was hired by the university five years before women were allowed to pursue degrees. She also worked in the library and taught meteorology to assist with pilot training sessions to students during WWII. Her presence encouraged many young women to apply for special student status and take classes at the school and ultimately allowed women to receive degrees at this school. As co-ed enrollment increased, she promoted women involvement on campus and co-educational programs. She also became the academic advisor to all female students and thoroughly enjoyed the role of &quot;mother&quot; that she was able to play here to all of her students. Wood also held the title &quot;Dean of Women&quot;, making her the first woman to receive the title dean at the university.

Margaret Holley Chapman was the first woman to complete a degree program from Michigan College of Mining and Technology, which would become Michigan Technological University in 1964. She earned a Bachelor of Science in General Science in 1933, and another in chemistry the following year. Margaret went on to become a candidate for a master&#x27;s degree in General Science. Not only was she the first woman to receive a degree from Michigan Tech, she was also the first female trustee and requested that a scholarship be established to help other female students to finance their education. The Margaret H. Chapman Endowed Scholarship is still active to this day.

The first woman to graduate with a degree in Chemical Engineering was Alice Runge in 1942. Following shortly behind was the first woman to graduate with High Honors in Metallurgical &amp; Materials Engineering, Lilian (Heikkinen) Beck, in 1947. She was also the first woman from Michigan Tech to be inducted into the Alpha Sigma Mu honorary fraternity of the International Metallurgical Society. One year later, Marian Ione (Smith) Scott was the first woman to earn a Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering.

====Women in athletics====

The first female varsity athlete was Nada J. Fenton, who was a member of the rifle team during the 1950s. She was a graduate of Houghton High school and entered MTU in 1952. Nada holds the record of being the first woman to ever fire on a varsity rifle team in the world.

Today Michigan Tech has seven women&#x27;s varsity sports including basketball, cross country, Nordic skiing, tennis, track and field, volleyball, and soccer.

====Today====
As of the fall semester in 2021, the total enrollment at Michigan Technological University is 6,977. Of those students, 2,054 of them were women (an all-time high), which means female students make up about 29% of the enrollment at Michigan Tech.

==Campus==

The main Michigan Tech campus is mainly situated on US-41 in Houghton. The main part of campus can be traversed in about 10 minutes. The Lakeshore Center in downtown Houghton houses the offices of Human Relations, Vice President for Research, and other departments.
Faculty are involved in several distance education programs with clients including General Motors.

The Portage Lake Golf Course opened for play in April 1902. In 1945, the members could no longer support the needs of the course and sold it to Michigan Tech for one dollar. Since then, many improvements have been made such as the addition of another nine holes in 1969. In 1984, the new clubhouse was constructed. In 1996, a sprinkler system was installed to modernize the course and keep it playable. The Portage Lake Golf Course is located two miles (3 km) southeast of campus. With 18 holes on 160 acres, it offers two nines of distinctly different flavors and challenges.

Mont Ripley is the oldest ski area in Michigan (established in the 1900s) in the snowiest city in the Midwest. It is also university-owned, so Michigan Tech students ski or snowboard for free. Mont Ripley has twenty-two trails, a terrain park, a tubing park, sits on 112 acres, and has a scenic overlook of the Keweenaw Waterway. It is about two miles from campus; the hill is viewable from most campus buildings. In 2019, Michigan Tech&#x27;s Mont Ripley earned the university a No. 13 rating on College Census&#x27; 25 Best Colleges for Skiing and Snowboarding list.

Michigan Tech Trails In 2001, Michigan Tech implemented a plan to develop the trails as a way to secure funding for the Michigan Tech Varsity Nordic skiing program and to create facility to attract outdoor-loving students. The Michigan Tech College of Forest Resources and Environmental Science proposed that revenue could be generated from timber harvesting to support the team and upgrade the trails. The university&#x27;s cross country ski trail system is located near the Student Development Complex in the Michigan Tech Recreational Forest. It includes 33 km of groomed cross country ski trails (both classic and skate sections) and 11.7 km of groomed snowshoe trails. 7.5 km of the trail is lighted. The Tech Trails are nationally recognized for the quality of skiing, consistency of grooming and variety of terrain. The trail system, with the help of hundreds of volunteers, hosted the US Junior National Championships, and U.S. Senior National championships, along with regional races. It is the selected site to host the 2023 US Cross Country Ski Championships. With Houghton&#x27;s average snowfall of 218 inches, the season usually opens in early December and continues into April. Students ski free; community members can purchase a pass.

Ford Center Ford Motor Company donated the Ford Center to Michigan Tech in the 1950s. It is a historical village that once owned and operated as a sawmill by Henry Ford located 40 miles south of Michigan Tech&#x27;s main campus in Alberta, Michigan. Since 1954, the Ford Center has been an outdoor and environmental education center utilized by Michigan Tech students enrolled in forestry, ecology, wildlife ecology, and natural resource management. Referred to as &quot;Fall Camp&quot; by the students, this center boasts 4906 acres of forest and wetlands where the students attend outdoor classes. The center also contains several buildings that the students use for their dormitory, recreation and indoor classes. The Ford Motor Company gave Michigan Tech a grant in 1996 to turn the sawmill into a museum. The museum is open to the public as well as the center itself for holding conferences and reunions.

==Academics==

=== Undergraduate admissions ===

Undergraduate admission to Michigan Tech is considered &quot;selective&quot; by &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;. For the Class of 2025 (enrolling Fall 2021), Michigan Tech received 8,041 applications and accepted 6,895 (85.7%), with 1,479 enrolling. The middle 50% range of SAT scores for enrolling freshmen was 1138–1320. The middle 50% ACT composite score range was 25–31. The average overall ACT scores for incoming students is 27.2 in fall 2017, compared to 21.2 nationally.

=== Divisions ===

Michigan Tech offers more than 120 undergraduate and graduate degrees in engineering, natural and physical sciences, computing, business and economics, technology, environmental studies, arts, humanities, and social sciences. Home to the first college of computing in the state of Michigan, the university is divided into five colleges: Business; Computing; Engineering; Forest Resources and Environmental Science; and Sciences and Arts.

*The College of Engineering. A total of 17 undergraduate degrees are offered by the college, ranging from the original mining engineering degree to robotics engineering, added in 2019. The undergraduate degree programs, together with masters and doctoral degrees are offered across the college&#x27;s nine departments: biomedical engineering; civil, environmental, and geospatial engineering; chemical engineering; electrical and computer engineering; geological and mining engineering and sciences; manufacturing and mechanical engineering technology; materials science and engineering; and mechanical engineering-engineering mechanics.
*The College of Computing was established in 2019. It offers undergraduate degrees in computer science, software engineering, computer network &amp; system administration, cybersecurity, electrical engineering technology. Graduate degrees are offered in computer science, mechatronics, health informatics, and cybersecurity. 
*The College of Sciences and Arts has majors in fields including bio-informatics, biological sciences, biochemistry, cheminformatics, chemistry, kinesiology and integrative physiology, mathematics, nursing, pharmaceutical chemistry, physics, psychology, and social sciences. The college is also home to the visual and performing arts, Air Force ROTC, and Army ROTC programs.
*The College of Business is accredited by AACSB. Students can receive a Bachelor of Science degree in seven areas, including accounting, economics, finance, management, management information systems, marketing, and operations and systems management. The undergraduate program includes a unique Business Development Experience, where students gain real-life business experience in a mentored environment. Students also have the opportunity to join several business student organizations, including the Applied Portfolio Management Program where they invest $1 million in the stock market each year.
*The College of Forest Resources and Environmental Science maintains greenhouses, labs, and the Ford Forest and Ford Center in nearby Alberta, and celebrated its 75th year in 2011.

Michigan Tech&#x27;s Enterprise Program provides students with real-world design, engineering, and entrepreneurial experiences. Enterprises develop engineering skills by allowing students to work in businesslike environments on real-world projects while completing their education. Enterprises include Open Source Technologies, Nanotechnology Innovations, Hybrid Transportation, Aerospace, Blue Marble Security, Husky Game Development, Boardsports Technologies, and Wireless Communications Enterprises.

Its three most popular undergraduate majors, by 2021–22 graduates, were Mechanical Engineering (266), Electrical Engineering (93), and Chemical Engineering (88).

=== Rankings ===
In their 2024 rankings, the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education (FIRE) ranked over 248 schools and surveyed a total of 55,102 students, with Michigan Technological University achieving the top ranking for academic freedom and viewpoint tolerance.

===Research===
Michigan Tech ranked 172nd of 600 US colleges and universities in research and development expenditures in 2007. Research expenditures exceeded $81 million in the 2021–22 school year.
The university has 16 research centers and institutes and 271,962 square feet of research space and labs.

==Student body==

In the 2023-2024 academic year, 68% of Michigan Technological University students were from the state of Michigan, 22% were from other states in the US, and 10% were from other countries. The first to second year retention rate for first-time students was 84.5% and the six-year graduation rate was 72.2%. The student to faculty ratio was 13:1. In the fall of 2021, the university enrolled its largest freshman class since 1982.

The student body consisted of 7,324 students, including 1,421 graduate students and 473 faculty members. In 2017, Michigan Tech students were primarily from Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Illinois.
==Organization and administration==
===Student organizations===

Michigan Tech currently recognizes more than two hundred student organizations.

===Greek life===

Michigan Tech is currently host to twelve fraternities and seven sororities on campus.

===Athletics===
As the school mascot is the husky (specifically, Blizzard T. Husky), the school&#x27;s sports teams are known as the Huskies. Michigan Tech competes primarily in the NCAA&#x27;s Division II Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (GLIAC), while the men&#x27;s hockey team competes in Division I as a member of the Central Collegiate Hockey Association (CCHA). Michigan Tech owns a downhill skiing/snowboarding hill, Mont Ripley, just across Portage Lake from campus, and maintains extensive cross-country skiing trails (used for mountain biking in summer).

====School songs====
Michigan Tech has both an official fight song and an official Alma Mater. At most sporting events, however, both the &quot;Engineer&#x27;s Song&quot; and &quot;In Heaven There Is No Beer&quot; are played by the Huskies Pep Band.
===Huskies Pep Band===
The Huskies Pep Band is the university&#x27;s scramble band. The Huskies Pep Band performs at all home football, basketball, volleyball, and ice hockey games, as well as parades and other local events. The band is often recognized as one of the best bands in NCAA Division 1 hockey because of their sheer power and energy, and their firm roots in tradition. The band was formed in the fall of 1928 as the Michigan Tech ROTC Band, under the baton of E. E. Melville.

They are known for performing traditional songs such as &quot;In Heaven There Is No Beer&quot; and &quot;The Engineers&quot; along with a variety of selections in popular music. Some cheers and songs have been around since the 1930s and &#x27;40s, such as the &quot;Blue Skirt Waltz&quot; in which the pep band (along with the audience) would link arms and sway back and forth. This tradition began during Winter Carnival in 1948 after Frankie Yankovic had recently performed there and has been since dubbed &quot;The Copper Country Anthem.&quot; Some of the antics of the band are considered Monty Python-esque, often performing songs from the sketches themselves and shouting the phrase &quot;Run away!&quot; when they exit from the performance. The band also incorporates other non-traditional ensemble instruments, including electric bass guitar, bagpipes, kazoos, cowbells, accordions, an electric viola, a toaster, an oven, and at one point a large inflatable lobster.

===Traditions===
*K-Day (Keweenaw Day) is the first Friday of the fall term. It&#x27;s a university-sponsored, half-day holiday hosted by Greek Life. Activities include a student organizations fair, games, swimming, and music. Originally K-Day was held at Fort Wilkins at Copper Harbor. 
From 1976 to 2017 this fair was held at Mclain State Park. This halted after severe weather damage in June 2018. &quot;K-Day&quot; has been held at Chassell Centennial Park in Chassell, MI since with the exception of 2020 because of COVID precautions. 
*Homecoming has happened on campus each fall since 1929. The event is marked by a football game and a cardboard boat race.
*Parade of Nations and multicultural festival began in 1990 as a way to acknowledge and celebrate the cultures and countries of Keweenaw residents and visitors, many of whom were Michigan Tech international students. The event occurs in September.
*Winter Carnival is where students compete in a variety of artistic and athletic events. The highlight of Winter Carnival is a snow statue competition in which students construct snow and ice sculptures consistent with an annual theme. Winter Carnival began in 1922.
* Spring Fling is always the Friday of Week 13 of the Spring Semester. Students end the academic year and welcome warmer weather by engaging in activities. Various student organizations participate in this event providing food and entertainment for a campus community eager to relax and have fun before the serious business of final exams begins.
*Summer Youth Programs (SYP) have been held on campus since 1972: Women in Engineering (WIE), Engineering Scholars Program (ESP), and National Summer Transportation Institute (NSTI), among many other programs, introduce middle and high school students to college opportunities.
*Film and Music Festivals at Michigan Tech&#x27;s Rozsa Center for the Performing Arts occur throughout the year. The Rozsa is a main venue for the &quot;Pine Mountain Music Festival&quot;; &quot;The Red Jacket Jamboree&quot;, an old-time radio variety show; and the &quot;41 N Film Festival&quot;.

===Records===
* Michigan Tech holds two world records, the largest snowball (21&#x27; 3&quot; circumference) and largest snowball fight (3,745), which they accomplished in 2006, as verified by &quot;Guinness World Records&quot; officials. They originally held three world records, the third of which was the most people making snow angels simultaneously in a single venue (3,784). This record was taken from the city of Bismarck, North Dakota, but about a year later, Bismarck took the record back with 8,962 snow angels. In 2018, students and community members set out to break the world record for most snowmen in one hour. Guinness is still tallying the results.

==Notable people ==


=== Faculty ===
As of 2023, Michigan Tech has 454 faculty. Notable faculty include: Elias C. Aifantis, Stephen Bowen, Margaret Burnett, Robert Schneider, Kathy Halvorsen, Lyon Bradley King, Nancy Langston, Robert J. Nemiroff, Joseph Rallo, Donald Shell, Martha E. Sloan, David R. Shonnard, and Svitlana Winnikow.

=== Alumni ===

There are over 68,000 Michigan Tech alumni living in all 50 states and over 100 countries. Some notable alumni include:

*Joe Berger, former NFL player
*Markus J. Buehler, material scientist and McAfee Professorship of Engineering chair at Massachusetts Institute of Technology
*Herb Boxer, first U.S.-born player drafted to the NHL
*Melvin Calvin, Nobel laureate and discoverer of the Calvin Cycle
*Chris Conner, NHL player
*Jill Dickman, Republican member of the Nevada Assembly
*David Edwards, biomedical engineering professor at Harvard, writer
*Tony Esposito, NHL Hall of Famer
*Charles Gates Sr., businessman; founder of Gates Corporation
*Roxane Gay, writer, professor, editor, blogger, and commentator
*Hallquist, John O., founder of Livermore Software Technology Corporation and original developer of LS-DYNA
*William S. Hammack, chemical engineer and engineering educator
*David Hill, former chief engineer for the Chevrolet Corvette
*David House, Intel GM of Microcomputer Components Div for 13 years, coined the phrase &quot;Intel Inside&quot;
*Greg Ives, NASCAR crew chief
*Samson Jenekhe, chemical engineer, chemist, and educator
*Jujhar Khaira, Punjabi professional hockey player
*Martin Lagina, engineer and reality TV personality
*Bob Lurtsema, former NFL player
*Randy McKay, former NHL player, two-time Stanley Cup winner
*David O&#x27;Donahue, Wisconsin National Guard general
*Joseph P. Overton, conceiver of the Overton window
*Baijayant Panda, Member of lower house of Indian Parliament
*Davis Payne, former head coach of the St. Louis Blues
*Mel Pearson, college ice hockey coach
*Sarah Rajala, electrical engineer and engineering educator
*Bhakta B. Rath, material physicist and Padma Bhushan recipient
*Kanwal Rekhi, businessman and entrepreneurship promoter in Silicon Valley
*Damian Rhodes, former NHL player
*Ron Rolston, ice hockey coach; head coach of the Buffalo Sabres (2012–2013)
*Jarkko Ruutu, former NHL player
*Donald G. Saari, game theorist
*Alexander King Sample, 12th Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Marquette; 11th Archbishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Portland in Oregon
*Leonard C. Ward, former Chief of the Army Division (National Guard Bureau) 
*John Scott, former NHL player; 2016 NHL All-Star Captain and MVP
*Donald Shell, author of the Shell sort
*Matthew Songer, founder and chief executive officer of Pioneer Surgical Technology
*Karl A. Smith, metallurgical engineer, academic and author
*Andy Sutton, former NHL player
*Marek W. Urban, American Chemical Society Fellow; recipient of numerous awards 
*John Vartan, businessman, developer, banker, restaurateur and philanthropist
*Dave Walter, former NFL player

==See also==
* List of colleges and universities in Michigan

==Notes==
== References ==
==External links==
* Athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="0" end="33" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Technological University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="35" end="48" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="50" end="53" title="Michigan Technological University" label="MTU"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="65" end="69" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="76" end="82" title="public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="83" end="102" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q12429" start="106" end="124" title="Houghton, Michigan" label="Houghton, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="164" end="186" title="Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Mining School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="232" end="259" title="Upper Peninsula of Michigan" label="Upper Peninsula of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="279" end="289" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="299" end="363" title="Carnegie_Classification_of_Institutions_of_Higher_Education#Doctorate-granting_Universities" label="Research 1: Very High Research Spending and Doctorate Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837752" start="558" end="590" title="Michigan Tech Research Institute" label="Michigan Tech Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589680" start="691" end="711" title="governor of Michigan" label="governor of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494600" start="733" end="748" title="Michigan Senate" label="Michigan Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="1120" end="1132" title="Keweenaw Waterway" label="Portage Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143451" start="1264" end="1271" title="Michigan Tech Huskies" label="Huskies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="1301" end="1317" title="NCAA Division II" label="NCAA Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599459" start="1318" end="1365" title="Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146601" start="1390" end="1396" title="College ice hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="1414" end="1424" title="NCAA Division I" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q835207" start="1444" end="1481" title="Central Collegiate Hockey Association" label="Central Collegiate Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591035" start="1494" end="1530" title="List of NCAA Division I men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey champions" label="has won three national championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q48890" start="1549" end="1559" title="College basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621925" start="1569" end="1596" title="2011 NCAA Division II women&amp;#x27;s basketball tournament" label="national runners-up in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684300" start="1701" end="1717" title="Jay Abel Hubbell" label="Jay Abel Hubbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q187508" start="1945" end="1963" title="Houghton Fire Hall" label="Houghton Fire Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223890" start="2020" end="2041" title="Marshman Edward Wadsworth" label="Marshman E. Wadsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q105723593" start="2556" end="2573" title="Grover C. Dillman" label="Grover C. Dillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711560" start="2782" end="2799" title="Alberta, Michigan" label="Alberta, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="7549" end="7559" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q500050" start="7561" end="7574" title="cross country running" label="cross country"/>
<link wikidata="Q216613" start="7576" end="7589" title="Nordic skiing" label="Nordic skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="7591" end="7597" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="7599" end="7614" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="7616" end="7626" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="7632" end="7638" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028702" start="7924" end="7944" title="Campus of Michigan Technological University" label="Michigan Tech campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q449988" start="7967" end="7972" title="U.S. Route 41 in Michigan" label="US-41"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="8213" end="8231" title="distance education" label="distance education"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="8264" end="8278" title="General Motors Corporation" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903098" start="8859" end="8870" title="Mont Ripley" label="Mont Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="12235" end="12242" title="natural science" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q14632398" start="12247" end="12263" title="physical science" label="physical science"/>
<link wikidata="Q910164" start="13669" end="13684" title="cheminformatics" label="cheminformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q744144" start="13969" end="13974" title="AACSB" label="AACSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006246" start="15420" end="15465" title="Foundation for Individual Rights in Education" label="Foundation for Individual Rights in Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="16813" end="16825" title="fraternity" label="fraternities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="16836" end="16846" title="sorority" label="sororities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244349" start="16903" end="16908" title="husky" label="husky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927023" start="16924" end="16941" title="Blizzard T. Husky" label="Blizzard T. Husky"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="17041" end="17045" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="17053" end="17064" title="NCAA Division II" label="Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599459" start="17065" end="17112" title="Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Great Lakes Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837751" start="17132" end="17154" title="Michigan Tech Huskies men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="men&amp;#x27;s hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="17167" end="17177" title="NCAA Division I" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q835207" start="17197" end="17234" title="Central Collegiate Hockey Association" label="Central Collegiate Hockey Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="17273" end="17279" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178131" start="17280" end="17292" title="snowboarding" label="snowboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903098" start="17299" end="17310" title="Mont Ripley" label="Mont Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397950" start="17324" end="17336" title="Keweenaw Waterway" label="Portage Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="17374" end="17394" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006977" start="17585" end="17605" title="Engineer&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Engineer&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658534" start="17622" end="17648" title="In Heaven There Is No Beer" label="In Heaven There Is No Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12432" start="17673" end="17689" title="Huskies Pep Band" label="Huskies Pep Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438710" start="17760" end="17773" title="scramble band" label="scramble band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658534" start="18242" end="18268" title="In Heaven There Is No Beer" label="In Heaven There Is No Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006977" start="18285" end="18298" title="Engineer&amp;#x27;s song" label="The Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q150272" start="18616" end="18632" title="Frankie Yankovic" label="Frankie Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="18773" end="18785" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951902" start="20069" end="20084" title="Michigan Technological University&amp;#x27;s Winter Carnival" label="Winter Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q833972" start="20195" end="20206" title="snow sculpture" label="snow statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195279" start="21114" end="21142" title="Pine Mountain Music Festival" label="Pine Mountain Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="21459" end="21481" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q37066" start="21680" end="21702" title="Bismarck, North Dakota" label="Bismarck, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q19891954" start="22033" end="22050" title="Elias C. Aifantis" label="Elias C. Aifantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608750" start="22052" end="22065" title="Stephen Bowen (biologist)" label="Stephen Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47294258" start="22067" end="22083" title="Margaret Burnett" label="Margaret Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586663" start="22085" end="22101" title="Robert Schneider" label="Robert Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q106873734" start="22103" end="22118" title="Kathy Halvorsen" label="Kathy Halvorsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q109539197" start="22120" end="22137" title="Lyon Bradley King" label="Lyon Bradley King"/>
<link wikidata="Q22278777" start="22139" end="22153" title="Nancy Langston" label="Nancy Langston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733266" start="22155" end="22173" title="Robert J. Nemiroff" label="Robert J. Nemiroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286478" start="22175" end="22187" title="Joseph Rallo" label="Joseph Rallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q93133" start="22189" end="22201" title="Donald Shell" label="Donald Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20267560" start="22203" end="22218" title="Martha E. Sloan" label="Martha E. Sloan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116970771" start="22220" end="22237" title="David R. Shonnard" label="David R. Shonnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q111449817" start="22243" end="22260" title="Svitlana Winnikow" label="Svitlana Winnikow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179982" start="22401" end="22411" title="Joe Berger" label="Joe Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="22420" end="22423" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771460" start="22432" end="22449" title="Markus J. Buehler" label="Markus J. Buehler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="22519" end="22556" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732848" start="22558" end="22568" title="Herb Boxer" label="Herb Boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="22608" end="22611" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q49347" start="22613" end="22626" title="Melvin Calvin" label="Melvin Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q220389" start="22665" end="22677" title="Calvin Cycle" label="Calvin Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q836377" start="22679" end="22691" title="Chris Conner" label="Chris Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="22693" end="22696" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073500" start="22705" end="22717" title="Jill Dickman" label="Jill Dickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494527" start="22744" end="22759" title="Nevada Assembly" label="Nevada Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017827" start="22761" end="22774" title="David Edwards (ArtScientist)" label="David Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="22812" end="22819" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q954322" start="22829" end="22842" title="Tony Esposito" label="Tony Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527100" start="22906" end="22923" title="Gates Corporation" label="Gates Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202911" start="22925" end="22935" title="Roxane Gay" label="Roxane Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q570519" start="23089" end="23096" title="LS-DYNA" label="LS-DYNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928399" start="23098" end="23116" title="William S. Hammack" label="William S. Hammack"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106290" start="23162" end="23172" title="Dave Hill (automotive engineer)" label="David Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="23204" end="23222" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Chevrolet Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q120493357" start="23224" end="23235" title="David House (computer designer)" label="David House"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="23237" end="23242" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21663020" start="23336" end="23345" title="Greg Ives" label="Greg Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="23347" end="23353" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q59489642" start="23366" end="23380" title="Samson Jenekhe" label="Samson Jenekhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21598113" start="23424" end="23437" title="Jujhar Khaira" label="Jujhar Khaira"/>
<link wikidata="Q110494593" start="23475" end="23488" title="Martin Lagina" label="Martin Lagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641312" start="23527" end="23539" title="Bob Lurtsema" label="Bob Lurtsema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000678" start="23560" end="23571" title="Randy McKay" label="Randy McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q51078685" start="23621" end="23641" title="David O&amp;#x27;Donahue" label="David O&amp;#x27;Donahue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027237" start="23643" end="23667" title="Wisconsin National Guard" label="Wisconsin National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015941" start="23677" end="23694" title="Joseph P. Overton" label="Joseph P. Overton"/>
<link wikidata="Q542950" start="23713" end="23727" title="Overton window" label="Overton window"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843231" start="23729" end="23744" title="Baijayant Panda" label="Baijayant Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241946" start="23790" end="23801" title="Davis Payne" label="Davis Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="23828" end="23843" title="St. Louis Blues" label="St. Louis Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810807" start="23845" end="23856" title="Mel Pearson" label="Mel Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107522331" start="23884" end="23896" title="Sarah Rajala" label="Sarah Rajala"/>
<link wikidata="Q25323997" start="23944" end="23958" title="Bhakta B. Rath" label="Bhakta B. Rath"/>
<link wikidata="Q932650" start="23983" end="23996" title="Padma Bhushan" label="Padma Bhushan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6365719" start="24008" end="24020" title="Kanwal Rekhi" label="Kanwal Rekhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q330501" start="24083" end="24096" title="Damian Rhodes" label="Damian Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377908" start="24117" end="24128" title="Ron Rolston" label="Ron Rolston"/>
<link wikidata="Q131206" start="24166" end="24180" title="Buffalo Sabres" label="Buffalo Sabres"/>
<link wikidata="Q188105" start="24194" end="24206" title="Jarkko Ruutu" label="Jarkko Ruutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q560834" start="24227" end="24242" title="Donald G. Saari" label="Donald G. Saari"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="24244" end="24257" title="game theory" label="game theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q554725" start="24259" end="24280" title="Alexander King Sample" label="Alexander King Sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q872042" start="24301" end="24336" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Marquette" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q45525" start="24361" end="24409" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Portland in Oregon" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Portland in Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430434" start="24411" end="24426" title="Leonard C. Ward" label="Leonard C. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q954403" start="24488" end="24498" title="John Scott (ice hockey, born 1982)" label="John Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q93133" start="24554" end="24566" title="Donald Shell" label="Donald Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q848955" start="24582" end="24592" title="Shell sort" label="Shell sort"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791249" start="24594" end="24608" title="Matthew Songer" label="Matthew Songer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196799" start="24649" end="24676" title="Pioneer Surgical Technology" label="Pioneer Surgical Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q111258779" start="24678" end="24691" title="Karl A. Smith" label="Karl A. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q527802" start="24738" end="24749" title="Andy Sutton" label="Andy Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040378" start="24770" end="24784" title="Marek W. Urban" label="Marek W. Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="24786" end="24811" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261831" start="24851" end="24862" title="John Vartan" label="John Vartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195855" start="24929" end="24940" title="Dave Walter" label="Dave Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701341" start="24976" end="25021" title="List of colleges and universities in Michigan" label="List of colleges and universities in Michigan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45896" wikidata="Q163297" url="?curid=45896" title="The Stranger (Camus novel)">
<text>The Stranger ( , ), also published in English as The Outsider, is a 1942 novella written by French author Albert Camus. The first of Camus&#x27;s novels published in his lifetime, the story follows Meursault, an indifferent settler in French Algeria, who, weeks after his mother&#x27;s funeral, kills an unnamed Arab man in Algiers. The story is divided into two parts, presenting Meursault&#x27;s first-person narrative before and after the killing.

Camus completed the initial manuscript by May 1941, with revisions suggested by André Malraux, Jean Paulhan, and Raymond Queneau that were adopted in the final version. The original French-language first edition of the novella was published on 19 May 1942, by Gallimard, under its original title; it appeared in bookstores from that June but was restricted to an initial 4,400 copies, so few that it could not be a bestseller. Published during the Nazi occupation of France, it went on sale without censorship or omission by the Propaganda-Staffel.

It began being published in English from 1946, first in the United Kingdom, where its title was changed to &quot;The Outsider&quot; to avoid confusion with the translation of Maria Kuncewiczowa&#x27;s novel of the same name; after being published in the United States, the novella retained its original name, and the British-American difference in titles has persisted in subsequent editions. &quot;The Stranger&quot; gained popularity among anti-Nazi circles following its focus in Jean-Paul Sartre&#x27;s 1947 article &quot; (&quot;Analysis of &quot;The Stranger&quot;&quot;).

Considered a classic of 20th-century literature, &quot;The Stranger&quot; has received critical acclaim for Camus&#x27;s philosophical outlook, absurdism, syntactic structure, and existentialism (despite Camus&#x27;s rejection of the label), particularly within its final chapter. &quot;Le Monde&quot; ranked &quot;The Stranger&quot; as number one on its 100 Books of the 20th Century. The novella has twice been adapted for film: &quot;Lo Straniero&quot; (1967) and &quot;Yazgı&quot; (2001), has seen numerous references and homages in television and music (notably &quot;Killing an Arab&quot; by The Cure), and was retold from the perspective of the unnamed Arab man&#x27;s brother in Kamel Daoud&#x27;s 2013 novel &quot;The Meursault Investigation&quot;.

==Plot==
===Part 1===
Meursault learns of the death of his mother, who has been living in an old age home in the country. He takes time off from work to attend her funeral but seems to show no signs of grief or mourning to the people around him. When asked if he wishes to view her body, he declines, and he smokes and drinks regular (white) coffee—not the obligatory black coffee—at the vigil held by the coffin the night before the burial with the caretaker.

The day after the funeral Meursault returns to Algiers and encounters Marie, a former secretary of his firm. The two become re-acquainted, swim together, and that evening watch a comedy film and begin to have an intimate relationship.

Over the next few days, Meursault helps Raymond Sintès, a neighbor and friend who is rumored to be a pimp, but says he works in a warehouse, to get revenge on a Moorish mistress he suspects has been accepting gifts and money from another man. Raymond asks Meursault to write a letter inviting the girl over to Raymond&#x27;s apartment solely so that he can have sex with her and then spit in her face and throw her out. While listening to Raymond, Meursault is unfazed by any feelings of empathy, does not express concern that she would be emotionally hurt by this plan and agrees to write the letter.

The girl visits Raymond on a Sunday morning, and the police get involved when he beats her for slapping him after he tries to kick her out. He asks Meursault to testify that the girl had been unfaithful when he is called to the police station, and Meursault agrees. Ultimately, Raymond is let off with a warning.

While this is going on, Meursault&#x27;s boss asks him if he would like to work at a branch their firm is thinking about opening in Paris and Marie asks him if he wants to get married. In both cases, Meursault does not have strong feelings about the matter but is willing to move or get married if it will please the other party. Also, Salamano, Meursault and Raymond&#x27;s elderly neighbor, loses his abused and diseased dog and, despite outwardly maintaining his usual spiteful and uncaring attitude toward the creature, goes to Meursault for comfort and advice a few times. During one of these conversations, Salamano, who adopted the dog as a companion shortly after his wife&#x27;s death, mentions that some neighbors had &#x27;said nasty things&#x27; about Meursault after he sent his mother to a retirement home. Meursault is surprised to learn about this negative impression of his actions.

One weekend, Raymond invites Meursault and Marie to a friend&#x27;s beach cabin. There they see the brother of Raymond&#x27;s spurned mistress along with another Arab, who Raymond has mentioned have been following him around recently. The Arabs confront Raymond and his friend, and the brother wounds Raymond with a knife before running away. Later, Meursault walks back along the beach alone, armed with a revolver he took from Raymond to prevent him from acting rashly, and encounters the brother of Raymond&#x27;s mistress. Disoriented and on the edge of heatstroke, Meursault shoots when the Arab flashes his knife at him. It is a fatal shot, but Meursault shoots the man four more times after a pause.

===Part 2===
Meursault is incarcerated. His general detachment and ability to adapt to any external circumstance seem to make living in prison tolerable, especially after he gets used to the idea of being restricted and unable to have sex with Marie, though he does realize at one point that he has been unknowingly talking to himself for a number of days. For almost a year, he sleeps, looks out the small window of his cell, and mentally lists the objects in his old apartment while waiting for his day in court.

Meursault never denies the murder he committed, so, at his trial, the prosecuting attorney focuses more on his inability or unwillingness to cry at his mother&#x27;s funeral than on the details of the murder. He portrays Meursault&#x27;s quietness and passivity as demonstrating his criminality and lack of remorse and denounces Meursault as a soulless monster who deserves to die for his crime. Although several of Meursault&#x27;s friends testify on his behalf and his attorney tells him the sentence will likely be light, Meursault is sentenced to be publicly decapitated.

Put in a new cell, Meursault obsesses over his impending doom and appeal and tries to imagine some way in which he can escape his fate. He refuses to see the prison chaplain, but one day the chaplain visits him anyway. Meursault says he does not believe in God and is not even interested in the subject, but the chaplain persists in trying to lead Meursault away from atheism (or, perhaps more precisely, apatheism). The chaplain believes Meursault&#x27;s appeal will succeed in getting him released from prison, but says such an outcome will not get rid of his feelings of guilt or fix his relationship with God. Eventually, Meursault accosts the chaplain in a rage. He attacks the chaplain&#x27;s worldview and patronizing attitude and asserts that, in confronting the certainty of the nearness of his death, he has had insights about life and death that he feels with a confidence beyond what the chaplain possesses. He says that, although what we say or do or feel can cause our deaths to happen at different times or under different circumstances, none of those things can change the fact that we are all condemned to die one day, so nothing ultimately matters.

After the chaplain leaves, Meursault finds some comfort in thinking about the parallels between his situation and how he thinks his mother must have felt while being surrounded by death and slowly dying at the retirement home. Yelling at the chaplain had emptied him of all hope or thoughts of escape or a successful appeal, so he manages to open his heart &#x27;to the benign indifference of the universe&#x27; and decides that he has been, and still is, happy. His indifference to the universe makes him feel like he belongs to it. He even hopes there will be a large, hateful crowd at his execution which will bring everything to a consummate end.

== Characters ==
* Meursault () is a French settler in Algeria who learns of his mother&#x27;s death by telegram. Meursault&#x27;s indifference to his mother&#x27;s death demonstrates some emotional detachment from his environment. Other instances are shown. Meursault is also a truthful person, speaking his mind without regard for others. He is estranged from society due to his indifference but shows some affection towards Marie. 
* Meursault&#x27;s mother was sent to an old people&#x27;s home three years prior to her death, as noted in the opening lines of the novel. As Meursault nears the time for his execution, he feels a kinship with his mother, thinking she, too, embraced a meaningless universe.
* Thomas Pérez was close to Meursault&#x27;s mother while she was in the home; prompting other residents to joke him as &quot;fiancé&quot;. He brings up the rear in the funeral procession for Meursault&#x27;s mother, and Meursault describes in a great amount of detail the old man&#x27;s struggle to keep up. He is called to testify at Meursault&#x27;s trial.
* Céleste is the owner of a café that Meursault frequents. He testifies at Meursault&#x27;s trial.
* Marie Cardona was a typist in the same workplace as Meursault. A day after his mother&#x27;s funeral, she meets Meursault at a public pool, and they begin a relationship. She asks Meursault on one occasion if he loves her, and on another if he would like to marry her. To the first he responds with no, the second he seems indifferent to the idea. Marie visits him once in prison, but is not permitted any further visits since she is not his wife. She testifies at Meursault&#x27;s trial.
* Salamano is an old man who routinely walks his dog. He abuses it but is still attached to it. When he loses his dog, he is distressed and asks Meursault for advice. He testifies at Meursault&#x27;s trial.
* Raymond Sintès is a neighbour of Meursault who beats his Arab mistress. Her brother and friends try to take revenge. He brings Meursault into the conflict, and the latter kills the brother. Raymond and Meursault seem to develop a bond, and he testifies for Meursault during his trial.
* Masson is the owner of the beach house where Raymond takes Marie and Meursault. Masson is a carefree person who likes to live his life and be happy. He testifies at Meursault&#x27;s trial.
* The Arabs include Raymond&#x27;s mistress, her brother, and his assumed friends. None of the Arabs in &quot;The Stranger&quot; are named, reflecting the distance between the French colonists and native people.
* The Arab (the brother of the mistress of Raymond) is a man shot and killed by Meursault on a beach in Algiers.
* The Chaplain serves as a final attempt to force Meursault into following normative social scripts, in this case, seeking Christian forgiveness for his crime. The overall weakness of the Chaplain’s arguments in the face of Meursault’s complete disinterest in them emphasizes the novel’s view of religion as a limiting worldview that distracts from the truth of life’s ultimate absurdity.

==Critical analysis==
In his 1956 analysis of the novel, Carl Viggiani wrote:

Victor Brombert has analysed &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot; and Sartre&#x27;s &quot;Explication de &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot;&quot; in the philosophical context of the Absurd. Louis Hudon dismissed the characterisation of &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot; as an existentialist novel in his 1960 analysis. The 1963 study by Ignace Feuerlicht begins with an examination of the themes of alienation, in the sense of Meursault being a &#x27;stranger&#x27; in his society. In his 1970 analysis, Leo Bersani commented that &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot; is &quot;mediocre&quot; in its attempt to be a &quot;&#x27;profound&#x27; novel&quot;, but describes the novel as an &quot;impressive if flawed exercise in a kind of writing promoted by the New Novelists of the 1950s&quot;. Paul P. Somers Jr. has compared Camus&#x27;s &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot; and Sartre&#x27;s &quot;Nausea&quot;, in light of Sartre&#x27;s essay on Camus&#x27;s novel. Sergei Hackel has explored parallels between &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot; and Dostoyevsky&#x27;s &quot;Crime and Punishment&quot;.

Terry Otten has studied in detail the relationship between Meursault and his mother. Gerald Morreale examines Meursault&#x27;s killing of the Arab and the question of whether Meursault&#x27;s action is an act of murder. Ernest Simon has examined the nature of Meursault&#x27;s trial in &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot;, with respect to earlier analysis by Richard Weisberg and jurist Richard A. Posner. René Girard has critiqued the relative nature of &#x27;indifference&#x27; in the character of Meursault in relation to his surrounding society.

Kamel Daoud has written a novel &quot;The Meursault Investigation&quot; (2013/2014), first published in Algeria in 2013, and then republished in France to critical acclaim. This post-colonialist response to &quot;The Stranger&quot; counters Camus&#x27;s version with elements from the perspective of the unnamed Arab victim&#x27;s brother (naming him and presenting him as a real person who was mourned) and other protagonists. Daoud explores their subsequent lives following the withdrawal of French authorities and most pied-noirs from Algeria after the conclusion of the Algerian War of Independence in 1962.

==Publication history and English translations==

=== Original French publication ===
On 27 May 1941, Camus was informed about the changes suggested by André Malraux after he had read the manuscript and took his remarks into account. For instance, Malraux thought the minimalist syntactic structure was too repetitive. Some scenes and passages (the murder, the conversation with the chaplain) should also be revised.
The manuscript was then read by editors Jean Paulhan and Raymond Queneau. Gerhard Heller, a German editor, translator and lieutenant in the Wehrmacht working for the Censorship Bureau offered to help.

The original French-language novel was published in Paris on 19 May 1942 by Gallimard as &quot;L&#x27;Étranger&quot;. The book started appearing in bookstores in June 1942, at a price of 25 francs. Only 4,400 copies of it were printed. As a marketing ploy, the title pages and rear wrappers were inscribed to give the false impression that there were eight different editions. At the time, Camus was suffering from a recurring bout of tuberculosis in Oran and could not travel to France and therefore could not keep with the French publishing tradition of presenting copies of his new book to journalists. He was also unable to read the first reviews published in newspapers or witness the distribution in bookstores. Upon publication, twenty copies were sent to him, but they never arrived and it was not until 17 June that Camus finally received a single copy. Camus was further diagnosed with tuberculosis in both lungs in July 1942 and left Algeria for Panelier, a village near Le Chambon-sur-Lignon in the mountains of south-central France.

=== English translations ===
In 1946, the first English translation, by British author Stuart Gilbert, was published, based on the first French edition. For more than 30 years, Gilbert&#x27;s version was the standard English translation. Gilbert&#x27;s choice of title, &quot;The Stranger&quot;, was changed by Hamish Hamilton to &quot;The Outsider&quot;, because they considered it &quot;more striking and appropriate&quot; and because Maria Kuncewiczowa&#x27;s Polish-language novel &quot;Cudzoziemka&quot; had recently been published in London as &quot;The Stranger&quot;. In the United States, Knopf had already typeset the manuscript using Gilbert&#x27;s original title when informed of the name change and so disregarded it; the British–American difference in titles has persisted in subsequent editions. Several scholars, including Helen Sebba, John E. Gale, and Eric Du Plessis, along with commentators such as James Campbell, have noted inaccuracies in the Stuart Gilbert translation and their resulting distortions of the tone of Camus&#x27; original French text in his English translation.

In 1982, the British publisher Hamish Hamilton, which had issued Gilbert&#x27;s translation, published a translation by Joseph Laredo, also as &quot;The Outsider.&quot; Penguin Books bought this version in 1983 for a paperback edition.

In 1988, Vintage published a version in the United States with a translation by American Matthew Ward under the standard American title of &quot;The Stranger.&quot; Camus was influenced by American literary style, and Ward&#x27;s translation expresses American usage and adheres more closely to Camus&#x27; original prose and tone.

In 2012, a newer translation by Sandra Smith was published by Penguin as &quot;The Outsider.&quot;

==== Difference between translations ====
A critical difference among these translations is the expression of emotion in the sentence towards the close of the novel: &quot;I laid my heart open to the benign indifference of the universe&quot; in Gilbert&#x27;s translation, versus Laredo&#x27;s &quot;I laid my heart open to the gentle indifference of the universe&quot; (original French: ; literally, &quot;the tender indifference of the world&quot;). The Penguin Classics 2000 reprint of Laredo&#x27;s translation has &quot;gentle&quot; changed to &quot;benign&quot;. Smith&#x27;s 2012 translation uses the literal translation, &quot;tender&quot;, stating in her Translator&#x27;s Note that using &quot;benign&quot; &quot;fails to capture the paradoxical nuance of &#x27;tender&#x27;&quot;.

The ending lines differ as well: Gilbert translates &quot;on the day of my execution there should be a huge crowd of spectators and that they should greet me with howls of execration&quot;, which contrasts with Laredo&#x27;s and Smith&#x27;s translation of &quot;greet me with cries of hatred.&quot; This passage describes a scene that would serve as a foil to the prior &quot;indifference of the world&quot;. In French, the phrase is . Ward translates this as &quot;with cries of hate&quot;. Gilbert juxtaposes &quot;execration&quot; with &quot;execution&quot;.

 is the opening sentence of the novel. English translations have rendered the first sentence as &#x27;Mother died today&#x27;, &#x27;Maman died today&#x27;, or a variant thereof. In 2012, Ryan Bloom argued that it should be translated as &#x27;Today, Maman died.&#x27; He believes this better expresses the character of Meursault, as developed in the novel, as someone who &#x27;lives for the moment&#x27;, &#x27;does not consciously dwell on the past&#x27;, and &#x27;does not worry about the future&#x27;.

==== List of English translations ====

* 1946, &quot;The Outsider&quot; (translated by Stuart Gilbert), London: Hamish Hamilton
* 1946, &quot;The Stranger&quot; (translated by Stuart Gilbert), New York: Alfred A. Knopf
* 1982, &quot;The Outsider&quot; (translated by Joseph Laredo), London: Hamish Hamilton, 
* 1989, &quot;The Stranger&quot; (translated by Matthew Ward), New York: Vintage, 
* 2012, &quot;The Outsider&quot; (translated by Sandra Smith), London: Penguin, 

==Adaptations and allusions==
===Film adaptations/allusions ===
==== Direct adaptations ====
* 1967 &quot;Lo Straniero&quot; by Luchino Visconti (Italian)
* 2001 &quot;Yazgı&quot; (&quot;Fate&quot;) by Zeki Demirkubuz (Turkish)

==== Allusions ====
* 1990 American psychological horror film &quot;Jacob&#x27;s Ladder&quot;. In the first scene where Jacob finds himself no longer fighting in the jungles of Vietnam, he is on a subway train reading &quot;The Stranger&quot;.
* 2001 &quot;The Man Who Wasn&#x27;t There&quot; by The Coen Brothers
* 2014 &quot;The Gambler&quot;

===Literature===
* &quot;The Meursault Investigation&quot; (2015) by Kamel Daoud is a novel created counter to Camus&#x27;s version, from the perspective of an Arab man described as the brother of the murdered man. Referred to only as &quot;The Arab&quot; by Camus, in this novel he is said to have been named Musa, and was an actual man who existed and was mourned by his brother and mother. It was a &quot;New York Times&quot; Notable Book of 2015.
* In Camus’ &quot;The Plague&quot;, published in 1948, Camus mentions a woman who &quot;started airing her views about a murder case that had created some stir in Algiers. A young commercial employee had killed an Algerian on a beach&quot;.

===In song===
* &quot;Killing an Arab&quot;, the 1978 debut single by the Cure, was described by Robert Smith as &quot;a short poetic attempt at condensing my impression of the key moments in &#x27;l&#x27;entranger&#x27; (The Outsider) by Albert Camus&quot;.
* &quot;Noch koroche dnya&quot;, from the 1995 album of the same name by the Russian heavy metal band Aria, is based on Meursault&#x27;s encounter with the chaplain in the final scene of the novel. It is narrated from Meursault&#x27;s first-person perspective and includes (in Russian) the line, &quot;The cries of hate will be my reward / Upon my death, I will not be alone&quot;.
* At the end of &quot;Asa Phelps Is Dead&quot;, from the album &quot;Ghost Stories&quot; by The Lawrence Arms, the passage in which Meursault accepts his impending execution is read by Chris McCaughan. It parallels certain themes in the song&#x27;s lyrics.
* Folk singer-songwriter Eric Andersen has a song called &quot;The Stranger (Song of Revenge)&quot;, one of four songs based on Camus&#x27;s works on his 2014 EP &quot;The Shadow and Light of Albert Camus.&quot;
* Tuxedomoon&#x27;s third single was titled &quot;The Stranger&quot; and was reworked in 1981 as &quot;L&#x27;étranger (Gigue existentielle)&quot; for the &quot;Suite en sous-sol&quot; EP. The lyrics to both versions include direct references to the protagonist&#x27;s mother&#x27;s death and the expectation that he cry at her funeral.
* Avenged Sevenfold&#x27;s first single &quot;Nobody&quot; from Life Is But a Dream... was inspired by The Stranger.
* During the first verse of &quot;Versailles&quot;, from the album Aethiopes by Billy Woods, woods directly references the killing in the book with the line, &quot;It&#x27;s hot on these streets monsieur, I might shoot a arab&quot;.
* The Turkish rock song titled “Yabancı&quot; (The Stranger) written and composed by Ata Akdağ and performed by Feridun Düzağaç feat Yaya, is dedicated to Camus&#x27; novel of the same name. Some of the lyrics in the song are: “The days do not progress, they have lost their names, It&#x27;s all the same / I knocked on the door of disaster / I am a stranger who kills for someone else.” The song is included in the album “10&#x27;a Özel”, released in 2019.
* The sixth song on J. A. Seazer’s album バルバラ矮星子黙示録 (Barbara Dwarf Star Child Apocalypse) features the song 異邦人の揺籠歌 (エトランジェのララバイ), which can be translated to “L’Etranger’s Lullabye”.

===Games===
* Meursault, the character based on Meursault, featured in the 2023 game Limbus Company by the Korean game studio Project Moon
* Mistral, a French-Algerian woman from Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance who uses a polearm called L&#x27;Etranger in battle.
* &quot;Team Fortress 2&quot; features a weapon for the Spy called L&#x27;Etranger, included in a set called The Saharan Spy.

==See also==

* Absurdism
* Character evidence
* Existentialism
* &quot;La Veuve Couderc&quot;
* &quot;Le Monde&quot;″s 100 Books of the Century

==References==
==External links==

* —the French version of the novella</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="73" end="80" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="106" end="118" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="235" end="249" title="French Algeria" label="French Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="324" end="331" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q616622" start="398" end="420" title="first-person narrative" label="first-person narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q151164" start="532" end="545" title="André Malraux" label="André Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q470557" start="547" end="559" title="Jean Paulhan" label="Jean Paulhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q218690" start="565" end="580" title="Raymond Queneau" label="Raymond Queneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q273819" start="712" end="721" title="Gallimard" label="Gallimard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="900" end="925" title="German military administration in occupied France during World War II" label="Nazi occupation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="981" end="999" title="Propaganda-Staffel" label="Propaganda-Staffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090723" start="1177" end="1195" title="Maria Kuncewiczowa" label="Maria Kuncewiczowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192548" start="1209" end="1225" title="Cudzoziemka" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="1485" end="1501" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q333625" start="1726" end="1735" title="absurdism" label="absurdism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="1762" end="1776" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="1869" end="1877" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q40734" start="1937" end="1966" title="Le Monde&amp;#x27;s 100 Books of the Century" label="100 Books of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067859" start="2019" end="2031" title="The Stranger (1967 film)" label="Lo Straniero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437360" start="2055" end="2060" title="Yazgı" label="Yazgı"/>
<link wikidata="Q62051509" start="2155" end="2170" title="Killing an Arab" label="Killing an Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="2180" end="2188" title="The Cure" label="The Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192364" start="2269" end="2280" title="Kamel Daoud" label="Kamel Daoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723935" start="2305" end="2332" title="The Meursault Investigation" label="The Meursault Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908" start="2434" end="2446" title="old age home" label="old age home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="2850" end="2857" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43437" start="3140" end="3144" title="Procuring (prostitution)" label="pimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="3200" end="3207" title="Moorish" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q625369" start="3208" end="3216" title="Mistress (lover)" label="mistress"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="4088" end="4093" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="5264" end="5272" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5384" end="5395" title="Orientation (mental)#Causes of mental disorientation" label="Disoriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="5591" end="5603" title="Imprisonment" label="incarcerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436149" start="5881" end="5899" title="Intrapersonal communication" label="talking to himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="6151" end="6171" title="Prosecutor" label="prosecuting attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="6635" end="6655" title="guillotine" label="publicly decapitated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6816" end="6831" title="Chaplain#Prison" label="prison chaplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="7026" end="7033" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q620834" start="7063" end="7072" title="apatheism" label="apatheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17930" start="8667" end="8708" title="anomie" label="emotional detachment from his environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="10999" end="11015" title="Pieds-noirs" label="French colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859372" start="11020" end="11033" title="Arab-Berber" label="native people"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11271" end="11292" title="Forgiveness#Christianity" label="Christian forgiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="11444" end="11452" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522213" start="11617" end="11632" title="Victor Brombert" label="Victor Brombert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="11678" end="11684" title="Sartre" label="Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q360259" start="12099" end="12110" title="Leo Bersani" label="Leo Bersani"/>
<link wikidata="Q658288" start="12475" end="12481" title="Nausea (novel)" label="Nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18737203" start="12544" end="12557" title="Sergei Hackel" label="Sergei Hackel"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="12621" end="12632" title="Dostoyevsky" label="Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q165318" start="12646" end="12666" title="Crime and Punishment" label="Crime and Punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q533583" start="13054" end="13071" title="Richard A. Posner" label="Richard A. Posner"/>
<link wikidata="Q129228" start="13073" end="13084" title="René Girard" label="René Girard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3192364" start="13218" end="13229" title="Kamel Daoud" label="Kamel Daoud"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723935" start="13256" end="13283" title="The Meursault Investigation" label="The Meursault Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="13322" end="13329" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q265425" start="13396" end="13412" title="post-colonialist" label="post-colonialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="13740" end="13749" title="pied-noir" label="pied-noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="13792" end="13820" title="Algerian War of Independence" label="Algerian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q151164" start="13983" end="13996" title="André Malraux" label="André Malraux"/>
<link wikidata="Q470557" start="14288" end="14300" title="Jean Paulhan" label="Jean Paulhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q218690" start="14305" end="14320" title="Raymond Queneau" label="Raymond Queneau"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14322" end="14336" title="Gerhard Heller (editor)" label="Gerhard Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="14388" end="14397" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q273819" start="14526" end="14535" title="Éditions Gallimard" label="Gallimard"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="14901" end="14905" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q155549" start="15432" end="15453" title="Le Chambon-sur-Lignon" label="Le Chambon-sur-Lignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626586" start="15584" end="15598" title="Stuart Gilbert" label="Stuart Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090723" start="15934" end="15952" title="Maria Kuncewiczowa" label="Maria Kuncewiczowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192548" start="15988" end="15999" title="Cudzoziemka" label="Cudzoziemka"/>
<link wikidata="Q197707" start="16630" end="16645" title="Hamish Hamilton" label="Hamish Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="16768" end="16781" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560313" start="16845" end="16852" title="Vintage Books" label="Vintage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791383" start="16925" end="16937" title="Matthew Ward (writer)" label="Matthew Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="17231" end="17238" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626586" start="19223" end="19237" title="Stuart Gilbert" label="Stuart Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q197707" start="19248" end="19263" title="Hamish Hamilton" label="Hamish Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431868" start="19339" end="19354" title="Alfred A. Knopf" label="Alfred A. Knopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q197707" start="19427" end="19442" title="Hamish Hamilton" label="Hamish Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791383" start="19493" end="19505" title="Matthew Ward (writer)" label="Matthew Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560313" start="19518" end="19525" title="Vintage Books" label="Vintage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="19599" end="19606" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067859" start="19716" end="19728" title="The Stranger (1967 film)" label="Lo Straniero"/>
<link wikidata="Q13888" start="19738" end="19754" title="Luchino Visconti" label="Luchino Visconti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437360" start="19778" end="19783" title="Yazgı" label="Yazgı"/>
<link wikidata="Q187261" start="19812" end="19827" title="Zeki Demirkubuz" label="Zeki Demirkubuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q482626" start="19907" end="19926" title="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ladder (1990 film)" label="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q913440" start="20096" end="20125" title="The Man Who Wasn&amp;#x27;t There (2001 film)" label="The Man Who Wasn&amp;#x27;t There"/>
<link wikidata="Q56095" start="20135" end="20152" title="The Coen Brothers" label="The Coen Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15706898" start="20166" end="20177" title="The Gambler (2014 film)" label="The Gambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q20723935" start="20210" end="20237" title="The Meursault Investigation" label="The Meursault Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q320372" start="20654" end="20664" title="The Plague (novel)" label="The Plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q62051509" start="20900" end="20915" title="Killing an Arab" label="Killing an Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="20948" end="20956" title="the Cure" label="the Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q491252" start="20975" end="20987" title="Robert Smith (musician)" label="Robert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969269" start="21179" end="21206" title="Noch koroche dnya" label="1995 album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q785828" start="21239" end="21243" title="Aria (band)" label="Aria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761811" start="21588" end="21601" title="Ghost Stories (The Lawrence Arms album)" label="Ghost Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q581703" start="21611" end="21628" title="The Lawrence Arms" label="The Lawrence Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107387" start="21704" end="21719" title="Chris McCaughan" label="Chris McCaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q712090" start="21801" end="21814" title="Eric Andersen" label="Eric Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474525" start="21990" end="22000" title="Tuxedomoon" label="Tuxedomoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24966029" start="22149" end="22166" title="Suite en sous-sol" label="Suite en sous-sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q165193" start="22327" end="22344" title="Avenged Sevenfold" label="Avenged Sevenfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q117350506" start="22371" end="22377" title="Nobody (Avenged Sevenfold song)" label="Nobody"/>
<link wikidata="Q117168348" start="22389" end="22411" title="Life Is But a Dream..." label="Life Is But a Dream..."/>
<link wikidata="Q113380373" start="22509" end="22518" title="Aethiopes (album)" label="Aethiopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247049" start="22522" end="22533" title="Billy Woods" label="Billy Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068798" start="22787" end="22802" title="Feridun Düzağaç" label="Feridun Düzağaç"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156780" start="23153" end="23165" title="J. A. Seazer" label="J. A. Seazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116970602" start="23402" end="23416" title="Limbus Company" label="Limbus Company"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23496" end="23526" title="Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance" label="Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q382108" start="23588" end="23603" title="Team Fortress 2" label="Team Fortress 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q333625" start="23723" end="23732" title="Absurdism" label="Absurdism"/>
<link wikidata="Q413931" start="23735" end="23753" title="Character evidence" label="Character evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="23756" end="23770" title="Existentialism" label="Existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213535" start="23779" end="23795" title="La Veuve Couderc" label="La Veuve Couderc"/>
<link wikidata="Q40734" start="23804" end="23851" title="Le Monde&amp;#x27;s 100 Books of the Century" label="&amp;quot;Le Monde&amp;quot;″s 100 Books of the Century"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45900" wikidata="Q538371" url="?curid=45900" title="1270s BC">
<text>The 1270s BC is a decade which lasted from 1279 BC to 1270 BC.

== Events and trends ==
*1279 BC—Pharaoh Seti I dies after an 11-year reign.
*c. 1279 BC—Troy VI, speculated to be the city mentioned in Homer&#x27;s Iliad, is presumed to have been destroyed by Greek armies.
*c. 1279 BC—Ramesses II (19th Dynasty) becomes pharaoh of Egypt. During his reign he builds a new capital on the eastern Nile Delta which he, renames Pi-Ramesses – the &quot;House of Ramesses&quot;. The capital is created as a center of Egyptian power in the North.
*c. 1279 BC – 1213 BC—Temple of Ramesses II in Abu Simbel in Nubia (19th Dynasty) is built. The wall painting of Queen Nefertari making an offering to the god Isis in the tomb of Nefertari is made. The tomb is located in the Valley of the Queens in Egypt.
*c. 1279 BC – 1213 BC—Temple of Amun, Mut and Khons at Luxor are built.
*1278 BC—Ramesses II defeats the Shardana sea pirates and nomads on the western frontier.
*1275 BC—Ramesses II marches his army north to secure Amurru and makes a bold statement of intent to the Hittites, who have been fighting internecine skirmishes in the north, east and west of their realm for many years.
*1274 BC—The Battle of Kadesh (or Battle of Qadesh) in Syria, regarded as the largest (5,000–6,000) chariot vs. chariot battle in antiquity. The end of the battle is followed by some 15 years of border warfare ended by the signing of the earliest known peace treaty between the Hittites and Egyptians, the Treaty of Kadesh.
*c. 1274 BC—Ramesses II (the Great) fights a number of campaigns in Canaan and Syria, with the aim of recovering territories lost in the post-Kadesh revolts.
*1274 BC—Shalmaneser I becomes king of the Assyrian Empire.

== Significant people ==
* Ramesses II, pharaoh of Egypt (1279 BC–1213 BC)
* Tukulti-Ninurta I, king of Assyria (approximate date)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q538371" start="4" end="12" title="1270s BC" label="1270s BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q196828" start="18" end="24" title="List of decades" label="decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q538371" start="89" end="96" title="1279 BC" label="1279 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q157918" start="105" end="111" title="Seti I" label="Seti I"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="153" end="160" title="Troy" label="Troy VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="201" end="206" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="214" end="219" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="285" end="296" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q157956" start="298" end="310" title="Nineteenth dynasty of Egypt" label="19th Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="331" end="336" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="394" end="404" title="Nile Delta" label="Nile Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q937930" start="423" end="434" title="Pi-Ramesses" label="Pi-Ramesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742408" start="553" end="560" title="1213 BC" label="1213 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q134140" start="586" end="596" title="Abu Simbel" label="Abu Simbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="600" end="605" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210535" start="658" end="667" title="Nefertari" label="Nefertari"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="698" end="702" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q260386" start="764" end="784" title="Valley of the Queens" label="Valley of the Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q58373" start="827" end="831" title="Amun" label="Amun"/>
<link wikidata="Q29409" start="833" end="836" title="Mut" label="Mut"/>
<link wikidata="Q190521" start="841" end="846" title="Khonsu" label="Khons"/>
<link wikidata="Q130514" start="850" end="855" title="Luxor" label="Luxor"/>
<link wikidata="Q538371" start="868" end="875" title="1278 BC" label="1278 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894673" start="900" end="908" title="Sherden" label="Shardana"/>
<link wikidata="Q538371" start="958" end="965" title="1275 BC" label="1275 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q481766" start="1011" end="1017" title="Amurru kingdom" label="Amurru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="1062" end="1070" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q538371" start="1178" end="1185" title="1274 BC" label="1274 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q203729" start="1190" end="1206" title="Battle of Kadesh" label="Battle of Kadesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1232" end="1237" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q625298" start="1430" end="1442" title="peace treaty" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="1455" end="1463" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="1468" end="1477" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q253155" start="1483" end="1499" title="Egyptian–Hittite peace treaty" label="Treaty of Kadesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="1569" end="1575" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1580" end="1585" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q690035" start="1643" end="1649" title="Kadesh (Syria)" label="Kadesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q310142" start="1668" end="1681" title="Shalmaneser I" label="Shalmaneser I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="1702" end="1717" title="Assyrian Empire" label="Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="1747" end="1758" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="1771" end="1776" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742408" start="1786" end="1793" title="1213 BC" label="1213 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q299013" start="1797" end="1814" title="Tukulti-Ninurta I" label="Tukulti-Ninurta I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="1824" end="1831" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45903" wikidata="Q749783" url="?curid=45903" title="The Man in the High Castle">
<text>The Man in the High Castle is an alternative history novel by Philip K. Dick, first published in 1962, which imagines a world in which the Axis Powers won World War II. The story occurs in 1962, fifteen years after the end of the war in 1947, and depicts the life of several characters living under Imperial Japan or Nazi Germany as they rule a partitioned United States. The eponymous character is the mysterious author of a novel-within-the-novel entitled &quot;The Grasshopper Lies Heavy&quot;, a subversive alternative history of the war in which the Allied Powers are victorious.

Dick&#x27;s thematic inspirations include the alternative history of the American Civil War, &quot;Bring the Jubilee&quot; (1953), by Ward Moore, and the &quot;I Ching&quot;, a Chinese book of divination that features in the story and the actions of the characters. &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; won the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1963, and was adapted to television for Amazon Prime Video as &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; in 2015.

==Synopsis==
===Background===

In the alternative history imagined in &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;, Giuseppe Zangara assassinates President-elect Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1933, resulting in the continuation of the Great Depression and the policy of United States non-interventionism at the start of World War II in 1939. American inaction allows Nazi Germany to conquer and annex continental Europe and the Soviet Union into the Reich. The exterminations of the Jews, the Romani, the Bible Students, the Slavs, and all other peoples whom the Nazis considered subhuman ensued. The Axis powers then jointly conquered Africa, and still compete for the control of South America in 1962. Imperial Japan won the war in the Pacific and invaded the West Coast of the United States, while Nazi Germany invaded the East Coast; the surrender of the Allies ended World War II in 1947.

By 1962, Imperial Japan and Nazi Germany are the world&#x27;s superpowers, fighting a geopolitical cold war over the world, and in particular over the former United States and South America. Japan extended the Co-Prosperity Pacific Alliance with the establishment of the Pacific States of America (PSA), with the politically neutral Rocky Mountain States acting as a buffer against the Nazi territory to the east. Nazi North America is composed of two countries: The South, and the northeastern part of the former contiguous United States of America, which is referred to as &quot;the U.S.&quot; in the book, both of which are ruled by collaborationist pro-Nazi puppet regimes. Canada remains an independent country.

The aged Adolf Hitler is incapacitated by tertiary syphilis, Martin Bormann is the acting Chancellor of Germany, and many high-ranking Nazi leaders—Joseph Goebbels, Reinhard Heydrich, Hermann Göring, and Arthur Seyss-Inquart—still survive and vie to succeed Hitler as the &quot;Führer&quot; of the Greater Germanic Reich. Technologically, the Nazis have drained the Mediterranean Sea for &quot;Lebensraum&quot; and farmland, developed and used the hydrogen bomb, developed rockets for traveling throughout the world and into outer space, and have undertaken colonization missions to the Moon and to the planets Venus and Mars.

===Plot===
In 1962, it has been fifteen years since Imperial Japan and Nazi Germany won World War II. In San Francisco, in the Pacific States of America, Japanese judicial racism has enslaved black people and reduced the Chinese residents to second-class citizens. Businessman Robert Childan owns an antique shop there that specializes in Americana for a Japanese clientele who fetishize cultural artifacts of the former United States. One day, Childan receives a request from Nobusuke Tagomi, a high-ranking trade official, who seeks a gift to impress a Swedish industrialist named Baynes. Childan can not fulfil Tagomi&#x27;s original request (a civil war recruiting poster) but is able to present various alternatives because he is well-stocked with counterfeit antiques made by the metal works Wyndam-Matson Corporation.

Recently fired from his job at a Wyndam-Matson factory, Frank Frink (formerly Fink) is a secret Jew and war veteran who agrees to join a former co-worker to start a business making and selling jewelry. Meanwhile, in the Rocky Mountain States, Frank&#x27;s ex-wife, Juliana Frink, works as a judo instructor in Canon City, Colorado and, in her private life, has begun a sexual relationship with Joe Cinnadella, an Italian truck driver and ex-soldier.

Frink blackmails the Wyndam-Matson Corporation for money to finance his jewelry business, threatening to expose their supplying counterfeit antiques to Childan. Tagomi and Baynes meet, but Baynes repeatedly delays conducting any real business because he awaits a third party from Japan. The Nazi news media announces that Chancellor of Nazi Germany Martin Bormann has died after a short illness. Childan takes some of Frink&#x27;s &quot;authentic metalwork&quot; jewelry on consignment in order to curry favor with a Japanese client, who, to Childan&#x27;s surprise, says it possesses much &quot;Wu&quot;, spiritual awareness. Juliana and Joe travel by road to Denver, Colorado, but en route Joe impulsively decides that they take a side trip to Cheyenne, Wyoming, to meet Hawthorne Abendsen, the mysterious author of &quot;The Grasshopper Lies Heavy&quot;, a novel of speculative fiction that presents an alternate history of World War II wherein the Allies defeat the Axis. The Nazis banned the book in the U.S., but the Japanese allow its publication and sale in the Pacific States of America. Supposedly, Abendsen lives in a heavily guarded estate named the High Castle. Meanwhile, the Nazi news media inform the public that Joseph Goebbels is the new Chancellor of Nazi Germany.

After much delay, Baynes and Tagomi meet their Japanese contact, while the &quot;Sicherheitsdienst&quot; (SD), the Nazi security service, is close to arresting Baynes, who is actually Nazi defector Rudolf Wegener. Baynes warns his contact, a Japanese general, of the existence of Operation Dandelion, a plan of Goebbels for a Nazi sneak attack upon the Japanese Home Islands, with the goal of destroying the Empire of Japan. Frink is exposed as a crypto-Jew and arrested by the San Francisco police. Elsewhere, two SD agents confront Baynes and Tagomi, who uses his antique American pistol to kill both agents. In Colorado, Joe changes his appearance and mannerisms before the side trip to the High Castle in Wyoming; Juliana infers that Joe intends to assassinate Abendsen. Joe reveals himself to be a Swiss Nazi when he confirms his intention; Juliana kills Joe and goes to warn Abendsen.

Wegener flies back to Germany and learns that Reinhard Heydrich (a member of the faction against Operation Dandelion) has launched a coup d&#x27;état against Goebbels, to install himself as Chancellor of Nazi Germany. Tagomi is shocked by having killed the SD agents and goes to the antiques shop to sell the pistol back to Childan; instead, sensing the spiritual energy from one of Frink&#x27;s jewelry creations, Tagomi buys the jewelry. Tagomi then undergoes an intense spiritual experience during which he momentarily perceives an alternative version of San Francisco, evidenced by the Embarcadero freeway, which he has never seen and by the fact that white people do not defer to Japanese people.

Tagomi later meets with the German consul in San Francisco and compels the Germans to free Frink, whom Tagomi has never met, by refusing to sign the order of extradition to Nazi Germany. Juliana has a spiritual experience when she arrives in Cheyenne. She discovers that Abendsen lives with his family in a normal house, having abandoned the High Castle because of a changed outlook on life; thus the possibility of being assassinated no longer worries him. After evading Juliana&#x27;s questions about his literary inspiration, Abendsen says he used the &quot;I Ching&quot;, a Chinese book of divination, to guide the writing of his novel. Before leaving, Juliana infers then that Truth wrote the novel to reveal the Inner Truth that Imperial Japan and Nazi Germany did lose World War II in 1945.

==&quot;The Grasshopper Lies Heavy&quot;==
Several characters in &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; read the popular novel &quot;The Grasshopper Lies Heavy&quot;, by Hawthorne Abendsen, the title of which the readers presume derives from the Bible verse fragment: &quot;The grasshopper shall be a burden&quot; (). As an alternative history of the Second World War, wherein the Allies defeat the Axis Powers, the Nazi regime bans &quot;The Grasshopper Lies Heavy&quot; in the South, whereas the Pacific States of America allow the publication and sale of the counterfactual novel.

&quot;The Grasshopper Lies Heavy&quot; postulates that President Roosevelt survives the 1933 assassination attempt but chooses not to seek re-election in 1940. The next president, Rexford Tugwell, moves the American Pacific Fleet from Pearl Harbor, saving it from attack by the Imperial Japanese Navy, which ensures that the country is better equipped to fight the war. Having retained most of their military-industrial capabilities, the United Kingdom contributes more to the Allied war effort, which facilitates the defeat of Erwin Rommel in the North African Campaign. The British fight the Axis armies through the Caucasus to join the Soviet Union and defeat the Nazis in the Battle of Stalingrad; the Kingdom of Italy reneges its membership in the Axis and betrays the Nazis; the British Army joins the Red Army in the Battle of Berlin, the decisive defeat of Nazi Germany. At war&#x27;s end in 1945, Hitler and the Nazi leaders are tried as war criminals and are put to death, with Hitler&#x27;s last words being &quot;Deutsche, hier steh&#x27; ich&quot; (&quot;Germans, here I stand&quot;), in imitation of Martin Luther.

After the war, Tugwell promulgates the New Deal for the countries of the world, which finances a decade of rebuilding in China and the education of illiterate peoples in the undeveloped countries of Africa and Asia, who receive television sets by which they are taught to read and write, are instructed in digging wells and in purifying water. The New Deal financial assistance facilitates American businesses building factories in the undeveloped countries of Asia and Africa. American society is peaceful and harmonious and is at peace with the other countries of the world; the war ends the Soviet Union. Ten years after the war, still headed by Winston Churchill, the British Empire becomes militaristic, anti-American and establishes prison camps in India for Chinese subjects considered disloyal. Suspecting that the United States is sponsoring the anti-colonial subversion of British colonial rule in Asia, Churchill provokes a cold war for global hegemony; the geopolitical rivalry leads to an Anglo-American war won by the United Kingdom.

==Inspirations==
Dick said that he imagined the story of &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; (1962) from his reading of the novel &quot;Bring the Jubilee&quot; (1953), by Ward Moore, which is an alternative history of the U.S. civil war won by the Confederacy. In the acknowledgements page of &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;, Dick mentions the thematic influences of the popular history &quot;The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany&quot; (1960), by William L. Shirer; the biography &quot;&quot; (1952), by Alan Bullock; &quot;The Goebbels Diaries&quot; (1948); &quot;Foxes of the Desert&quot; (1960), by Paul Carrell; and the 1950 translation of the &quot;I Ching&quot;, by Richard Wilhelm. As a novelist, Dick used the &quot;I Ching&quot; to craft the themes, plot and story of &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;, whose characters also use the &quot;I Ching&quot; to inform and guide their decisions.

Dick cites the thematic influences of Japanese and Tibetan poetry upon the narrative of &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;; (i) The &quot;haiku&quot; in page 48 of the novel is from the first volume of the &quot;Anthology of Japanese Literature&quot; (1955), edited by Donald Keene; (ii) the &quot;waka&quot; poem in page 135 is from &quot;Zen and Japanese Culture&quot; (1955), by D. T. Suzuki and (iii) the Tibetan book of the dead, the &quot;Bardo Thodol&quot; (1960), edited by Walter Evans-Wentz and mentions the sociologic influences of the expressionist novella &quot;Miss Lonelyhearts&quot; (1933), by Nathanael West, in which an unhappy newspaper reporter pseudonymously writes the &quot;Miss Lonelyhearts&quot; advice column, through which he dispenses advice to emotionally forlorn readers during the Great Depression. Despite his job as Miss Lonelyhearts, the reporter seeks consolation in religion, sexual promiscuity, rural vacations and much work; no activity provides him with a sense of personal authenticity derived from his intellectual and emotional engagement with the world.

==Reception==
Avram Davidson praised the novel as a &quot;superior work of fiction&quot;, citing Dick&#x27;s use of the &quot;I Ching&quot; as &quot;fascinating&quot;. Davidson concluded that &quot;It&#x27;s all here—extrapolation, suspense, action, art, philosophy, plot, [and] character&quot;. &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; secured for Dick the 1963 Hugo Award for Best Novel. In a review of a paperback reprint of the novel, Robert Silverberg wrote in &quot;Amazing Stories&quot; magazine, &quot;Dick&#x27;s prose crackles with excitement, his characters are vividly real, his plot is stunning&quot;.

In &quot;The Religion of Science Fiction&quot;, Frederick A. Kreuziger explores the theory of history implied by Dick&#x27;s creation of the two alternative realities

Neither of the two worlds, however, the revised version of the outcome of WWII nor the fictional account of our present world, is anywhere near similar to the world we are familiar with. But they could be! This is what the book is about. The book argues that this world, described twice, although differently each time, is exactly the world we know and are familiar with. Indeed, it is the only world we know: the world of chance, luck, fate.

In her introduction to the Folio Society edition of the novel, Ursula K. Le Guin writes that &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; &quot;may be the first, big lasting contribution science fiction made to American literature.&quot;

==Adaptations==
===Audiobook===
An unabridged &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; audiobook, read by George Guidall and running approximately 9.5 hours over seven audio cassettes, was released in 1997. Another unabridged audiobook version was released in 2008 by Blackstone Audio, read by Tom Wyner (credited as Tom Weiner) and running approximately 8.5 hours over seven CDs. A third unabridged audiobook recording was released in 2014 by Brilliance Audio, read by Jeff Cummings with a running time of 9 hours 58 minutes.

===Television===
After a number of attempts to adapt the book to the screen, in October 2014, Amazon&#x27;s film production unit began filming the pilot episode of &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; in Roslyn, Washington, for release through the Amazon Prime Web video streaming service. The pilot episode was released by Amazon Studios on January 15, 2015, and was Amazon&#x27;s &quot;most watched pilot ever&quot; according to Amazon Studios&#x27; vice president, Roy Price. On February 18, 2015, Amazon green-lit the series. The show became available for streaming on November 20, 2015.

==Incomplete sequel==
In a 1976 interview, Dick said he planned to write a sequel novel to &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;: &quot;And so there&#x27;s no real ending on it. I like to regard it as an open ending. It will segue into a sequel sometime.&quot; Dick said that he had &quot;started several times to write a sequel&quot; but progressed little, because he was too disturbed by his original research for &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; and could not mentally bear &quot;to go back and read about Nazis again&quot;. He suggested that the sequel would be a collaboration with another author:Somebody would have to come in and help me do a sequel to it. Someone who had the stomach for the stamina to think along those lines, to get into the head; if you&#x27;re going to start writing about Reinhard Heydrich, for instance, you have to get into his face. Can you imagine getting into Reinhard Heydrich&#x27;s face?

Two chapters of the proposed sequel were published in &quot;The Shifting Realities of Philip K. Dick&quot;, a collection of his essays and other writings. Eventually, Dick admitted that the proposed sequel became an unrelated novel, &quot;The Ganymede Takeover&quot;, co-written with Ray Nelson (known for writing the short story &quot;Eight O&#x27;Clock in the Morning&quot; filmed as &quot;They Live&quot;).

Dick&#x27;s novel &quot;Radio Free Albemuth&quot; is rumored to have started as a sequel to &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;. Dick described the plot of this early version of &quot;Radio Free Albemuth&quot;—then titled &quot;VALISystem A&quot;—writing:... a divine and loving ETI [extraterrestrial intelligence] ... help[s] Hawthorne Abendsen, the protagonist-author in [&quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;], continue on in his difficult life after the Nazi secret police finally got to him ... VALISystem A, located in deep space, sees to it that nothing can prevent Abendsen from finishing his novel.

The novel eventually became a new story unrelated to &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;. Dick ultimately abandoned the &quot;Albemuth&quot; book, unpublished during his lifetime, though portions were salvaged and used for 1981&#x27;s &quot;VALIS&quot;. &quot;Radio Free Albemuth&quot; was published in 1985, three years after Dick&#x27;s death.

==See also==

*&quot;Fatherland&quot; (novel)
*Hypothetical Axis victory in World War II
*Turning Point: Fall of Liberty

==References==
==Further reading==

*Brown, William Lansing. 2006. &quot;alternative Histories: Power, Politics, and Paranoia in Philip Roth&#x27;s &quot;The Plot against America&quot; and Philip K. Dick&#x27;s &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;&quot;, &quot;The Image of Power in Literature, Media, and Society: Selected Papers&quot;, 2006 Conference, Society for the Interdisciplinary Study of Social Imagery. Wright, Will; Kaplan, Steven (eds.); Pueblo, CO: Society for the Interdisciplinary Study of Social Imagery, Colorado State University-Pueblo; pp. 107–11.
*Campbell, Laura E. 1992. &quot;Dickian Time in &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;&quot;, &quot;Extrapolation&quot;, 33: 3, pp. 190–201.
*Carter, Cassie, 1995. &quot;The Metacolonization of Dick&#x27;s &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;: Mimicry, Parasitism and Americanism in the PSA&quot;, &quot;Science Fiction Studies&quot; #67, 22:3, pp. 333–342.
*DiTommaso, Lorenzo, 1999. &quot;Redemption in Philip K. Dick&#x27;s &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;&quot;, &quot;Science Fiction Studies&quot; # 77, 26:, pp. 91–119, DePauw University.
*Fofi, Goffredo 1997. &quot;Postfazione&quot;, Philip K. Dick, &quot;La Svastica sul Sole&quot;, Roma, Fanucci, pp. 391–5.
*Hayles, N. Katherine 1983. &quot;Metaphysics and Metafiction in &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;&quot;, &quot;Philip K. Dick&quot;. Greenberg, M.H.; Olander, J.D. (eds.); New York: Taplinger, 1983, pp. 53–71.
*Malmgren, Carl D. 1980. &quot;Philip Dick&#x27;s &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; and the Nature of Science Fictional Worlds&quot;, &quot;Bridges to Science Fiction&quot;. Slusser, George E.; Guffey, George R.; Rose, Mark (eds.); Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press, pp. 120–30.
*Mountfort, Paul 2016. &quot;The &quot;I Ching&quot; and Philip K. Dick&#x27;s &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;&quot;, &quot;Science-Fiction Studies&quot; # 129, 43:, pp. 287–309.
*Pagetti, Carlo, 2001a. &quot;La svastica americana&quot; [Introduction], Philip K. Dick, &quot;L&#x27;uomo nell&#x27;alto castello&quot;, Roma: Fanucci, pp. 7–26.
*Proietti, Salvatore, 1989. &quot;&quot;The Man in The High Castle&quot;: politica e metaromanzo&quot;, &quot;Il sogno dei simulacri&quot;. Pagetti, Carlo; Viviani, Gianfranco (eds.); Milano: Nord, 1989 pp. 34–41.
*Rieder, John 1988. &quot;The Metafictive World of &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;: Hermeneutics, Ethics, and Political Ideology&quot;, &quot;Science-Fiction Studies&quot; # 45, 15.2: 214–25.
*Rossi, Umberto, 2000. &quot;All Around the High Castle: Narrative Voices and Fictional Visions in Philip K. Dick&#x27;s &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;&quot;, &quot;Telling the Stories of America — History, Literature and the Arts — Proceedings of the 14th AISNA Biennial conference (Pescara, 1997)&quot;, Clericuzio, A.; Goldoni, Annalisa; Mariani, Andrea (eds.); Roma: Nuova Arnica, pp. 474–83.
*Simons, John L. 1985. &quot;The Power of Small Things in Philip K. Dick&#x27;s &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;&quot;. &quot;The Rocky Mountain Review of Language and Literature&quot;, 39:4, pp. 261–75.
*Warrick, Patricia, 1992. &quot;The Encounter of Taoism and Fascism in &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;&quot;, &quot;On Philip K. Dick&quot;, Mullen et al. (eds.); Terre Haute and Greencastle: SF-TH Inc. 1992, pp. 27–52.
==External links==
*&quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; cover art gallery
*&quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot; at Worlds Without End</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="33" end="52" title="alternative history" label="alternative history"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="62" end="76" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205903" start="139" end="150" title="Hypothetical Axis victory in World War II" label="Axis Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="155" end="167" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="299" end="313" title="Empire of Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="317" end="329" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132785" start="685" end="702" title="Bring the Jubilee" label="Bring the Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q947986" start="720" end="730" title="Ward Moore" label="Ward Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="746" end="753" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q255032" start="899" end="924" title="Hugo Award for Best Novel" label="Hugo Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740856" start="968" end="986" title="Amazon Prime Video" label="Amazon Prime Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844750" start="996" end="1022" title="The Man in the High Castle (TV series)" label="The Man in the High Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658306" start="1149" end="1165" title="Giuseppe Zangara" label="Giuseppe Zangara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467287" start="1179" end="1194" title="President-elect of the United States" label="President-elect"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="1195" end="1216" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="1263" end="1279" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155530" start="1298" end="1331" title="United States non-interventionism" label="United States non-interventionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1395" end="1407" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914778" start="1478" end="1483" title="Greater Germanic Reich" label="Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1511" end="1515" title="Holocaust" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="1521" end="1527" title="Gypsies" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q343029" start="1533" end="1547" title="Bible Student movement" label="Bible Students"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="1553" end="1558" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q326822" start="1608" end="1616" title="Untermensch" label="subhuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="1755" end="1773" title="war in the Pacific" label="war in the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="1790" end="1821" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="1854" end="1864" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="1887" end="1893" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="2009" end="2021" title="geopolitics" label="geopolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q696192" start="2133" end="2163" title="Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere" label="Co-Prosperity Pacific Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="2386" end="2395" title="Southern United States" label="The South"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="2559" end="2575" title="collaborationism" label="collaborationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2650" end="2662" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="2692" end="2700" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76367" start="2702" end="2716" title="Martin Bormann" label="Martin Bormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="2731" end="2752" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="2789" end="2804" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="2806" end="2823" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="2825" end="2839" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q650219" start="2845" end="2865" title="Arthur Seyss-Inquart" label="Arthur Seyss-Inquart"/>
<link wikidata="Q431214" start="2995" end="3024" title="Atlantropa" label="drained the Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="3035" end="3045" title="Lebensraum" label="Lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="3089" end="3102" title="Thermonuclear weapon" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="3166" end="3177" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3374" end="3387" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q848745" start="3432" end="3447" title="Institutional racism" label="judicial racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q817393" start="3461" end="3473" title="black people" label="black people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243712" start="3511" end="3532" title="second-class citizens" label="second-class citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267025" start="3569" end="3581" title="antique shop" label="antique shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q467355" start="3608" end="3617" title="Americana (culture)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="4055" end="4066" title="metal-working" label="metal works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468229" start="4184" end="4194" title="Crypto-Judaism" label="secret Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="4386" end="4390" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003240" start="4405" end="4425" title="Canon City, Colorado" label="Canon City, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q76367" start="4895" end="4909" title="Martin Bormann" label="Martin Bormann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368743" start="5020" end="5031" title="consignment" label="consignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055524" start="5142" end="5144" title="Wu (awareness)" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="5207" end="5223" title="Denver, Colorado" label="Denver, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q39042" start="5292" end="5309" title="Cheyenne, Wyoming" label="Cheyenne, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326077" start="5415" end="5434" title="speculative fiction" label="speculative fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="5775" end="5790" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q153559" start="5912" end="5929" title="Sicherheitsdienst" label="Sicherheitsdienst"/>
<link wikidata="Q841337" start="6184" end="6205" title="Japanese archipelago" label="Japanese Home Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468229" start="6278" end="6288" title="crypto-Jew" label="crypto-Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q60039" start="6769" end="6786" title="Reinhard Heydrich" label="Reinhard Heydrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q757971" start="7313" end="7332" title="California State Route 480" label="Embarcadero freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="7987" end="7994" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="8020" end="8030" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q699416" start="8949" end="8968" title="1940 United States presidential election" label="re-election in 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q887045" start="8990" end="9005" title="Rexford Tugwell" label="Rexford Tugwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q127091" start="9045" end="9057" title="Pearl Harbor" label="Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="9338" end="9350" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="9358" end="9380" title="North African Campaign" label="North African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="9490" end="9510" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="9516" end="9532" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="9618" end="9626" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="9634" end="9650" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="9757" end="9770" title="War crime" label="war criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="9924" end="9937" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="9979" end="9987" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="10612" end="10626" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q574827" start="10649" end="10662" title="Anti-Americanism" label="anti-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176199" start="10875" end="10883" title="cold war (general term)" label="cold war"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132785" start="11128" end="11145" title="Bring the Jubilee" label="Bring the Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q947986" start="11163" end="11173" title="Ward Moore" label="Ward Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q655921" start="11392" end="11455" title="The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich" label="The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q327287" start="11473" end="11490" title="William L. Shirer" label="William L. Shirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q335167" start="11530" end="11542" title="Alan Bullock" label="Alan Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577105" start="11554" end="11570" title="Goebbels Diaries" label="Goebbels Diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="11680" end="11687" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q62126" start="11698" end="11713" title="Richard Wilhelm (sinologist)" label="Richard Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37707" start="12073" end="12078" title="haiku" label="haiku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240040" start="12204" end="12216" title="Donald Keene" label="Donald Keene"/>
<link wikidata="Q737148" start="12233" end="12237" title="waka (poetry)" label="waka"/>
<link wikidata="Q44847" start="12317" end="12329" title="D. T. Suzuki" label="D. T. Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q597697" start="12380" end="12392" title="Bardo Thodol" label="Bardo Thodol"/>
<link wikidata="Q456451" start="12417" end="12435" title="Walter Evans-Wentz" label="Walter Evans-Wentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="12482" end="12495" title="Expressionism" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6876987" start="12510" end="12527" title="Miss Lonelyhearts" label="Miss Lonelyhearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q370521" start="12545" end="12559" title="Nathanael West" label="Nathanael West"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="12747" end="12763" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q782991" start="13047" end="13061" title="Avram Davidson" label="Avram Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q255032" start="13394" end="13419" title="Hugo Award for Best Novel" label="Hugo Award for Best Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q314553" start="13470" end="13487" title="Robert Silverberg" label="Robert Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q991271" start="13503" end="13518" title="Amazing Stories" label="Amazing Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="14322" end="14339" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18686499" start="14596" end="14610" title="George Guidall" label="George Guidall"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="14658" end="14673" title="Compact Cassette" label="audio cassettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923391" start="14758" end="14774" title="Blackstone Audio" label="Blackstone Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="14866" end="14869" title="Compact disc" label="CDs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14934" end="14950" title="Amazon (company)#Brilliance Audio" label="Brilliance Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="15112" end="15118" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510360" start="15224" end="15242" title="Roslyn, Washington" label="Roslyn, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086634" start="15268" end="15280" title="Amazon Prime" label="Amazon Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740868" start="15344" end="15358" title="Amazon Studios" label="Amazon Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819643" start="16786" end="16807" title="The Ganymede Takeover" label="The Ganymede Takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324126" start="16831" end="16841" title="Ray Nelson (author)" label="Ray Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q72909" start="16939" end="16948" title="They Live" label="They Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416949" start="16982" end="17001" title="Radio Free Albemuth" label="Radio Free Albemuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q845167" start="17936" end="17966" title="Fatherland (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Fatherland&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205903" start="17968" end="18009" title="Hypothetical Axis victory in World War II" label="Hypothetical Axis victory in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18011" end="18041" title="Turning Point: Fall of Liberty" label="Turning Point: Fall of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111515" start="18567" end="18599" title="Colorado State University-Pueblo" label="Colorado State University-Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422243" start="18713" end="18726" title="Extrapolation (journal)" label="Extrapolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433544" start="18919" end="18942" title="Science Fiction Studies" label="Science Fiction Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179599" start="19147" end="19164" title="DePauw University" label="DePauw University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45906" wikidata="Q237193" url="?curid=45906" title="Exponential distribution">
<text>In probability theory and statistics, the exponential distribution or negative exponential distribution is the probability distribution of the distance between events in a Poisson point process, i.e., a process in which events occur continuously and independently at a constant average rate; the distance parameter could be any meaningful mono-dimensional measure of the process, such as time between production errors, or length along a roll of fabric in the weaving manufacturing process. It is a particular case of the gamma distribution. It is the continuous analogue of the geometric distribution, and it has the key property of being memoryless. In addition to being used for the analysis of Poisson point processes it is found in various other contexts.

The exponential distribution is not the same as the class of exponential families of distributions. This is a large class of probability distributions that includes the exponential distribution as one of its members, but also includes many other distributions, like the normal, binomial, gamma, and Poisson distributions.

==Definitions==

===Probability density function===
The probability density function (pdf) of an exponential distribution is

:formula_1

Here &quot;λ&quot; &gt; 0 is the parameter of the distribution, often called the &quot;rate parameter&quot;. The distribution is supported on the interval . If a random variable &quot;X&quot; has this distribution, we write .

The exponential distribution exhibits infinite divisibility.

===Cumulative distribution function===
The cumulative distribution function is given by

:formula_2

===Alternative parametrization===
The exponential distribution is sometimes parametrized in terms of the scale parameter , which is also the mean:
formula_3

==Properties==

===Mean, variance, moments, and median===

The mean or expected value of an exponentially distributed random variable &quot;X&quot; with rate parameter &quot;λ&quot; is given by
formula_4

In light of the examples given below, this makes sense; a person who receives an average of two telephone calls per hour can expect that the time between consecutive calls will be 0.5 hour, or 30 minutes.

The variance of &quot;X&quot; is given by
formula_5
so the standard deviation is equal to the mean.

The moments of &quot;X&quot;, for formula_6 are given by
formula_7

The central moments of &quot;X&quot;, for formula_6 are given by
formula_9
where !&quot;n&quot; is the subfactorial of &quot;n&quot;

The median of &quot;X&quot; is given by
formula_10
where refers to the natural logarithm. Thus the absolute difference between the mean and median is
formula_11

in accordance with the median-mean inequality.

===Memorylessness property of exponential random variable===
An exponentially distributed random variable &quot;T&quot; obeys the relation
formula_12

This can be seen by considering the complementary cumulative distribution function:
formula_13

When &quot;T&quot; is interpreted as the waiting time for an event to occur relative to some initial time, this relation implies that, if &quot;T&quot; is conditioned on a failure to observe the event over some initial period of time &quot;s&quot;, the distribution of the remaining waiting time is the same as the original unconditional distribution. For example, if an event has not occurred after 30 seconds, the conditional probability that occurrence will take at least 10 more seconds is equal to the unconditional probability of observing the event more than 10 seconds after the initial time.

The exponential distribution and the geometric distribution are the only memoryless probability distributions.

The exponential distribution is consequently also necessarily the only continuous probability distribution that has a constant failure rate.

===Quantiles===
The quantile function (inverse cumulative distribution function) for Exp(&quot;λ&quot;) is
formula_14

The quartiles are therefore:
* first quartile: ln(4/3)/&quot;λ&quot;
* median: ln(2)/&quot;λ&quot;
* third quartile: ln(4)/&quot;λ&quot;

And as a consequence the interquartile range is ln(3)/&quot;λ&quot;.

===Conditional Value at Risk (Expected Shortfall)===
The conditional value at risk (CVaR) also known as the expected shortfall or superquantile for Exp(&quot;λ&quot;) is derived as follows:

formula_15

===Buffered Probability of Exceedance (bPOE)===

The buffered probability of exceedance is one minus the probability level at which the CVaR equals the threshold formula_16. It is derived as follows:

formula_17

===Kullback–Leibler divergence===
The directed Kullback–Leibler divergence in nats of formula_18 (&quot;approximating&quot; distribution) from formula_19 (&#x27;true&#x27; distribution) is given by
formula_20

===Maximum entropy distribution===
Among all continuous probability distributions with support and mean &quot;μ&quot;, the exponential distribution with &quot;λ&quot; = 1/&quot;μ&quot; has the largest differential entropy. In other words, it is the maximum entropy probability distribution for a random variate &quot;X&quot; which is greater than or equal to zero and for which E[&quot;X&quot;] is fixed.

===Distribution of the minimum of exponential random variables===
Let &quot;X&quot;1, ..., &quot;X&quot;&quot;n&quot; be independent exponentially distributed random variables with rate parameters &quot;λ&quot;1, ..., &quot;λn&quot;. Then
formula_21
is also exponentially distributed, with parameter
formula_22

This can be seen by considering the complementary cumulative distribution function:
formula_23

The index of the variable which achieves the minimum is distributed according to the categorical distribution
formula_24

A proof can be seen by letting formula_25. Then,
formula_26

Note that
formula_27
is not exponentially distributed, if &quot;X&quot;1, ..., &quot;X&quot;&quot;n&quot; do not all have parameter 0.

===Joint moments of i.i.d. exponential order statistics===

Let formula_28 be formula_29 independent and identically distributed exponential random variables with rate parameter &quot;λ&quot;.
Let formula_30 denote the corresponding order statistics.
For formula_31 , the joint moment formula_32 of the order statistics formula_33 and formula_34 is given by
formula_35

This can be seen by invoking the law of total expectation and the memoryless property:
formula_36

The first equation follows from the law of total expectation.
The second equation exploits the fact that once we condition on formula_37, it must follow that formula_38. The third equation relies on the memoryless property to replace formula_39 with formula_40.

===Sum of two independent exponential random variables===
The probability distribution function (PDF) of a sum of two independent random variables is the convolution of their individual PDFs. If formula_41 and formula_42 are independent exponential random variables with respective rate parameters formula_43 and formula_44 then the probability density of formula_45 is given by
formula_46
The entropy of this distribution is available in closed form: assuming formula_47 (without loss of generality), then
formula_48
where formula_49 is the Euler-Mascheroni constant, and formula_50 is the digamma function.

In the case of equal rate parameters, the result is an Erlang distribution with shape 2 and parameter formula_51 which in turn is a special case of gamma distribution.

The sum of n independent Exp(&quot;λ)&quot; exponential random variables is Gamma(n, &quot;λ)&quot; distributed.

==Related distributions==
* If &quot;X&quot; ~ Laplace(μ, β−1), then |&quot;X&quot; − μ| ~ Exp(β).
* If &quot;X&quot; ~ &quot;U&quot;(0, 1) then −log(&quot;X&quot;) ~ Exp(1).
* If &quot;X&quot; ~ Pareto(1, λ), then log(&quot;X&quot;) ~ Exp(λ).
* If &quot;X&quot; ~ SkewLogistic(θ), then formula_52.
* If &quot;Xi&quot; ~ &quot;U&quot;(0, 1) then formula_53
* The exponential distribution is a limit of a scaled beta distribution: formula_54
* The exponential distribution is a special case of type 3 Pearson distribution.
* The exponential distribution is the special case of a Gamma distribution with shape parameter 1.
* If &quot;X&quot; ~ Exp(λ) and &quot;X&quot; ~ Exp(λ) then:
** formula_55, closure under scaling by a positive factor.
** 1 + &quot;X&quot; ~ BenktanderWeibull(λ, 1), which reduces to a truncated exponential distribution.
** &quot;keX&quot; ~ Pareto(&quot;k&quot;, λ).
** &quot;e−λX&quot; ~ &quot;U&quot;(0, 1).
** &quot;e−X&quot; ~ Beta(λ, 1).
** &quot;e&quot; ~ PowerLaw(&quot;k&quot;, λ)
** formula_56, the Rayleigh distribution
** formula_57, the Weibull distribution
** formula_58
** formula_59, a geometric distribution on 0,1,2,3...
** formula_60, a geometric distribution on 1,2,3,4...
** If also &quot;Y&quot; ~ Erlang(&quot;n&quot;, λ) orformula_61 then formula_62
** If also λ ~ Gamma(&quot;k&quot;, θ) (shape, scale parametrisation) then the marginal distribution of &quot;X&quot; is Lomax(&quot;k&quot;, 1/θ), the gamma mixture
** λ&quot;X&quot; − λ&quot;Y&quot; ~ Laplace(0, 1).
** min{&quot;X&quot;1, ..., &quot;Xn&quot;} ~ Exp(λ1 + ... + λ&quot;n&quot;).
** If also λ = λ then:
*** formula_63 Erlang(&quot;k&quot;, λ) = Gamma(&quot;k&quot;, λ) with integer shape parameter &quot;k&quot; and rate parameter λ.
*** If formula_64, then formula_65.
*** &quot;X&quot; − &quot;X&quot; ~ Laplace(0, λ−1).
** If also &quot;X&quot; are independent, then:
*** formula_66 ~ U(0, 1)
*** formula_67 has probability density function formula_68. This can be used to obtain a confidence interval for formula_69.
** If also λ = 1:
*** formula_70, the logistic distribution
*** formula_71
*** &quot;μ&quot; − σ log(&quot;X&quot;) ~ GEV(μ, σ, 0).
*** Further if formula_72 then formula_73 (K-distribution)
** If also λ = 1/2 then ; i.e., &quot;X&quot; has a chi-squared distribution with 2 degrees of freedom. Hence: formula_74
* If formula_75 and formula_76 ~ Poisson(&quot;X&quot;) then formula_77 (geometric distribution)
* The Hoyt distribution can be obtained from exponential distribution and arcsine distribution
* The exponential distribution is a limit of the &quot;κ&quot;-exponential distribution in the formula_78 case.
* Exponential distribution is a limit of the κ-Generalized Gamma distribution in the formula_79 and formula_80 cases:
*: formula_81

Other related distributions:
* Hyper-exponential distribution – the distribution whose density is a weighted sum of exponential densities.
* Hypoexponential distribution – the distribution of a general sum of exponential random variables.
* exGaussian distribution – the sum of an exponential distribution and a normal distribution.

==Statistical inference==
Below, suppose random variable &quot;X&quot; is exponentially distributed with rate parameter λ, and formula_82 are &quot;n&quot; independent samples from &quot;X&quot;, with sample mean formula_83.

===Parameter estimation===

The maximum likelihood estimator for λ is constructed as follows.

The likelihood function for λ, given an independent and identically distributed sample &quot;x&quot; = (&quot;x&quot;1, ..., &quot;x&quot;&quot;n&quot;) drawn from the variable, is:
formula_84

where:
formula_85
is the sample mean.

The derivative of the likelihood function&#x27;s logarithm is:
formula_86

Consequently, the maximum likelihood estimate for the rate parameter is:
formula_87

This is an unbiased estimator of formula_51 although formula_89 an unbiased MLE estimator of formula_90 and the distribution mean.

The bias of formula_91 is equal to
formula_92
which yields the bias-corrected maximum likelihood estimator
formula_93

An approximate minimizer of mean squared error (see also: bias–variance tradeoff) can be found, assuming a sample size greater than two, with a correction factor to the MLE:
formula_94
This is derived from the mean and variance of the inverse-gamma distribution, formula_95.

===Fisher information===
The Fisher information, denoted formula_96, for an estimator of the rate parameter formula_97 is given as:
formula_98

Plugging in the distribution and solving gives:
formula_99

This determines the amount of information each independent sample of an exponential distribution carries about the unknown rate parameter formula_97.

===Confidence intervals===
An exact 100(1 − α)% confidence interval for the rate parameter of an exponential distribution is given by:
formula_101
which is also equal to
formula_102
where is the percentile of the chi squared distribution with &quot;v&quot; degrees of freedom, n is the number of observations and x-bar is the sample average. A simple approximation to the exact interval endpoints can be derived using a normal approximation to the distribution. This approximation gives the following values for a 95% confidence interval:
formula_103

This approximation may be acceptable for samples containing at least 15 to 20 elements.

===Bayesian inference===
The conjugate prior for the exponential distribution is the gamma distribution (of which the exponential distribution is a special case). The following parameterization of the gamma probability density function is useful:

formula_104

The posterior distribution &quot;p&quot; can then be expressed in terms of the likelihood function defined above and a gamma prior:

formula_105

Now the posterior density &quot;p&quot; has been specified up to a missing normalizing constant. Since it has the form of a gamma pdf, this can easily be filled in, and one obtains:

formula_106

Here the hyperparameter &quot;α&quot; can be interpreted as the number of prior observations, and &quot;β&quot; as the sum of the prior observations.
The posterior mean here is:
formula_107

==Occurrence and applications==

===Occurrence of events===
The exponential distribution occurs naturally when describing the lengths of the inter-arrival times in a homogeneous Poisson process.

The exponential distribution may be viewed as a continuous counterpart of the geometric distribution, which describes the number of Bernoulli trials necessary for a &quot;discrete&quot; process to change state. In contrast, the exponential distribution describes the time for a continuous process to change state.

In real-world scenarios, the assumption of a constant rate (or probability per unit time) is rarely satisfied. For example, the rate of incoming phone calls differs according to the time of day. But if we focus on a time interval during which the rate is roughly constant, such as from 2 to 4 p.m. during work days, the exponential distribution can be used as a good approximate model for the time until the next phone call arrives. Similar caveats apply to the following examples which yield approximately exponentially distributed variables:
* The time until a radioactive particle decays, or the time between clicks of a Geiger counter
* The time between receiving one telephone call and the next
* The time until default (on payment to company debt holders) in reduced-form credit risk modeling

Exponential variables can also be used to model situations where certain events occur with a constant probability per unit length, such as the distance between mutations on a DNA strand, or between roadkills on a given road.

In queuing theory, the service times of agents in a system (e.g. how long it takes for a bank teller etc. to serve a customer) are often modeled as exponentially distributed variables. (The arrival of customers for instance is also modeled by the Poisson distribution if the arrivals are independent and distributed identically.) The length of a process that can be thought of as a sequence of several independent tasks follows the Erlang distribution (which is the distribution of the sum of several independent exponentially distributed variables).
Reliability theory and reliability engineering also make extensive use of the exponential distribution. Because of the memoryless property of this distribution, it is well-suited to model the constant hazard rate portion of the bathtub curve used in reliability theory. It is also very convenient because it is so easy to add failure rates in a reliability model. The exponential distribution is however not appropriate to model the overall lifetime of organisms or technical devices, because the &quot;failure rates&quot; here are not constant: more failures occur for very young and for very old systems.
In physics, if you observe a gas at a fixed temperature and pressure in a uniform gravitational field, the heights of the various molecules also follow an approximate exponential distribution, known as the Barometric formula. This is a consequence of the entropy property mentioned below.

In hydrology, the exponential distribution is used to analyze extreme values of such variables as monthly and annual maximum values of daily rainfall and river discharge volumes.

:The blue picture illustrates an example of fitting the exponential distribution to ranked annually maximum one-day rainfalls showing also the 90% confidence belt based on the binomial distribution. The rainfall data are represented by plotting positions as part of the cumulative frequency analysis.
In operating-rooms management, the distribution of surgery duration for a category of surgeries with no typical work-content (like in an emergency room, encompassing all types of surgeries).

===Prediction===
Having observed a sample of &quot;n&quot; data points from an unknown exponential distribution a common task is to use these samples to make predictions about future data from the same source. A common predictive distribution over future samples is the so-called plug-in distribution, formed by plugging a suitable estimate for the rate parameter &quot;λ&quot; into the exponential density function. A common choice of estimate is the one provided by the principle of maximum likelihood, and using this yields the predictive density over a future sample &quot;x&quot;&quot;n&quot;+1, conditioned on the observed samples &quot;x&quot; = (&quot;x&quot;1, ..., &quot;xn&quot;) given by
formula_108

The Bayesian approach provides a predictive distribution which takes into account the uncertainty of the estimated parameter, although this may depend crucially on the choice of prior.

A predictive distribution free of the issues of choosing priors that arise under the subjective Bayesian approach is

formula_109

which can be considered as
# a frequentist confidence distribution, obtained from the distribution of the pivotal quantity formula_110;
# a profile predictive likelihood, obtained by eliminating the parameter &quot;λ&quot; from the joint likelihood of &quot;x&quot;&quot;n&quot;+1 and &quot;λ&quot; by maximization;
# an objective Bayesian predictive posterior distribution, obtained using the non-informative Jeffreys prior 1/&quot;λ&quot;;
# the Conditional Normalized Maximum Likelihood (CNML) predictive distribution, from information theoretic considerations.

The accuracy of a predictive distribution may be measured using the distance or divergence between the true exponential distribution with rate parameter, &quot;λ&quot;0, and the predictive distribution based on the sample &quot;x&quot;. The Kullback–Leibler divergence is a commonly used, parameterisation free measure of the difference between two distributions. Letting Δ(&quot;λ&quot;0||&quot;p&quot;) denote the Kullback–Leibler divergence between an exponential with rate parameter &quot;λ&quot;0 and a predictive distribution &quot;p&quot; it can be shown that

formula_111

where the expectation is taken with respect to the exponential distribution with rate parameter , and is the digamma function. It is clear that the CNML predictive distribution is strictly superior to the maximum likelihood plug-in distribution in terms of average Kullback–Leibler divergence for all sample sizes .

==Random variate generation==

A conceptually very simple method for generating exponential variates is based on inverse transform sampling: Given a random variate &quot;U&quot; drawn from the uniform distribution on the unit interval , the variate

formula_112

has an exponential distribution, where &quot;F&quot; is the quantile function, defined by

formula_113

Moreover, if &quot;U&quot; is uniform on (0, 1), then so is 1 − &quot;U&quot;. This means one can generate exponential variates as follows:

formula_114

Other methods for generating exponential variates are discussed by Knuth and Devroye.

A fast method for generating a set of ready-ordered exponential variates without using a sorting routine is also available.

==See also==
* Dead time – an application of exponential distribution to particle detector analysis.
* Laplace distribution, or the &quot;double exponential distribution&quot;.
* Relationships among probability distributions
* Marshall–Olkin exponential distribution

==References==
==External links==
* Online calculator of Exponential Distribution</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="3" end="21" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="26" end="36" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="42" end="66" title="Exponential distribution" label="exponential distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="70" end="103" title="Exponential distribution" label="negative exponential distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="111" end="135" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145117" start="172" end="193" title="Poisson point process" label="Poisson point process"/>
<link wikidata="Q117806" start="522" end="540" title="gamma distribution" label="gamma distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q729523" start="579" end="601" title="geometric distribution" label="geometric distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q176750" start="640" end="650" title="memoryless" label="memoryless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188504" start="823" end="843" title="exponential families" label="exponential families"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="1032" end="1038" title="normal distribution" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185547" start="1040" end="1048" title="binomial distribution" label="binomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q117806" start="1050" end="1055" title="gamma distribution" label="gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q205692" start="1061" end="1068" title="Poisson distribution" label="Poisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="1141" end="1169" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="1385" end="1400" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754066" start="1488" end="1509" title="infinite divisibility (probability)" label="infinite divisibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="1555" end="1587" title="cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289366" start="1718" end="1733" title="scale parameter" label="scale parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="1842" end="1856" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2007" end="2012" title="#Occurrence and applications" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="2186" end="2194" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q159375" start="2241" end="2259" title="standard deviation" label="standard deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q638982" start="2287" end="2294" title="Moment (mathematics)" label="moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088747" start="2355" end="2369" title="central moment" label="central moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207920" start="2454" end="2466" title="subfactorial" label="subfactorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="2489" end="2495" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q204037" start="2556" end="2573" title="natural logarithm" label="natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773230" start="2584" end="2603" title="absolute difference" label="absolute difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q249514" start="2670" end="2692" title="median-mean inequality" label="median-mean inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="2882" end="2928" title="complementary cumulative distribution function" label="complementary cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q327069" start="3358" end="3381" title="conditional probability" label="conditional probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q729523" start="3581" end="3603" title="geometric distribution" label="geometric distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q176750" start="3608" end="3653" title="memorylessness" label="the only memoryless probability distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737027" start="3783" end="3795" title="failure rate" label="failure rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489473" start="3818" end="3835" title="quantile function" label="quantile function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786686" start="3921" end="3929" title="quartile" label="quartile"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="3988" end="3994" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916617" start="4080" end="4099" title="interquartile range" label="interquartile range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420856" start="4233" end="4251" title="expected shortfall" label="expected shortfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q255166" start="4588" end="4615" title="Kullback–Leibler divergence" label="Kullback–Leibler divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q376660" start="4619" end="4623" title="nat (unit)" label="nats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4838" end="4845" title="Support (mathematics)#In probability and measure theory" label="support"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055345" start="4952" end="4972" title="differential entropy" label="differential entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795892" start="5000" end="5040" title="maximum entropy probability distribution" label="maximum entropy probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291996" start="5047" end="5061" title="random variate" label="random variate"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="5278" end="5289" title="Independent random variables" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="5505" end="5551" title="complementary cumulative distribution function" label="complementary cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="5973" end="6012" title="independent and identically distributed" label="independent and identically distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767128" start="6117" end="6132" title="order statistic" label="order statistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247110" start="6287" end="6311" title="law of total expectation" label="law of total expectation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247110" start="6389" end="6413" title="law of total expectation" label="law of total expectation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166603" start="6770" end="6806" title="convolution of probability distributions" label="convolution of their individual PDFs"/>
<link wikidata="Q273023" start="7158" end="7183" title="Euler-Mascheroni constant" label="Euler-Mascheroni constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q905326" start="7207" end="7223" title="digamma function" label="digamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q762448" start="7281" end="7300" title="Erlang distribution" label="Erlang distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q117806" start="7374" end="7392" title="gamma distribution" label="gamma distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q671617" start="7556" end="7571" title="Laplace distribution" label="Laplace(μ, β−1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="7629" end="7648" title="Uniform distribution (continuous)" label="&amp;quot;U&amp;quot;(0, 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q837683" start="7705" end="7717" title="Pareto distribution" label="Pareto(1, λ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65205009" start="7774" end="7789" title="Skew-logistic distribution" label="SkewLogistic(θ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="7830" end="7849" title="Uniform distribution (continuous)" label="&amp;quot;U&amp;quot;(0, 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q756254" start="7920" end="7937" title="beta distribution" label="beta distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075209" start="8009" end="8029" title="Pearson distribution" label="Pearson distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q117806" start="8087" end="8105" title="Gamma distribution" label="Gamma distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889567" start="8273" end="8290" title="Benktander Weibull distribution" label="BenktanderWeibull"/>
<link wikidata="Q837683" start="8374" end="8380" title="Pareto distribution" label="Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="8422" end="8441" title="Uniform distribution (continuous)" label="&amp;quot;U&amp;quot;(0, 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q756254" start="8464" end="8468" title="Beta distribution" label="Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="8495" end="8503" title="power law" label="PowerLaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q637150" start="8541" end="8562" title="Rayleigh distribution" label="Rayleigh distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q732332" start="8582" end="8602" title="Weibull distribution" label="Weibull distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q729523" start="8634" end="8656" title="geometric distribution" label="geometric distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q729523" start="8688" end="8710" title="geometric distribution" label="geometric distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q117806" start="8821" end="8826" title="gamma distribution" label="Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517984" start="8927" end="8932" title="Lomax distribution" label="Lomax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156926" start="8964" end="8971" title="compound distribution" label="mixture"/>
<link wikidata="Q671617" start="9009" end="9022" title="Laplace distribution" label="Laplace(0, 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q762448" start="9140" end="9146" title="Erlang distribution" label="Erlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q117806" start="9167" end="9172" title="gamma distribution" label="Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="9410" end="9411" title="uniform distribution (continuous)" label="U"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="9507" end="9526" title="confidence interval" label="confidence interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q589603" start="9581" end="9602" title="logistic distribution" label="logistic distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617240" start="9661" end="9673" title="generalized extreme value distribution" label="GEV(μ, σ, 0)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6322815" start="9718" end="9732" title="K-distribution" label="K-distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q243462" start="9786" end="9810" title="chi-squared distribution" label="chi-squared distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253731" start="9818" end="9836" title="degrees of freedom (statistics)" label="degrees of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q205692" start="9889" end="9911" title="Poisson distribution" label="Poisson(&amp;quot;X&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q729523" start="9929" end="9951" title="geometric distribution" label="geometric distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258347" start="9959" end="9976" title="Hoyt distribution" label="Hoyt distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258262" start="10027" end="10047" title="arcsine distribution" label="arcsine distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q112871357" start="10097" end="10135" title="Kaniadakis Exponential distribution" label="&amp;quot;κ&amp;quot;-exponential distribution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10205" end="10237" title="κ-Generalized Gamma distribution" label="κ-Generalized Gamma distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258517" start="10324" end="10354" title="Hyper-exponential distribution" label="Hyper-exponential distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258520" start="10434" end="10462" title="Hypoexponential distribution" label="Hypoexponential distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421535" start="10534" end="10557" title="exGaussian distribution" label="exGaussian distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="10605" end="10624" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045555" start="10885" end="10903" title="maximum likelihood" label="maximum likelihood"/>
<link wikidata="Q45284" start="10952" end="10971" title="likelihood function" label="likelihood function"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="10988" end="11027" title="independent and identically distributed" label="independent and identically distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045555" start="11274" end="11292" title="maximum likelihood" label="maximum likelihood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264527" start="11352" end="11370" title="unbiased estimator" label="unbiased estimator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11536" end="11579" title="Maximum likelihood estimation#Second-order efficiency after correction for bias" label="bias-corrected maximum likelihood estimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940696" start="11620" end="11638" title="mean squared error" label="mean squared error"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003119" start="11650" end="11672" title="bias–variance tradeoff" label="bias–variance tradeoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258521" start="11827" end="11853" title="inverse-gamma distribution" label="inverse-gamma distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420659" start="11897" end="11915" title="Fisher information" label="Fisher information"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913954" start="12418" end="12428" title="percentile" label="percentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q243462" start="12436" end="12460" title="chi squared distribution" label="chi squared distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253731" start="12480" end="12498" title="degrees of freedom (statistics)" label="degrees of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711784" start="12893" end="12908" title="conjugate prior" label="conjugate prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q117806" start="12949" end="12967" title="gamma distribution" label="gamma distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q278079" start="13129" end="13151" title="posterior distribution" label="posterior distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171168" start="13476" end="13490" title="Hyperparameter (Bayesian statistics)" label="hyperparameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145117" start="13836" end="13851" title="Poisson process" label="Poisson process"/>
<link wikidata="Q729523" start="13932" end="13954" title="geometric distribution" label="geometric distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077800" start="13986" end="14001" title="Bernoulli trial" label="Bernoulli trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7778426" start="14744" end="14758" title="particle decay" label="particle decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q48171" start="14793" end="14807" title="Geiger counter" label="Geiger counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="15129" end="15137" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="15144" end="15147" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324130" start="15167" end="15175" title="roadkill" label="roadkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q847526" start="15198" end="15212" title="queuing theory" label="queuing theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205692" start="15442" end="15462" title="Poisson distribution" label="Poisson distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q762448" start="15627" end="15646" title="Erlang distribution" label="Erlang distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193887" start="15746" end="15764" title="Reliability theory" label="Reliability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193887" start="15769" end="15792" title="reliability engineering" label="reliability engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q543310" start="15947" end="15958" title="hazard rate" label="hazard rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q432465" start="15974" end="15987" title="bathtub curve" label="bathtub curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737027" start="16072" end="16084" title="failure rate" label="failure rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="16356" end="16363" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="16382" end="16385" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="16397" end="16408" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="16413" end="16421" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="16435" end="16454" title="gravitational field" label="gravitational field"/>
<link wikidata="Q808592" start="16559" end="16577" title="Barometric formula" label="Barometric formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="16646" end="16655" title="hydrology" label="hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="16970" end="16985" title="confidence belt" label="confidence belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q185547" start="16999" end="17020" title="binomial distribution" label="binomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q378347" start="17059" end="17076" title="plotting position" label="plotting position"/>
<link wikidata="Q73129" start="17093" end="17122" title="cumulative frequency analysis" label="cumulative frequency analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107611014" start="17225" end="17248" title="Predictive methods for surgery duration" label="no typical work-content"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160087" start="18389" end="18412" title="confidence distribution" label="confidence distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4068240" start="18756" end="18770" title="Jeffreys prior" label="Jeffreys prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q255166" start="19153" end="19180" title="Kullback–Leibler divergence" label="Kullback–Leibler divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291996" start="19902" end="19909" title="variate" label="variate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377019" start="19923" end="19949" title="inverse transform sampling" label="inverse transform sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="20003" end="20023" title="uniform distribution (continuous)" label="uniform distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489473" start="20133" end="20150" title="quantile function" label="quantile function"/>
<link wikidata="Q628723" start="20558" end="20567" title="Dead time" label="Dead time"/>
<link wikidata="Q671617" start="20646" end="20666" title="Laplace distribution" label="Laplace distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29209" start="20722" end="20767" title="Relationships among probability distributions" label="Relationships among probability distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q39056571" start="20770" end="20809" title="Marshall–Olkin exponential distribution" label="Marshall–Olkin exponential distribution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45907" wikidata="Q3203001" url="?curid=45907" title="Beyond This Horizon">
<text>Beyond This Horizon is a science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It was originally published as a two-part serial in &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; (April, May 1942, under the pseudonym Anson MacDonald) and then as a single volume by Fantasy Press in 1948. It was awarded a Retro-Hugo award for best novel in 2018.

==Overview==
The novel depicts a world in which genetic selection for increased health, longevity, and intelligence has become so widespread that the unmodified &quot;control naturals&quot; are a carefully managed and protected minority. Duels and the carrying of arms are socially accepted ways of maintaining civility in public. A man can wear distinctive clothing to show his unwillingness to duel, but this results in an inferior social status. The world has become an economic utopia; the &quot;economic dividend&quot; is so high that work has become optional. The chief economic problem uses up the economic surplus: many high-quality goods actually cost &quot;less&quot; than those of lower quality. Many people use lower-quality goods as status symbols. The government invests heavily in scientific research, but it has the side effect of further increasing productivity a decade or more later, and so long-term projects with no expected economic return are favored above anything but medical research, on the theory that longer lifespans will consume more surplus.

The story&#x27;s protagonist, Hamilton Felix (surname first), is the archetypal übermensch. He is the penultimate step in a &quot;star line&quot; designed to breed for the highest-quality human characteristics. However, he lacks eidetic memory, which disqualifies him for what many consider to be humanity&#x27;s most important occupation: that of an &quot;encyclopedic synthesist&quot;, who analyzes the sum total of human knowledge for untapped potential. As such, he finds his life and the society in which he lives to be enjoyable but meaningless. However, when one of the synthesists seeks him out and inquires when he plans to continue his line, he finds himself drawn into an adventure that gives him purpose and also convinces him that his society is worth saving after all.

Major themes in the novel are reincarnation, the immortality of the soul, and telepathy. Felix is the product of generations of genetic engineering. He is almost but not quite the perfect human. In the second half of the book, his genetically engineered son is born, the climax of generations of genetic engineering and selective breeding and a genetically perfect human. As the son grows, he begins to develop almost-superhuman mental abilities and a surprising telepathic ability.

As the novel draws to a close, it becomes apparent that the son senses that Hamilton Felix&#x27;s second child, a daughter, is the reincarnation of a wise elderly government official, who foresaw her own death and arranged to die shortly before Felix&#x27;s daughter was born. The official understood that the soul is reincarnated, and in preparation for her own death and reincarnation, she was instrumental in the genetic engineering of the son and the daughter.

==Reception==
Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas characterized &quot;Beyond This Horizon&quot; as among &quot;the finest science fiction novels of the modern crop&quot;. P. Schuyler Miller reviewed the novel favorably, saying: &quot;in true Heinlein manner the basic theme of the book smashes the screen of action only in the closing pages&quot;.

==In popular culture==
In the Japanese visual novel &quot;Eden*&quot;, the term &quot;Felix&quot; is used in the setting to refer to genetically engineered humans with abilities similar to those described in the book, and the connection to Heinlein&#x27;s work is referred to in dialogue.

Mordan Claude’s quote &quot;An armed society is a polite society&quot; is often cited by pro-gun groups in justifying the proposal of universal carrying of arms. The context of the quote is usually omitted, though:

==See also==
* &quot;For Us, The Living: A Comedy of Customs&quot;

==References==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="25" end="40" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="66" end="84" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="144" end="170" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434321" start="263" end="276" title="Fantasy Press" label="Fantasy Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="303" end="313" title="Retro-Hugo" label="Retro-Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836899" start="512" end="528" title="control group" label="control naturals"/>
<link wikidata="Q191503" start="583" end="588" title="Duels" label="Duels"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="827" end="833" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975790" start="885" end="909" title="post-scarcity" label="work has become optional"/>
<link wikidata="Q43484" start="1500" end="1510" title="übermensch" label="übermensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q386001" start="1649" end="1663" title="eidetic memory" label="eidetic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="2332" end="2351" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q246303" start="3168" end="3183" title="Anthony Boucher" label="Anthony Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923872" start="3188" end="3206" title="J. Francis McComas" label="J. Francis McComas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900938" start="3328" end="3346" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q307199" start="3564" end="3569" title="Eden*" label="Eden*"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4033" end="4072" title="For Us, The Living: A Comedy of Customs" label="For Us, The Living: A Comedy of Customs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45908" wikidata="Q7355141" url="?curid=45908" title="Rocket Ship Galileo">
<text>Rocket Ship Galileo, a juvenile science-fiction novel by the American writer Robert A. Heinlein, published in 1947, features three teenagers who participate in a pioneering flight to the Moon. It was the first in the Heinlein juveniles, a long and successful series of science-fiction novels published by Scribner&#x27;s. Heinlein originally envisioned the novel as the first of a series of books called &quot;Young Rocket Engineers&quot;. Publishers initially rejected the script, judging going to the Moon as &quot;too far out&quot;.

==Plot summary==

After World War II, three teenage rocket experimenters are recruited by one boy&#x27;s uncle, Dr. Cargraves, a renowned physicist who had worked on the Manhattan Project, to refit a conventionally powered surplus &quot;mail rocket&quot;. It is to be converted to run on a thorium nuclear pile which boils zinc as a propellant. They use a cleared area in a military weapons test range in the desert for their work, despite prying and sabotage attempts by unknown agents.

Upon completion of the modifications, they stock the rocket, which they name the &quot;Galileo&quot;, and take off for the Moon, taking approximately three days to arrive. After establishing a semi-permanent structure based on a Quonset hut, they claim the Moon on behalf of the United Nations.

As they set up a radio to communicate with the Earth they pick up a local transmission, the sender of which promises to meet them. Instead, their ship is bombed. However, they are able to hole up undetected in their hut and succeed in ambushing the other ship when it lands, capturing the pilot. They discover that there is a Nazi base on the Moon. They bomb it from their captured ship and land. One survivor is found, revived, and questioned.

The boys also find evidence of an ancient lunar civilization, and postulate that the craters of the Moon were formed not by impacts from space, but by nuclear bombs that destroyed the alien race.

When the base&#x27;s Nazi leader shoots the pilot in order to silence him, Cargraves convenes a trial and finds him guilty of murder. Cargraves prepares to execute the prisoner by ejecting him into vacuum, mostly as a bluff for information on how to fly the base&#x27;s spaceship. The Nazi capitulates in the airlock and teaches them how to fly the ship back to Earth.

The boys radio the location of the hidden Nazi base on Earth to the authorities, leading to its destruction; they return as heroes.

==Adaptations==
The 1950 movie &quot;Destination Moon&quot; was loosely based on &quot;Rocket Ship Galileo&quot;, and Heinlein was one of three co-authors of the script. The film&#x27;s plot also resembles that of &quot;The Man Who Sold the Moon&quot;, which Heinlein wrote in 1949 but did not publish until 1951.

==Critical reception==
Surveying Heinlein&#x27;s juvenile novels, Jack Williamson noted that while &quot;Rocket Ship Galileo&quot; remains &quot;readable, with Heinlein&#x27;s familiar themes already emerging,&quot; it was a &quot;sometimes fumbling experiment. ... The plot is often trite, and the characters are generally thin stereotypes.&quot; Robert Wilfred Franson said that &quot;Heinlein wants there always to be young people of the right mind and character to seize such opportunities. His novels went a long way toward educating such a class of people, and still are doing so.&quot; Andrew Baker wrote: &quot;&#x27;Rocket Ship Galileo&#x27; shares with numerous works composed before the advent of the actual Space Program a gross underestimation of the huge costs and investment of resources needed for any jaunt outside Earth&#x27;s gravitational field. (...) The idea of private people (boys in this case) being able to just take off to the Moon on their own can ultimately be traced - like so many Science Fiction themes - to the fertile mind of H. G. Wells and to the two English gentlemen quietly taking off to the Moon in &quot;The First Men in the Moon&quot;. (...) The politics of &#x27;Galileo&#x27; are still those of the World War II anti-Nazi Alliance, not of the emerging Cold War. Had it been written a few years later, the villains would have likely been Russian Communists&quot;.

==References==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="32" end="47" title="science-fiction" label="science-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="77" end="95" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385973" start="217" end="235" title="Heinlein juveniles" label="Heinlein juveniles"/>
<link wikidata="Q845617" start="305" end="320" title="Charles Scribner&amp;#x27;s Sons" label="Scribner&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="707" end="724" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413546" start="774" end="785" title="Rocket mail" label="mail rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="827" end="834" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="860" end="864" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627026" start="1255" end="1266" title="Quonset hut" label="Quonset hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="1919" end="1926" title="Nuclear warfare" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="1986" end="1990" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="2163" end="2169" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245160" start="2505" end="2521" title="Destination Moon (film)" label="Destination Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055720" start="2688" end="2713" title="The Man Who Sold the Moon" label="The Man Who Sold the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q316788" start="2849" end="2864" title="Jack Williamson" label="Jack Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="3843" end="3854" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218232" start="3928" end="3953" title="The First Men in the Moon" label="The First Men in the Moon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45912" wikidata="Q81783" url="?curid=45912" title="Space Cadet">
<text>Space Cadet is a 1948 science fiction novel by Robert A. Heinlein about Matt Dodson, who joins the Interplanetary Patrol to help preserve peace in the Solar System. The story translates the standard military academy story into outer space: a boy from Iowa goes to officer school, sees action and adventure, shoulders responsibilities far beyond his experience, and becomes a man. It was published as the second of the series of Heinlein juveniles and inspired the media franchise around the character Tom Corbett, including the 1950s television series &quot;Tom Corbett, Space Cadet&quot; and radio show which made &quot;Space Cadet&quot; a household phrase whose meaning later shifted in popular culture.

==Plot summary==
In 2075, teenager Matt Dodson applies to join the prestigious Interplanetary Patrol. After a number of physical, mental, and ethics tests, he is accepted as a cadet. He makes friends with fellow recruits William &quot;Tex&quot; Jarman, Venus-born Oscar Jensen, and Pierre Armand from Ganymede. His first roommate is Girard Burke, the arrogant son of a wealthy spaceship builder. They are transported to the orbiting school ship PRS &quot;James Randolph&quot; for further training. Burke eventually either resigns or is asked to leave, and goes into the merchant service, but the remainder do well enough to be assigned to working Patrol ships. 

Dodson, Jarman and Jensen ship out on the &quot;Aes Triplex&quot;. Their first real mission is to help search for a missing research vessel, the &quot;Pathfinder&quot;, in the asteroid belt. They find it, but all aboard are dead, the unlucky victims of a fast-moving object that punctured the ship when the armored outer airlock door was open. Before the accident, a researcher on the &quot;Pathfinder&quot; had found evidence that the planet which blew up to form the asteroids was inhabited by an intelligent species, and that the explosion had been artificial. The captain of the &quot;Aes Triplex&quot; transfers half the crew to the repaired &quot;Pathfinder&quot; so that they can take the ship and the news of the startling discovery back to Earth quickly. With the remainder (including all three cadets), he plots a slower, fuel-efficient, elliptical voyage back to Earth.

Then, he receives an urgent message to investigate an incident on Venus. He sends Lieutenant Thurlow and the cadets to the planet&#x27;s surface. The lander touches down on a sinkhole, giving the crew barely enough time to get out before it disappears in the mud. With Thurlow comatose, injured when the lander fell over, Jensen assumes command. He contacts the sentient, usually friendly Venerians, but the entire party is taken captive. They soon find out why.

These particular natives had never seen human beings before, until old classmate Burke showed up in a prospecting ship. He had taken the matriarch of the local clan hostage when she refused to give him permission to exploit a rich deposit of radioactive ores. The locals promptly attacked the ship and killed his crew; Burke managed to send a message for help before being taken prisoner.

Jensen gains the matriarch&#x27;s trust and convinces her that they are honorable and civilized, unlike Burke, and the Patrolmen are released. Unfortunately, neither the lander nor Burke&#x27;s ship is flightworthy. To their amazement, the matriarch takes the stranded humans to the carefully preserved &quot;Astarte&quot;, the legendary first ship to set out for Venus over a century before and thought to have been lost en route. According to the log, the crew perished from disease. With the help of the natives, the cadets recommission the ship and fly it back to Venus&#x27;s South Pole colony. Dodson is initially disappointed when they are not treated as heroes, but then realizes that what they accomplished was simply what was expected of Patrolmen.

==Themes==
The Patrol is entrusted by the worldwide Earth government with a monopoly on nuclear weapons, and is expected to maintain a credible threat to drop them on Earth from orbit as a deterrent against breaking the peace. Matt, on a visit home, causes a family argument when his parents refuse to believe that the Patrol—and especially their son—would actually bomb Iowa.

The cadets are expected to renounce their loyalty to their respective countries and replace it by a wider allegiance to humanity as a whole and to the sentient species of the Solar System. They are told the stories of four Patrol heroes/martyrs who exemplify this quality. One of them, Rivera, leaves orders to annihilate his hometown if he is held captive there during negotiations. Heinlein later expanded another of these anecdotes into &quot;The Long Watch&quot;.

The young, idealistic Matt feels that he should be able, if the need arose, to emulate Rivera and destroy his own Iowa hometown. His father tells him such a need would never arise, since the Patrol&#x27;s cosmopolitan allegiance is little more than a sham and in fact it is controlled by the &quot;North American Federation&quot; and serves its interests. Later, Matt&#x27;s mentor in the Patrol makes him understand that if such an unlikely dilemma should arise, his commanding officer would lock him in his room rather than expect him to participate in the attack. The mentor uses this scenario to force Matt to confront the personal and political issues involved in the institutional control of atomic weapons in a more mature way.

Written almost a decade before the American Civil Rights Movement, and at a time when non-white characters were almost entirely absent from science fiction, the book also explores the theme of racism, both literally, in discussions about the cosmopolitan racial makeup of the (all-male) Patrol, and metaphorically, in its description of conflict with the Venerians. Venus is described as intensely hot and (incorrectly, as is now known) swampy, but habitable. The Venerians are at first thought to be primitive, but it is later revealed that they have a high level of technological sophistication, though developed along radically different lines than that of humans.

There is also a subplot revolving around the issue of what it means to be a good soldier. Discouraged by the intellectual demands of his Patrol training, and attracted to the glamor and esprit de corps of the Marines, Matt requests a transfer, but is dissuaded by his mentor. The mentor, dividing human motivations into three types, explains that the Patrol, which has the responsibility of holding the ultimate weapon and keeping overall peace, is manned by a certain sort of person, the man of ideals (its motto is &quot;Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?).&quot; In contrast, the Marines, the service branch which deals with ordinary military affairs, are trained to prize unquestioning loyalty and bravery as the highest ideals, and are deliberately recruited from the type of person who seeks glory and excitement. Matt belongs to the former category. The Merchant Service, by implication, is for a third category, those motivated by economic concerns — which is where Burke fits in.

The novel contains an early description of a mobile phone:

The phone &quot;was limited by its short range to the neighborhood of an earth-side [i.e. terrestrial] relay office&quot;. A cadet avoids having to talk to his family while traveling by packing his phone in luggage.

==Critical reception==
Surveying Heinlein&#x27;s juvenile novels, Jack Williamson characterized &quot;Space Cadet&quot; as &quot;a long step forward. ... The characters are stronger [and] the background is carefully built, original, and convincing, the story suspenseful enough.&quot; Williamson noted that Heinlein was &quot;perfecting the &quot;bildungsroman&quot; form that shapes the whole series.&quot;

P. Schuyler Miller gave the book a favorable review as &quot;a first-rate historical novel of the near future,&quot; saying &quot;So subtly has the scientific detail been interwoven with plot and action that the reader never realizes how painstakingly it has been worked out.&quot;

== &quot;Tom Corbett, Space Cadet&quot;==
The novel inspired Joseph Greene of Grosset &amp; Dunlap to develop the &quot;Tom Corbett, Space Cadet&quot; comic books, television series, radio show, comic strip, and novels that were popular in the early 1950s. Greene had originally submitted a radio script for &quot;Tom Ranger and the Space Cadets&quot; on January 16, 1946, but it remained unperformed when Heinlein&#x27;s novel was published. Heinlein influenced the evolution of &quot;Tom Ranger&quot; into &quot;Tom Corbett&quot; and launched his student astronaut title&#x27;s common mention; they share credit for the popularity of both formal and later slang uses of &quot;space cadet.&quot;

== In popular culture ==
The &quot;Tom Corbett, Space Cadet&quot; television series and radio show made &quot;space cadet&quot; a household phrase. By 1955, Jackie Gleason spoke the phrase on &quot;The Honeymooners&quot; television show in an episode called &quot;TV or Not to TV,&quot; original airdate October 1, 1955.

The popular meanings of &quot;space cadet&quot; later shifted in popular culture away from astronaut-in-training to indicate, by the 1960s, an &quot;eccentric person disconnected with reality&quot; (often implying an intimacy with hallucinogenic drugs) although by the 2010s, drug use was rarely implied by this phrase, nor was low intelligence implied; &quot;space cadet&quot; was more simply associated with &quot;spacing out,&quot; wandering from present concerns, especially of others present, and being a &quot;space case.&quot; Both the &quot;trainee astronaut&quot; and &quot;person regarded as being out of touch with reality&quot; entered the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;, though by 2014 Oxford noted that, in American English, the phrase had also recouped the positive connotations originally meant by Heinlein and Joseph Greene, the &quot;Tom Corbett, Space Cadet&quot; writer: &quot;An enthusiast for space travel, typically a young person.&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="22" end="37" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="47" end="65" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="151" end="163" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q917182" start="199" end="215" title="military academy" label="military academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="251" end="255" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12622609" start="264" end="278" title="Officer Candidate School" label="officer school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="365" end="378" title="rite of passage" label="becomes a man"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385973" start="428" end="446" title="Heinlein juveniles" label="Heinlein juveniles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815402" start="501" end="512" title="Tom Corbett, Space Cadet" label="Tom Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805393" start="558" end="582" title="Tom Corbett, Space Cadet (TV-series)" label="Tom Corbett, Space Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="960" end="965" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169" start="1008" end="1016" title="Ganymede (moon)" label="Ganymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q660668" start="1140" end="1151" title="school ship" label="school ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="1546" end="1559" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q114202" start="1806" end="1848" title="Phaeton (hypothetical planet)" label="planet which blew up to form the asteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q188734" start="2427" end="2435" title="sinkhole" label="sinkhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="3918" end="3923" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="3954" end="3968" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="4055" end="4064" title="deterrence theory" label="deterrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="4364" end="4372" title="Human" label="humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164434" start="4690" end="4704" title="The Long Watch" label="The Long Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="5484" end="5514" title="American Civil Rights Movement" label="American Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="5642" end="5648" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5815" end="5833" title="Venus in fiction#Swamp" label="Venus is described"/>
<link wikidata="Q912781" start="6327" end="6334" title="space marines" label="Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357290" start="6641" end="6671" title="Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?" label="Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="7149" end="7161" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q316788" start="7447" end="7462" title="Jack Williamson" label="Jack Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="7728" end="7741" title="bildungsroman" label="bildungsroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900938" start="7790" end="7808" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149552" start="8134" end="8147" title="Joseph Greene (writer)" label="Joseph Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117078" start="8151" end="8171" title="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap" label="Grosset &amp;amp; Dunlap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815402" start="8193" end="8217" title="Tom Corbett, Space Cadet" label="Tom Corbett, Space Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815402" start="8806" end="8830" title="Tom Corbett, Space Cadet" label="Tom Corbett, Space Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q454200" start="8928" end="8942" title="Jackie Gleason" label="Jackie Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q742551" start="8969" end="8985" title="The Honeymooners" label="The Honeymooners"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="9751" end="9776" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45913" wikidata="Q1223617" url="?curid=45913" title="Red Planet">
<text>Red Planet is a nickname for the planet Mars, due to its surface color.
It may also refer to:

* &quot;Mission: Red Planet&quot;, a 2005 boardgame by Bruno Cathala and Bruno Faidutti
* &quot;Red Planet&quot; (novel) by Robert A. Heinlein (1949)
** &quot;Red Planet&quot; (miniseries), a 1994 animated adaptation of the novel
* Red Planet, the source of the J-Jewel in &quot;The King of Braves GaoGaiGar&quot;
* &quot;Red Planet&quot; (film), a 2000 film starring Val Kilmer
* Red Planet (game), a &quot;BattleTech&quot; game scenario (ca. 1993)
* &quot;Red Planet Hotels&quot;, a regional hotel chain in Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines and Thailand
* &quot;Red Planet Mars&quot; a 1952 film based on a 1932 play &quot;Red Planet&quot;
* &quot;Red Planet&quot;, an episode in the game &quot;Angry Birds Space&quot;
* &quot;Red Planet&quot;, a song by Little Mix featuring T-Boz from their debut album, &quot;DNA&quot; (2012)
* &quot;Red Planet&quot;, a song by the Canadian indie band Alvvays from their eponymous debut album (2014)
* &quot;The Red Planet&quot;, an album by Rick Wakeman (2020)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="40" end="44" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773194" start="53" end="70" title="Mars surface color" label="its surface color"/>
<link wikidata="Q325179" start="168" end="182" title="Bruno Faidutti" label="Bruno Faidutti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211745" start="185" end="215" title="Red Planet (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Red Planet&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7304729" start="248" end="283" title="Red Planet (miniseries)" label="&amp;quot;Red Planet&amp;quot; (miniseries)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071984" start="374" end="402" title="The King of Braves GaoGaiGar" label="The King of Braves GaoGaiGar"/>
<link wikidata="Q945685" start="411" end="440" title="Red Planet (film)" label="&amp;quot;Red Planet&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869964" start="476" end="493" title="Red Planet (game)" label="Red Planet (game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052982" start="553" end="570" title="Red Planet Hotels" label="Red Planet Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284398" start="659" end="674" title="Red Planet Mars" label="Red Planet Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188898" start="792" end="809" title="Angry Birds Space" label="Angry Birds Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279549" start="909" end="912" title="DNA (Little Mix album)" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159571" start="1005" end="1026" title="Alvvays (album)" label="eponymous debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q85808302" start="1042" end="1056" title="The Red Planet" label="The Red Planet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45915" wikidata="Q783947" url="?curid=45915" title="Humpty Dumpty">
<text>Humpty Dumpty is a character in an English nursery rhyme, probably originally a riddle and one of the best known in the English-speaking world. He is typically portrayed as an anthropomorphic egg, though he is not explicitly described as such. The first recorded versions of the rhyme date from late eighteenth-century England and the tune from 1870 in James William Elliott&#x27;s &quot;National Nursery Rhymes and Nursery Songs&quot;. Its origins are obscure, and several theories have been advanced to suggest original meanings.

Humpty Dumpty was popularized in the United States on Broadway by actor George L. Fox in the pantomime musical &quot;Humpty Dumpty&quot;. The show ran from 1868 to 1869, for a total of 483 performances. As a character and literary allusion, Humpty Dumpty has appeared or been referred to in many works of literature and popular culture, particularly English author Lewis Carroll&#x27;s 1871 book &quot;Through the Looking-Glass&quot;, in which he was described as an egg. The rhyme is listed in the Roud Folk Song Index as No. 13026.

==Lyrics and melody==
The rhyme is one of the best known in the English language. The common text from 1882 is:
&lt;poem&gt;
Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall.
Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.
All the king&#x27;s horses and all the king&#x27;s men
Couldn&#x27;t put Humpty together again.
&lt;/poem&gt;

It is a single quatrain with external rhymes that follow the pattern of AABB and with a trochaic metre, which is common in nursery rhymes. The melody commonly associated with the rhyme was first recorded by composer and nursery rhyme collector James William Elliott in his &quot;National Nursery Rhymes and Nursery Songs&quot; (London, 1870), as outlined below:

&lt;score sound=&quot;1&quot;&gt;
\new Staff «
\clef treble \key bes \major {
 \time 6/8 \partial 2. 
 \relative d&#x27; {
 d4 f8 es4 g8 | f8 g a bes4. | d,4 f8 es4 g8 | f8 d bes c4. \bar&quot; \break
 d8 d f es es g | f8 g a bes4. | d8 d bes es es d | c8 bes a bes4. \bar&quot; \break
 }
%\new Lyrics \lyricmode {
»
\layout { indent = #0 }
\midi { \tempo 4. = 56 }
&lt;/score&gt;

==Origins==

The earliest known version was published in Samuel Arnold&#x27;s &quot;Juvenile Amusements&quot; in 1797 with the lyrics:
&lt;poem&gt;
Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall,
Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.
Four-score Men and Four-score more,
Could not make Humpty Dumpty where he was before.
&lt;/poem&gt;

A manuscript addition to a copy of &quot;Mother Goose&#x27;s Melody&quot; published in 1803 has the modern version with a different last line: &quot;Could not set Humpty Dumpty up again&quot;. It was published in 1810 in a version of &quot;Gammer Gurton&#x27;s Garland&quot;. (Note: Original spelling variations left intact.)
&lt;poem&gt;
Humpty Dumpty sate on a wall,
Humpti Dumpti had a great fall;
Threescore men and threescore more,
Cannot place Humpty dumpty as he was before.
&lt;/poem&gt;

In 1842, James Orchard Halliwell published a collected version as:
&lt;poem&gt;
Humpty Dumpty lay in a beck.
With all his sinews around his neck;
Forty Doctors and forty wrights
Couldn&#x27;t put Humpty Dumpty to rights!
&lt;/poem&gt;

Evidence of an alternative American version closer to the modern received rhyme quoted above is given by William Carey Richards in the issue of a children&#x27;s magazine for 1843, where he comments that he had come across it as a riddle when he was five-years old and that the answer was &quot;an egg&quot;.
&lt;poem&gt;
Humpty-dumpty sit upon a wall,
Humpty-dumpty had a great fall; 
All the king&#x27;s horses and all the king&#x27;s men
Couldn&#x27;t put humpty-dumpty together again.
&lt;/poem&gt;

According to the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot;, in the 17th century, the term &quot;humpty dumpty&quot; referred to a drink of brandy boiled with ale. The riddle probably exploited, for misdirection, the fact that &quot;humpty dumpty&quot; was also eighteenth-century reduplicative slang for a short and clumsy person. The riddle may depend upon the assumption that a clumsy person falling off a wall might not be irreparably damaged, whereas an egg would be. The rhyme is no longer posed as a riddle, since the answer is now so well known. Similar riddles have been recorded by folklorists in other languages, such as &quot;Boule Boule&quot; in French, &quot;Lille Trille&quot; in Swedish and Norwegian, and &quot;Runtzelken-Puntzelken&quot; or &quot;Humpelken-Pumpelken&quot; in different parts of Germany—although none is as widely known as Humpty Dumpty is in English.

==Meaning==
The rhyme does not explicitly state that the subject is an egg, possibly because it may have been originally posed as a riddle. There are also various theories of an original &quot;Humpty Dumpty&quot;. One, advanced by Katherine Elwes Thomas in 1930 and adopted by Robert Ripley, posits that Humpty Dumpty is King Richard III of England, depicted as hunchbacked in Tudor histories and particularly in Shakespeare&#x27;s play, and who was defeated, despite his armies, at Bosworth Field in 1485.

In 1785, Francis Grose&#x27;s &quot;Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue&quot; noted that a &quot;Humpty Dumpty&quot; was &quot;a short clumsey person of either sex, also ale boiled with brandy&quot;; no mention was made of the rhyme.

&quot;Punch&quot; in 1842 suggested jocularly that the rhyme was a metaphor for the downfall of Cardinal Wolsey; just as Wolsey was not buried in his intended tomb, so Humpty Dumpty was not buried in his shell.

Professor David Daube suggested in &quot;The Oxford Magazine&quot; of 16 February 1956 that Humpty Dumpty was a &quot;tortoise&quot; siege engine, an armored frame, used unsuccessfully to approach the walls of the Parliamentary-held city of Gloucester in 1643 during the Siege of Gloucester in the English Civil War. This was on the basis of a contemporary account of the attack, but without evidence that the rhyme was connected. The theory was part of an anonymous series of articles on the origin of nursery rhymes and was widely acclaimed in academia, but it was derided by others as &quot;ingenuity for ingenuity&#x27;s sake&quot; and declared to be a spoof. The link was nevertheless popularized by a children&#x27;s opera &quot;All the King&#x27;s Men&quot; by Richard Rodney Bennett, first performed in 1969.

From 1996, the website of the Colchester tourist board attributed the origin of the rhyme to a cannon recorded as used from the church of St Mary-at-the-Wall by the Royalist defenders in the siege of 1648. In 1648, Colchester was a walled town with a castle and several churches and was protected by the city wall. The story given was that a large cannon, which the website claimed was colloquially called Humpty Dumpty, was strategically placed on the wall. A shot from a Parliamentary cannon succeeded in damaging the wall beneath Humpty Dumpty, which caused the cannon to tumble to the ground. The Royalists (or Cavaliers, &quot;all the King&#x27;s men&quot;) attempted to raise Humpty Dumpty on to another part of the wall, but the cannon was so heavy that &quot;All the King&#x27;s horses and all the King&#x27;s men couldn&#x27;t put Humpty together again&quot;. Author Albert Jack claimed in his 2008 book &quot;Pop Goes the Weasel: The Secret Meanings of Nursery Rhymes&quot; that there were two other verses supporting this claim. Elsewhere, he claimed to have found them in an &quot;old dusty library, [in] an even older book&quot;, but did not state what the book was or where it was found. It has been pointed out that the two additional verses are not in the style of the seventeenth century or of the existing rhyme, and that they do not fit with the earliest printed versions of the rhyme, which do not mention horses and men.

==Adaptations==
American actor George L. Fox (1825–1877) helped to popularise the nursery rhyme character in nineteenth-century stage productions of pantomime versions, music, and rhyme. The character is also a common literary allusion, particularly to refer to a person in an insecure position, something that would be difficult to reconstruct once broken, or a short and fat person.

=== Lewis Carroll&#x27;s &quot;Through the Looking-Glass&quot; ===
Humpty Dumpty also makes an appearance in Lewis Carroll&#x27;s &quot;Through the Looking-Glass&quot; (1871). There Alice remarks that Humpty is &quot;exactly like an egg&quot;, which Humpty finds to be &quot;very provoking&quot; in the looking-glass world. Alice clarifies that she said he looks like an egg, not that he is one. They then go on discuss semantics and pragmatics when Humpty Dumpty says, &quot;my name means the shape I am&quot;.

A. J. Larner suggested that Carroll&#x27;s Humpty Dumpty had prosopagnosia on the basis of his description of his finding faces hard to recognise:

=== James Joyce&#x27;s &quot;Finnegans Wake&quot; ===
James Joyce used the story of Humpty Dumpty as a recurring motif of the Fall of Man in the 1939 novel Finnegans Wake. One of the most easily recognizable references is at the end of the second chapter, in the first verse of the Ballad of Persse O&#x27;Reilly:

===In science===
Humpty Dumpty has been used to demonstrate the second law of thermodynamics. The law describes a process known as entropy, a measure of the number of specific ways in which a system may be arranged, often taken to be a measure of &quot;disorder&quot;. The higher the entropy, the higher the disorder. After his fall and subsequent shattering, the inability to put him together again is representative of this principle, as it would be highly unlikely (though not impossible) to return him to his earlier state of lower entropy, as the entropy of an isolated system never decreases.

==See also==

*List of nursery rhymes

==References==
==External links==
* Library of Congress&#x27; Facsimile of the 1899 illustrated edition of &quot;Through the Looking-Glass&quot; 
* The Ballad of Persse O&#x27;Reilly</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q783947" start="0" end="13" title="Humpty Dumpty" label="Humpty Dumpty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123037" start="43" end="56" title="nursery rhyme" label="nursery rhyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q47054" start="80" end="86" title="riddle" label="riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q987355" start="120" end="142" title="English-speaking world" label="English-speaking world"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="176" end="191" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147" start="192" end="195" title="egg" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145568" start="353" end="374" title="James William Elliott" label="James William Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="587" end="595" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541452" start="605" end="618" title="George L. Fox (clown)" label="George L. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="626" end="635" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="898" end="911" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q220331" start="935" end="960" title="Through the Looking-Glass" label="Through the Looking-Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q49679" start="1032" end="1052" title="Roud Folk Song Index" label="Roud Folk Song Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q570948" start="1380" end="1388" title="quatrain" label="quatrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q208653" start="1453" end="1461" title="trochaic" label="trochaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145568" start="1609" end="1630" title="James William Elliott" label="James William Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379741" start="2167" end="2180" title="Samuel Arnold (composer)" label="Samuel Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q142305" start="2461" end="2473" title="Mother Goose" label="Mother Goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q63258116" start="2660" end="2688" title="Gammer Gurton&amp;#x27;s Garland" label="Gammer Gurton&amp;#x27;s Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q321691" start="2926" end="2949" title="James Orchard Halliwell" label="James Orchard Halliwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q232358" start="3039" end="3045" title="sinews" label="sinews"/>
<link wikidata="Q94133947" start="3258" end="3280" title="William Carey Richards" label="William Carey Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="3680" end="3705" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="3792" end="3798" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q208385" start="3811" end="3814" title="ale" label="ale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3933" end="3946" title="Reduplication#English" label="reduplicative"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="4244" end="4254" title="folklorist" label="folklorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4311" end="4317" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="4347" end="4354" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="4359" end="4368" title="Norwegian Language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47054" start="4671" end="4677" title="riddle" label="riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q732327" start="4816" end="4829" title="Robert Ripley" label="Robert Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="4865" end="4887" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q478389" start="4901" end="4912" title="hunchbacked" label="hunchbacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q652011" start="4952" end="4975" title="Richard III (play)" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s play"/>
<link wikidata="Q222013" start="5022" end="5036" title="Battle of Bosworth Field" label="Bosworth Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4150369" start="5056" end="5069" title="Francis Grose" label="Francis Grose"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="5294" end="5299" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5368" end="5399" title="Cardinal Wolsey#Downfall and death" label="the downfall of Cardinal Wolsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q215403" start="5510" end="5521" title="David Daube" label="David Daube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755806" start="5541" end="5560" title="The Oxford Magazine" label="The Oxford Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="5633" end="5645" title="siege engine" label="siege engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="5741" end="5751" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510051" start="5771" end="5790" title="Siege of Gloucester" label="Siege of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="5798" end="5815" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q959863" start="6268" end="6290" title="Richard Rodney Bennett" label="Richard Rodney Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q184163" start="6348" end="6358" title="Colchester" label="Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924393" start="6509" end="6522" title="Siege of Colchester" label="siege of 1648"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541452" start="7792" end="7805" title="George L. Fox (clown)" label="George L. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="7910" end="7919" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="8256" end="8269" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q220331" start="8283" end="8308" title="Through the Looking-Glass" label="Through the Looking-Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269082" start="8329" end="8334" title="Alice (Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland)" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675253" start="8450" end="8469" title="looking-glass world" label="looking-glass world"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="8567" end="8576" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="8581" end="8591" title="pragmatics" label="pragmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q244438" start="8721" end="8734" title="prosopagnosia" label="prosopagnosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="8862" end="8873" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135949" start="8934" end="8945" title="Fall of man" label="Fall of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507" start="8964" end="8978" title="Finnegans Wake" label="Finnegans Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715437" start="9090" end="9120" title="The Ballad of Persse O&amp;#x27;Reilly" label="Ballad of Persse O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="9187" end="9215" title="second law of thermodynamics" label="second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="9254" end="9261" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631527" start="9738" end="9760" title="List of nursery rhymes" label="List of nursery rhymes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45918" wikidata="Q3011003" url="?curid=45918" title="Between Planets">
<text>Between Planets is a juvenile science fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, originally serialized in &quot;Blue Book&quot; magazine in 1951 as &quot;Planets in Combat&quot;. It was published in hardcover that year by Scribner&#x27;s as part of the Heinlein juveniles.

==Plot summary==
Don Harvey&#x27;s scientist parents withdraw him from his high school in New Mexico in the middle of the term so that he can join them on Mars. The headmaster suggests that they want him out of a potential war zone, where he might be viewed suspiciously because of doubts about his loyalties. At his parents&#x27; behest, he visits an old family friend who asks him to deliver a ring to his father; security forces later arrest both of them. Harvey is released and given his ring back, after it has been examined; he is told that his friend has died of &quot;heart failure&quot;. Only later does he realize that &quot;all&quot; deaths can be described that way.

Harvey boards a shuttle to a space station orbiting Earth. The station doubles as a transshipment terminus and a military base, armed with missiles to keep restive nations in check. On the trip up, he befriends another passenger, a Venerian &quot;dragon&quot; calling himself &quot;Sir Isaac Newton&quot;. Sir Isaac, a renowned physicist, can vocalize English using a portable device.

Harvey gets caught up in the Venerian war of independence when colonial forces capture the station in a surprise raid. Most of the other travelers are sent back to Earth, while a few decide to join the rebels. Harvey is in a quandary. The spaceship to Mars has been confiscated, but he remains determined to get there, by way of Venus if necessary. Because he was born in space, with one parent from Venus and the other from Earth, he claims Venerian citizenship; more importantly, Sir Isaac vouches for him. He is allowed to tag along, which turns out to be very fortunate for Harvey. The rebels blow up the station to stir up trouble for the Earth government. When the shuttle returns to Earth with its radios disabled, the military assumes it has been booby-trapped and destroys it, killing all aboard.

On his arrival on Venus, Harvey finds that his Earth-backed money is now worthless. A banker lends him money, telling him to pay it forward. He gets a job washing dishes for his keep for Charlie, a Chinese immigrant who runs a small restaurant. He befriends a young woman, Isobel, when he tries to send a message to his parents. However, communication with Mars has been cut due to the hostilities. Harvey settles in to wait out the war, but the war comes to him.

Earth sends a force to put down the rebellion on Venus. The Venerian ships are destroyed in orbit and the ground forces are routed. Charlie is killed resisting the occupying soldiers. Harvey is rounded up and questioned by a senior security officer, who is very eager to get his hands on Harvey&#x27;s ring. Luckily, Harvey had given it to Isobel for safekeeping; he does not know where she is or whether she is even alive. Before he can be interrogated with drugs, he escapes and joins the Venerian guerrilla forces.

Harvey joins the army of the Republic and becomes an effective commando. In time, he is tracked down by the leaders of the resistance, who are also looking for the ring. Isobel and her father (an important member of the rebels) are safe at the very base where Harvey is taken.

The seemingly valueless ring turns out to contain the secret of scientific breakthroughs resulting from archaeological studies of an extinct alien civilization on Mars. With Sir Isaac&#x27;s assistance, the rebels use the information to build an advanced spaceship that is much faster than any other vessel in existence, with revolutionary weapons and defenses also derived from the new technology. As a combat veteran, Harvey is recruited for the maiden voyage of &quot;Little David&quot;, manning a dead man&#x27;s switch with strict orders to blow up the ship if it is in danger of capture. &quot;Little David&quot; intercepts and defeats a task force of warships on their way to Mars to crush the revolt there.

==Astronomy==
Like many science fiction works of its period, the novel depicts both Venus and Mars as suitable for human habitation. Since no interplanetary space probes had been launched at the time, neither the extreme pressure and temperature at the surface of Venus, nor the extremely low atmospheric pressure at the surface of Mars, were known to science. Even the length of the day on Venus was not yet known.

==Reception==
Groff Conklin reviewed the novel favorably, calling it &quot;a magnificently real and vivid Picture of the Possible&quot;. Boucher and McComas named it among the best sf novels of 1951, characterizing it as &quot;more mature than most &#x27;adult&#x27; science fiction&quot;. P. Schuyler Miller praised the novel as &quot;very smoothly and logically put together&quot;, although he noted that it lacked the level of &quot;elaboration of background detail&quot; that he expected from Heinlein.

Surveying Heinlein&#x27;s juvenile novels, Jack Williamson characterized &quot;Between Planets&quot; as &quot;mov[ing] the series still farther from its juvenile origins toward grownup concerns&quot;. Although describing the plot as &quot;pretty traditional space opera&quot;, he praised the novel for its &quot;ably drawn&quot; characters, its &quot;well-imagined&quot; background, and its &quot;story told with zest&quot;. Williamson also noted that Heinlein closed the novel &quot;with a vigorous statement of his unhappiness with &#x27;the historical imperative&#x27; leading to the loss of individual freedom as governmental organizations grew&quot;.

==Cartoon==
&quot;Between Planets&quot; was serialized in &quot;Boys&#x27; Life&quot; magazine in 1978 as a monthly cartoon series. The story took some liberties — for instance, the &quot;Dragons&quot; of Venus were portrayed as humanoids and the planets&#x27; names were changed — but the spirit of the story was relatively faithful.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="30" end="45" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="71" end="89" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928915" start="122" end="131" title="Blue Book (magazine)" label="Blue Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011003" start="164" end="181" title="Between Planets" label="Planets in Combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q845617" start="232" end="247" title="Charles Scribner&amp;#x27;s Sons" label="Scribner&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385973" start="263" end="281" title="Heinlein juveniles" label="Heinlein juveniles"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="359" end="370" title="secondary school" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="374" end="384" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="439" end="443" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="993" end="1006" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q456407" start="1048" end="1061" title="transshipment" label="transshipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="1196" end="1204" title="Venus" label="Venerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156612" start="2282" end="2296" title="pay it forward" label="pay it forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153563" start="3920" end="3942" title="dead man&amp;#x27;s switch" label="dead man&amp;#x27;s switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610108" start="4566" end="4579" title="Groff Conklin" label="Groff Conklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q246303" start="4689" end="4696" title="Anthony Boucher" label="Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5923872" start="4701" end="4708" title="J. Francis McComas" label="McComas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4842" end="4860" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q316788" start="5103" end="5118" title="Jack Williamson" label="Jack Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q126900267" start="5781" end="5796" title="Boys&amp;#x27; Life" label="Boys&amp;#x27; Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="5833" end="5840" title="cartoon" label="cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q502931" start="5946" end="5954" title="humanoid" label="humanoid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45919" wikidata="Q498690" url="?curid=45919" title="Academy Award for Best Dance Direction">
<text>The Academy Award for Best Dance Direction was presented from 1935 to 1937, after which it was discontinued due to pressure from the directors&#x27; branch. It is the only category for which a Marx Brothers film received an Oscar nomination, for the dance number All God&#x27;s Chillun Got Rhythm in &quot;A Day at the Races&quot; (1937).

==Winners and nominees==
==See also==
* List of Academy Award–nominated films

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q498690" start="4" end="42" title="Academy Award for Best Dance Direction" label="Academy Award for Best Dance Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="193" end="206" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728756" start="263" end="296" title="All God&amp;#x27;s Chillun Got Rhythm" label="All God&amp;#x27;s Chillun Got Rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214749" start="306" end="324" title="A Day at the Races (film)" label="A Day at the Races"/>
<link wikidata="Q126362374" start="380" end="417" title="List of Academy Award–nominated films" label="List of Academy Award–nominated films"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45920" wikidata="Q28206" url="?curid=45920" title="Augusta, Maine">
<text>Augusta is the capital city of the U.S. state of Maine. The city&#x27;s population was 18,899 at the 2020 United States census, making it the 12th-most populous city in Maine, and third-least populous state capital in the United States after Montpelier, Vermont, and Pierre, South Dakota. Augusta is the seat of and most populous city in Kennebec County.

The area was explored in 1607 by English settlers from the Popham Colony at the mouth of the Kennebec River. Before European settlement, Algonquian-speaking Indians lived in the area. In 1625, representatives of Plymouth Colony chose the east shore of the Kennebec for a trading post, which was likely built in 1628 and became known as &quot;Cushnoc&quot;. The Kennebec Proprietors, successors to the Plymouth Company, built Fort Western near the site of the abandoned trading post in 1754 and began settlement efforts. The new village was incorporated as [[Hallowell, Maine|Hallowell]] in 1771, and the upriver part of town separated in 1797 to form the town of Harrington. On June 9, 1797, Harrington changed its name to Augusta and, in 1827, it was designated capital of Maine.

Augusta is the easternmost state capital in the United States. Located on the Kennebec River at the head of tide, it is the principal city in the Augusta-Waterville micropolitan statistical area and home to the University of Maine at Augusta. Because of the city&#x27;s position on the Kennebec, downtown Augusta is vulnerable to floods in spring. The Maine flood of 1987, known as the &quot;Great Flood&quot;, affected the city. Bond Brook runs from northwest to southeast through the city center, and has been called the &quot;Home of wild Atlantic Salmon&quot;.

The city has five different residential areas, including the &quot;west side&quot;, a historic neighborhood north of the state capitol complex, and the &quot;east side&quot;, which is situated on the opposite side of the Kennebec. The city&#x27;s northwest quadrant includes both a retail center and neighborhoods.

Augusta State Airport serves the city, offering both commercial service and general aviation. Although the airport is owned by the State of Maine, it is managed and operated by the city. Interstate 95 passes by the western outskirts of Augusta, and both U.S. 202 and U.S. 201 run through the city.

==History==

The area was first explored by the English of the short-lived Popham Colony in September 1607. Twenty-one years later, English settlers from the Plymouth Colony settled in the area in 1628 as part of a trading post on the Kennebec River. The settlement was known by its Native American name &quot;Cushnoc&quot; (or Coussinoc or Koussinoc), meaning &quot;head of the tide&quot;. Fur trading was at first profitable, but because of Native uprisings and declining revenues, Plymouth Colony sold the Kennebec Patent in 1661. Cushnoc would remain unoccupied for the next 75 years.

The area around Cushnoc was inhabited by the Kennebec, a band of the larger Abenaki nation. During the 17th century, they were on friendly terms with the English settlers in the region.

A hotbed of Abenaki hostility toward British settlements was located further up the Kennebec at Norridgewock. In 1722, the tribe and its allies attacked Fort Richmond (now Richmond) and destroyed Brunswick. In response, English forces sacked Norridgewock in 1724 during Dummer&#x27;s War, when the English gained tentative control of the Kennebec.

During the height of the French and Indian War, in 1754, the English colonists built a blockhouse named Fort Western at Cushnoc on the eastern bank of the Kennebec River. It was intended as a supply depot for Fort Halifax upriver, as well as a regional defense from French attack. Later, during the American Revolutionary War, Benedict Arnold and his 1,100 troops would use Fort Western as a staging area before continuing their journey up the Kennebec to the Battle of Quebec.
Cushnoc was incorporated as part of Hallowell in 1771. Known as &quot;the Fort&quot;, it was set off and incorporated by the Massachusetts General Court in February 1797 as Harrington. In August, however, the name was changed to Augusta after Pamela Augusta Dearborn, daughter of Henry Dearborn. In 1799, it was designated as the county seat for the newly created Kennebec County.

Maine became a state in 1820 as a result of the Missouri Compromise. Augusta was designated as its capital in 1827, over Portland, and rival communities Brunswick and Hallowell. The Maine State Legislature continued meeting in Portland, however, until the completion of the Maine State House in 1832, designed by Charles Bulfinch. Augusta was incorporated as a city in 1849. After being named the state capital and the introduction of new industry, the city flourished. In 1840 and 1850, the city ranked among the 100 largest urban populations in the country. During the next decade, however, the city was quickly bypassed by rapidly growing metropolises in the Midwest.

Excellent soil provided for agriculture, and water power from streams provided for the industry. In 1837, a dam was built across the Kennebec where the falls drop 15  feet at the head of a tide. By 1838, 10 sawmills were contracted. With the arrival of the Kennebec &amp; Portland Railroad in 1851, Augusta became an even more productive mill town. In 1883, the property of A. &amp; W. Sprague Company was purchased by the Edwards Manufacturing Company, which erected extensive brick mills for manufacturing cotton textiles. They imported cotton from the South for processing and export to Europe. In the late 19th century, a paper and pulp plant was constructed.

Other Augusta firms produced lumber, sash, doors, window shutters, broom handles, stone cutters&#x27; tools, shoes, headstones, ice and furniture. The city developed as a publishing and shipping center. Today, government and post-secondary education are important businesses.

Since the mid-eighteenth century, there has been a military presence in Augusta. Fort Western has not had troops garrisoned there since the 1790s, but in 1828, the U.S. Government built an arsenal to protect their interests from Britain. During the Civil War, Augusta was a rendezvous point for Union soldiers traveling to the front. Many of the soldiers camped on the green in front of the capitol building. In 1862, Camp E.D. Keyes was established in the northwestern portion of the city.

During World War I, Camp Keyes was used as a mobilization and training camp for soldiers. The camp eventually became a headquarters for the Maine National Guard. In 1929, the state legislature approved the placement of the Augusta State Airport next to the camp. As the airport grew, the use of the camp as a training facility was no longer possible. Today, it is still used for administrative and logistical purposes by the National Guard.

In the 19th century, Augusta got a regular steamboat service and the railroad. The city installed gas lights in 1859. A telephone service was available in 1880 and a local hospital in 1898. In the early 20th century, Augusta built two movie houses and a film production studio.

==Downtown revitalization==
For much of Augusta&#x27;s history, the central business district was on and near Water Street on the west bank of the Kennebec River. The street, laid out in the late 1700s, was the location of the area&#x27;s commercial and industrial life. Many fires damaged this concentrated area, including one in 1865 that destroyed nearly 100 buildings. In 1890, the first trolley line began operation down Water Street, connecting Augusta with Gardiner and Hallowell to the south.

In 1932, buses replaced the trolley line. With the completion of the Maine Turnpike and Interstate 95 in 1955, local commercial developments began to move away from Water Street and closer to the highway. Among the results was a storefront vacancy rate downtown of about 60 percent.

Since the late 2000s, there has been a renewed and ongoing focus by city officials, the Augusta Downtown Alliance, and private developers to revitalize the downtown area.

==Geography==

Augusta is the easternmost state capital in the United States. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water. Augusta is drained by Bond&#x27;s Brook, Woromontogus Stream and the Kennebec River.

===Roads===
The city is crossed by Interstate 95, U.S. Route 201, State Route 11, U.S. Route 202, State Route 9, State Route 3, State Route 100, State Route 27, State Route 8, State Route 104, and State Route 105.

===Bordering===
Augusta borders the towns of Manchester to its west, Sidney and Vassalboro to its north, Windsor to its east, Chelsea to its south, and the city of Hallowell to its southwest.

===Climate===
Augusta&#x27;s climate is classified as a humid continental climate (Köppen: &quot;Dfb&quot;). Summers are typically warm, rainy, and humid, while winters are cold, windy, and snowy. Spring and fall are usually mild, but conditions are widely varied, depending on wind direction and jet stream positioning.

The hottest month is July, with an average high temperature of . The coldest month is January, with an average low of . Most snowfall occurs from December through March. There is usually little or no snow in April and November, and snow is rare in May and October.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 19,136 people, 8,802 households, and 4,490 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 9,756 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 94.1% White, 1.1% African American, 0.7% Native American, 1.5% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.4% from other races, and 2.3% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.8% of the population.

There were 8,802 households, of which 23.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.2% were married couples living together, 11.8% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.0% had a male householder with no wife present, and 49.0% were non-families. 39.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.08 and the average family size was 2.76.

The median age in the city was 43.2 years. 18.3% of residents were under the age of 18; 8.1% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 26% were from 25 to 44; 29.4% were from 45 to 64; and 18% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.6% male and 51.4% female.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 18,560 people, 8,565 households, and 4,607 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 9,480 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 96.21% White, 0.50% Black or African American, 0.48% Native American, 1.35% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 0.16% from other races, and 1.3% from two or more races. 0.86% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 8,565 households, out of which 24.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 39.1% were married couples living together, 10.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 46.2% were non-families. 38.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.10 and the average family size was 2.77.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 20.5% under the age of 18, 8.7% from 18 to 24, 28.3% from 25 to 44, 24.8% from 45 to 64, and 17.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.5 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $29,921, and the median income for a family was $42,230. Males had a median income of $31,209 versus $22,548 for females. The per capita income for the city was $19,145. About 11.4% of families and 15.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.2% of those under age 18 and 9.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==

===Local government===
Augusta is governed by a mayor and council-manager system. The City Council oversees all City government activities and establishes the legislative policies of the city, adopts and amends ordinances and local laws, appropriates municipal resources, and sets the tax rate. The City Manager serves as the chief executive officer and purchasing agent of the city. The mayor presides at all meetings of the council, and is recognized ceremonially as the official head of the city.

The city maintains a police department; it is remarkable for not having had an officer killed in the line of duty for over a century.

===Political makeup===

Augusta has historically been Democratic. In the 2012 presidential election, Barack Obama received 5,192 of the votes to Mitt Romney&#x27;s 3,339. 

In the 2020 presidential election, Joe Biden won 5,248 votes to Donald Trump&#x27;s 4,155. 

The city has not voted for a Republican presidential candidate since George H. W. Bush in the Republican landslide of 1988. Democrats are the majority political affiliation in all four voting wards. There are more voters who are not enrolled than there are registered Republicans in the city.

;Voter registration

==Education==

There are five public schools, one private school, and one college (the University of Maine at Augusta). There are two public libraries in Augusta, the city-operated Lithgow Public Library and the Maine State Library.

Farrington, Gilbert, Hussey, and Lincoln are the four public elementary schools that are located in the city.

Cony serves students in grades 7–12 from Augusta and the surrounding towns; Cony comprises Cony Middle School and Cony High School.

St. Michaels is a private Catholic school; it charges tuition to its students.

The University of Maine at Augusta is third-largest university in the University of Maine System.

==Media==

===Printed media===
*&quot;Kennebec Journal&quot;, daily newspaper for capital area
*&quot;Uncle Henry&#x27;s&quot;, former weekly classified adverts publication

===Radio===

*WJZN, oldies
*WMDR, religious
*WMME-FM, top-40
*WTOS-FM, rock
*WVQM, talk
*WWTP, religious

===Television===
Augusta is part of the Portland, Maine television market, and receives most of that market&#x27;s channels. WCBB channel 10, licensed to Augusta, is the local television outlet for the Maine Public Broadcasting Network.

==Transportation==
Interstate 95 passes by the western outskirts of Augusta. U.S. 202 runs east–west through the city. U.S. 201 runs north–south through the city.

Augusta State Airport (AUG), in the western part of the city, has commercial flights.

==Sites of interest==
*Blaine House
*Fort Western
*Holocaust and Human Rights Center of Maine at the University of Maine at Augusta
*Lithgow Public Library
*Maine State House
*Maine State Museum
*Viles Arboretum
*Kennebec Arsenal
*Augusta Mental Health Institute

==Notable people==
*Ambrose Abbott, state legislator
*Martha Ballard, midwife
*James G. Blaine, Secretary of State and presidential nominee
*Horatio Bridge, navy officer
*William Bridgeo, state representative and resident of Augusta
*Julia Clukey, 2010 Olympic luger
*Beverly Daggett, President of the Maine Senate
*Olive E. Dana, short-story writer, essayist, poet
*Melville Fuller, Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court 
*George Huntington Hartford, owner of Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company (A&amp;P), the country&#x27;s largest food retailer at the time of his death
*John F. Hill, former Maine governor
*Robert Deniston Hume, Oregon politician and businessman
*Eastman Johnson, artist
*Roger Katz, mayor of Augusta and state legislator
*George W. Ladd, U.S. congressman
*Dorianne Laux, poet
*Sumner Lipman, state legislator and attorney
*Henry A. McMasters, recipient of the Medal of Honor
*Rachel Nichols, actress
*Frederick G. Payne, Mayor of Augusta and 60th governor of Maine
*David Peoples, athlete and golfer
*Frederick W. Plaisted, mayor of Augusta, 48th governor of Maine
*John F. Potter, U.S. congressman, judge
*Travis Roy, hockey player
*Luther Severance, publisher, U.S. congressman and senator
*Olympia Snowe, U.S. senator
*John L. Stevens, U.S. minister to Kingdom of Hawaii, accused of attempting to overthrow Hawaiian queen, 1893
*Judith Tarr, fantasy and science fiction author
*Manch Wheeler, quarterback with the Buffalo Bills
*Gil Whitney, television news anchorman and meteorologist
*Reuel Williams, U.S. senator
*Willard G. Wyman, general

==See also==

*USS &quot;Augusta&quot;, 2 ships

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*City of Augusta, Maine
*Lithgow Public Library
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28206" start="0" end="7" title="Augusta, Maine" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q321470" start="15" end="27" title="List of capitals in the United States" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="35" end="45" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="49" end="54" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="101" end="126" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q107611061" start="142" end="174" title="List of cities in Maine" label="12th-most populous city in Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q26426" start="242" end="261" title="Montpelier, Vermont" label="Montpelier, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q40747" start="267" end="287" title="Pierre, South Dakota" label="Pierre, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="304" end="308" title="county seat" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q497172" start="338" end="353" title="Kennebec County, Maine" label="Kennebec County"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="389" end="396" title="British America" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003171" start="415" end="428" title="Popham Colony" label="Popham Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431323" start="449" end="463" title="Kennebec River" label="Kennebec River"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="493" end="512" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="568" end="583" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206" start="698" end="705" title="Augusta, Maine" label="Cushnoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q917078" start="757" end="773" title="Plymouth Company" label="Plymouth Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492009" start="781" end="793" title="Fort Western" label="Fort Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206" start="912" end="942" title="Augusta, Maine" label="[[Hallowell, Maine|Hallowell]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206" start="1019" end="1030" title="Augusta, Maine" label="Harrington."/>
<link wikidata="Q5689431" start="1238" end="1250" title="head of tide" label="head of tide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1284" end="1302" title="Kennebec County, Maine#Micropolitan statistical area" label="Augusta-Waterville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270419" start="1303" end="1332" title="micropolitan statistical area" label="micropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895654" start="1349" end="1379" title="University of Maine at Augusta" label="University of Maine at Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736365" start="1490" end="1509" title="Maine flood of 1987" label="Maine flood of 1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901648" start="2020" end="2041" title="Augusta State Airport" label="Augusta State Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436475" start="2207" end="2220" title="Interstate 95 in Maine" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="2274" end="2282" title="U.S. Route 202 in Maine" label="U.S. 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436491" start="2287" end="2295" title="U.S. Route 201" label="U.S. 201"/>
<link wikidata="Q4003171" start="2394" end="2407" title="Popham Colony" label="Popham Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="2477" end="2492" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431323" start="2554" end="2568" title="Kennebec River" label="Kennebec River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="2602" end="2617" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="2710" end="2721" title="Fur trading" label="Fur trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="2803" end="2818" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196220" start="2853" end="2860" title="Cushnoc Archeological Site" label="Cushnoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q488110" start="2954" end="2962" title="Kennebec people" label="Kennebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q318806" start="2985" end="2992" title="Abenaki" label="Abenaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q318806" start="3108" end="3115" title="Abenaki" label="Abenaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q488110" start="3192" end="3204" title="Norridgewock" label="Norridgewock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307045" start="3268" end="3276" title="Richmond, Maine" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q518466" start="3292" end="3301" title="Brunswick, Maine" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265114" start="3366" end="3383" title="Dummer&amp;#x27;s War" label="Dummer&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="3470" end="3491" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q82101" start="3532" end="3542" title="blockhouse" label="blockhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492009" start="3549" end="3561" title="Fort Western" label="Fort Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077887" start="3654" end="3666" title="Fort Halifax (Maine)" label="Fort Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3744" end="3770" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q298237" start="3772" end="3787" title="Benedict Arnold" label="Benedict Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062383" start="3857" end="3881" title="Benedict Arnold&amp;#x27;s expedition to Quebec" label="continuing their journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840117" start="3905" end="3921" title="Battle of Quebec (1775)" label="Battle of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283250" start="3959" end="3968" title="Hallowell, Maine" label="Hallowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="4048" end="4075" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q963349" start="4203" end="4217" title="Henry Dearborn" label="Henry Dearborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="4353" end="4372" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="4426" end="4434" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749841" start="4487" end="4510" title="Maine State Legislature" label="Maine State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="4532" end="4540" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985164" start="4579" end="4596" title="Maine State House" label="Maine State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063849" start="4618" end="4634" title="Charles Bulfinch" label="Charles Bulfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="5022" end="5033" title="water power" label="water power"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="5129" end="5134" title="waterfall" label="falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="5184" end="5191" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5234" end="5266" title="Maine Central Railroad main line#Kennebec &amp;amp; Portland RR" label="Kennebec &amp;amp; Portland Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012861" start="5315" end="5324" title="mill town" label="mill town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724263" start="5679" end="5683" title="window sash" label="sash"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="6168" end="6177" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6418" end="6429" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q106256470" start="6551" end="6571" title="Maine National Guard" label="Maine National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901648" start="6634" end="6655" title="Augusta State Airport" label="Augusta State Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="6896" end="6905" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436475" start="7703" end="7717" title="Maine Turnpike" label="Maine Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436475" start="7722" end="7735" title="Interstate 95 in Maine" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="8185" end="8212" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431323" start="8345" end="8359" title="Kennebec River" label="Kennebec River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436475" start="8397" end="8410" title="Interstate 95 in Maine" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436491" start="8412" end="8426" title="U.S. Route 201" label="U.S. Route 201"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436265" start="8428" end="8442" title="Maine State Route 11" label="State Route 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="8444" end="8458" title="U.S. Route 202 in Maine" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436254" start="8460" end="8473" title="Maine State Route 9" label="State Route 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436233" start="8475" end="8488" title="Maine State Route 3" label="State Route 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436338" start="8490" end="8505" title="Maine State Route 100" label="State Route 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436297" start="8507" end="8521" title="Maine State Route 27" label="State Route 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436252" start="8523" end="8536" title="Maine State Route 8" label="State Route 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510589" start="8538" end="8553" title="Maine State Route 104" label="State Route 104"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436348" start="8559" end="8574" title="Maine State Route 105" label="State Route 105"/>
<link wikidata="Q588282" start="8622" end="8632" title="Manchester, Maine" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450385" start="8646" end="8652" title="Sidney, Maine" label="Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241006" start="8657" end="8667" title="Vassalboro, Maine" label="Vassalboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449701" start="8682" end="8689" title="Windsor, Maine" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450690" start="8703" end="8710" title="Chelsea, Maine" label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283250" start="8741" end="8750" title="Hallowell, Maine" label="Hallowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="8826" end="8851" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="8853" end="8859" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="9403" end="9409" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="9508" end="9526" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9631" end="9636" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9643" end="9659" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9666" end="9681" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9688" end="9693" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9700" end="9716" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9728" end="9739" title="Race (U.S. Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9774" end="9782" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="9786" end="9792" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="9941" end="9956" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10845" end="10850" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10858" end="10863" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10867" end="10883" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10891" end="10906" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10914" end="10919" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10927" end="10943" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="10956" end="10967" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="11031" end="11039" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11043" end="11049" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q946819" start="12248" end="12273" title="mayor and council-manager" label="mayor and council-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q696776" start="12499" end="12511" title="City Manager" label="City Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="12588" end="12593" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="12722" end="12739" title="Police" label="police department"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="12890" end="12900" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226" start="12909" end="12935" title="2012 United States presidential election" label="2012 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="12937" end="12949" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="12981" end="12992" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="13016" end="13042" title="2020 United States Presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="13044" end="13053" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="13073" end="13085" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="13171" end="13188" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="13196" end="13224" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="Republican landslide of 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895654" start="13504" end="13534" title="University of Maine at Augusta" label="University of Maine at Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715225" start="13598" end="13620" title="Lithgow Public Library" label="Lithgow Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q73006672" start="13629" end="13648" title="Maine State Library" label="Maine State Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166767" start="13876" end="13892" title="Cony High School" label="Cony High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="13921" end="13936" title="Catholic school" label="Catholic school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495861" start="14045" end="14071" title="University of Maine System" label="University of Maine System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389544" start="14112" end="14128" title="Kennebec Journal" label="Kennebec Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25021455" start="14176" end="14194" title="Uncle Henry&amp;#x27;s" label="Uncle Henry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q614278" start="14216" end="14233" title="classified advert" label="classified advert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951483" start="14262" end="14266" title="WJZN" label="WJZN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952729" start="14276" end="14280" title="WMDR (AM)" label="WMDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952929" start="14293" end="14300" title="WMME-FM" label="WMME-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956344" start="14310" end="14317" title="WTOS-FM" label="WTOS-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956979" start="14325" end="14329" title="WVQM" label="WVQM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310975" start="14337" end="14341" title="WWTP (FM)" label="WWTP"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14394" end="14427" title=":Template:Portland Maine TV" label="Portland, Maine television market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736418" start="14556" end="14589" title="Maine Public Broadcasting Network" label="Maine Public Broadcasting Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436475" start="14611" end="14624" title="Interstate 95 in Maine" label="Interstate 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436504" start="14669" end="14677" title="U.S. Route 202 in Maine" label="U.S. 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436491" start="14711" end="14719" title="U.S. Route 201" label="U.S. 201"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901648" start="14756" end="14777" title="Augusta State Airport" label="Augusta State Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718533" start="14866" end="14878" title="Blaine House" label="Blaine House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492009" start="14880" end="14892" title="Fort Western" label="Fort Western"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14894" end="14936" title="Holocaust and Human Rights Center of Maine" label="Holocaust and Human Rights Center of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895654" start="14944" end="14974" title="University of Maine at Augusta" label="University of Maine at Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715225" start="14976" end="14998" title="Lithgow Public Library" label="Lithgow Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985164" start="15000" end="15017" title="Maine State House" label="Maine State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736479" start="15019" end="15037" title="Maine State Museum" label="Maine State Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930160" start="15039" end="15054" title="Viles Arboretum" label="Viles Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389542" start="15056" end="15072" title="Kennebec Arsenal" label="Kennebec Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q24693809" start="15074" end="15105" title="Augusta Mental Health Institute" label="Augusta Mental Health Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741752" start="15127" end="15141" title="Ambrose Abbott" label="Ambrose Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774333" start="15161" end="15175" title="Martha Ballard" label="Martha Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q448778" start="15186" end="15201" title="James G. Blaine" label="James G. Blaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902626" start="15248" end="15262" title="Horatio Bridge" label="Horatio Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q124079605" start="15278" end="15293" title="William Bridgeo" label="William Bridgeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q449906" start="15341" end="15353" title="Julia Clukey" label="Julia Clukey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899501" start="15375" end="15390" title="Beverly Daggett" label="Beverly Daggett"/>
<link wikidata="Q34637332" start="15423" end="15436" title="Olive E. Dana" label="Olive E. Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q943046" start="15474" end="15489" title="Melville Fuller" label="Melville Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540878" start="15542" end="15568" title="George Huntington Hartford" label="George Huntington Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166420" start="15579" end="15617" title="Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company" label="Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q880377" start="15696" end="15708" title="John F. Hill" label="John F. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15436599" start="15733" end="15753" title="Robert Deniston Hume" label="Robert Deniston Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278282" start="15790" end="15805" title="Eastman Johnson" label="Eastman Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358441" start="15815" end="15825" title="Roger Katz" label="Roger Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508444" start="15866" end="15880" title="George W. Ladd" label="George W. Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297809" start="15900" end="15913" title="Dorianne Laux" label="Dorianne Laux"/>
<link wikidata="Q19561227" start="15921" end="15934" title="Sumner Lipman" label="Sumner Lipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717001" start="15967" end="15985" title="Henry A. McMasters" label="Henry A. McMasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="16004" end="16018" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q140181" start="16020" end="16034" title="Rachel Nichols (actress)" label="Rachel Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q883477" start="16045" end="16063" title="Frederick G. Payne" label="Frederick G. Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q878623" start="16091" end="16108" title="List of Governors of Maine" label="governor of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238511" start="16110" end="16123" title="David Peoples (golfer)" label="David Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q431665" start="16145" end="16166" title="Frederick W. Plaisted" label="Frederick W. Plaisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414034" start="16210" end="16224" title="John F. Potter" label="John F. Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450673" start="16251" end="16261" title="Travis Roy" label="Travis Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542694" start="16278" end="16294" title="Luther Severance" label="Luther Severance"/>
<link wikidata="Q22290" start="16337" end="16350" title="Olympia Snowe" label="Olympia Snowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243707" start="16366" end="16381" title="John L. Stevens" label="John L. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q539418" start="16476" end="16487" title="Judith Tarr" label="Judith Tarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747202" start="16525" end="16538" title="Manch Wheeler" label="Manch Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q221626" start="16561" end="16574" title="Buffalo Bills" label="Buffalo Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560636" start="16576" end="16587" title="Gil Whitney" label="Gil Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242897" start="16634" end="16648" title="Reuel Williams" label="Reuel Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003408" start="16664" end="16680" title="Willard G. Wyman" label="Willard G. Wyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280030" start="16706" end="16729" title="USS Augusta" label="USS &amp;quot;Augusta&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45921" wikidata="Q4071777" url="?curid=45921" title="Starman Jones">
<text>Starman Jones, a 1953 science-fiction novel by Robert A. Heinlein, features a farm boy who wants to go to the stars. Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons published the book as part of the Heinlein juveniles series. 

==Plot summary==

Max Jones works the family farm in the Ozark Mountains. With his father dead and his stepmother marrying a man he detests, Max runs away from home, taking his late uncle&#x27;s astrogation manuals.

Most occupations are tightly controlled by guilds, with hereditary memberships. Since his uncle had been a member of the Astrogators&#x27; Guild and had had no children, Max hopes that before he died, his uncle had named him his heir. He begins hitchhiking towards Earthport to find out. Along the way, he finds a friendly face in hobo Sam Anderson, who later alludes to being a deserter from the Imperial Marines. Sam feeds Max and offers good advice, though he later absconds with Max&#x27;s valuable manuals.

At the guild&#x27;s headquarters, Max is disappointed to find that he had not been named as an heir, but he receives his uncle&#x27;s substantial security deposit for his manuals. Max learns that Sam had returned the manuals and tried to claim the deposit for himself.

By chance, he runs into an apologetic Sam. With Max&#x27;s money, Sam is able to finagle them jobs aboard a starship using forged records of service as crewmen aboard other starships. Max signs on as a steward&#x27;s mate third class, and then he absorbs the contents of the Stewards&#x27; Guild manual using his eidetic memory. Among his duties is caring for several animals, including passengers&#x27; pets. When Eldreth &quot;Ellie&quot; Coburn visits her pet, an alien, semi-intelligent &quot;spider puppy&quot; that Max has befriended, she learns that he can play three-dimensional chess, and challenges him to a game. A champion player, she diplomatically lets him win. Meanwhile, Sam rises to the position of master-at-arms.

When, through Ellie&#x27;s machinations, the ship&#x27;s officers discover that Max had learned astrogation from his uncle, Max is promoted to the undermanned command deck. Under the tutelage of Chief Astrogator Hendrix and Chief Computerman Kelly, he becomes a probationary apprentice chartsman, then a probationary astrogator. In a meeting with Hendrix, Max reluctantly admits to faking his record to get into space. Hendrix defers the matter until their return to Earth. The &quot;Asgard&quot; then departs for Halcyon, a colony planet orbiting Nu Pegasi.

When Hendrix dies, the astrogation department is left dangerously shorthanded. The aging captain tries to take his place, but is not up to the task. When Max detects a critical error in his real-time calculations leading up to a transition (an instantaneous jump to another region of space), neither the captain nor Assistant Astrogator Simes believe him, and the ship becomes lost. 

They locate a habitable world, which Ellie names Charity, and the passengers become colonists. Meanwhile, the crew continues to try to figure out where they are and whether they can return to Earth. Unfortunately, it turns out the planet is already inhabited by hostile centaur-like sapients. Max and Ellie are captured, but Ellie&#x27;s pet is able to guide Sam to them. They escape, though Sam is killed covering their retreat. Upon his return, Max is informed that the captain has died. Simes tried to take command illegally and was killed by Sam, leaving Max as the only remaining astrogator. To make matters worse, Simes hid or destroyed the astrogation manuals. 

Vastly outnumbered by the natives, the humans are forced to attempt a perilous return to known space by reversing the erroneous transition. Max must pilot the ship; he must also supply the missing astrogation tables from memory. To add to his burdens, the remaining officers inform Max that he must take command, as the captain must be an astrogator. The pressure is immense, but Max succeeds and the ship returns to known space.

Max pays heavy fines, but is allowed to join the Astrogators&#x27; Guild, and is assigned as an assistant astrogator aboard another starship. However, he loses any chance for a romantic relationship with Eldreth; she returns home to marry her boyfriend. Max accepts this with mixed feelings, but looks forward to his new career.

==Reception==
Groff Conklin in 1954 found the novel to be &quot;a richly textured and thoroughly mature tale&quot; and the best of the seven Heinlein juveniles available. Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas praised it for its &quot;good character-development, rousing adventure-telling, and brilliant creation of several forms of extra-Terrestrial life&quot;. P. Schuyler Miller ranked it &quot;close to the best in mainline science fiction&quot;.

&quot;New York Times&quot; reviewer Villiers Gerson declared &quot;Starman Jones&quot; to be &quot;superior science-fiction. ... carefully plotted, lucidly and beautifully written&quot;.

Surveying Heinlein&#x27;s juvenile novels, Jack Williamson described &quot;Starman Jones&quot; as &quot;a classic example of the &quot;bildungsroman&quot; pattern&quot; and noted that &quot;with its bold symbolism, the book makes a universal appeal&quot;. Despite &quot;coincidence and occasional melodrama&quot; in the plotting, Williamson concluded that &quot;the novel is a fine juvenile [which] reflects hopes and fears we all have known&quot;.

Damon Knight wrote that in &quot;Starman Jones&quot;
==Adaptation to other media==

Although Heinlein rarely permitted dramatic adaptations of his work, he authorized Douglas L. Lieberman to stage &quot;Starman Jones&quot; at the Goodman Children&#x27;s Theater in Chicago. Written and directed by Lieberman, the 2-act play ran for 25 performances in 1972. The title role was played by Charles Fleischer, who later performed the voice of Roger Rabbit in Hollywood. In 1974, Avon Books published the script as part of the anthology &quot;Contemporary Children&#x27;s Theater&quot; edited by Betty Jean Lifton.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="22" end="37" title="science-fiction" label="science-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="47" end="65" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q845617" start="117" end="145" title="Charles Scribner&amp;#x27;s Sons" label="Charles Scribner&amp;#x27;s Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385973" start="180" end="198" title="Heinlein juveniles" label="Heinlein juveniles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="266" end="281" title="Ozark Mountains" label="Ozark Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q254651" start="404" end="415" title="astrogation" label="astrogation"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="469" end="474" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q386001" start="1522" end="1536" title="eidetic memory" label="eidetic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q369931" start="1925" end="1939" title="master-at-arms" label="master-at-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176733" start="2490" end="2499" title="Nu Pegasi" label="Nu Pegasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="3157" end="3164" title="centaur" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610108" start="4332" end="4345" title="Groff Conklin" label="Groff Conklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q246303" start="4489" end="4504" title="Anthony Boucher" label="Anthony Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4509" end="4527" title="J. Francis McComas" label="J. Francis McComas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4681" end="4699" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="4776" end="4790" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q316788" start="5001" end="5016" title="Jack Williamson" label="Jack Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q223945" start="5093" end="5106" title="bildungsroman" label="bildungsroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q534599" start="5408" end="5420" title="Damon Knight" label="Damon Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q658690" start="5794" end="5811" title="Charles Fleischer" label="Charles Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265878" start="5846" end="5858" title="Roger Rabbit" label="Roger Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874472" start="5882" end="5892" title="Avon Books" label="Avon Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q59627732" start="5998" end="6015" title="Betty Jean Lifton" label="Betty Jean Lifton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45922" wikidata="Q729523" url="?curid=45922" title="Geometric distribution">
<text>&lt;/math&gt;
| kurtosis = formula_1
| entropy = formula_2
| fisher = formula_3
| mgf = formula_4for formula_5
| char = formula_6
| pgf = formula_7
| parameters2 = formula_8 success probability (real)
| support2 = &quot;k&quot; failures where formula_9
| pdf2 = formula_10
| cdf2 = formula_11 for formula_12,formula_13 for formula_14
| mean2 = formula_15
| median2 = formula_16 
(not unique if formula_17 is an integer)
| mode2 = formula_13
| variance2 = formula_19
| skewness2 = formula_20
| kurtosis2 = formula_1
| entropy2 = formula_2
| fisher2 = formula_3
| mgf2 = formula_24for formula_5
| char2 = formula_26
| pgf2 = formula_27
In probability theory and statistics, the geometric distribution is either one of two discrete probability distributions:

* The probability distribution of the number formula_28 of Bernoulli trials needed to get one success, supported on formula_29;
* The probability distribution of the number formula_30 of failures before the first success, supported on formula_31.

These two different geometric distributions should not be confused with each other. Often, the name &quot;shifted&quot; geometric distribution is adopted for the former one (distribution of formula_28); however, to avoid ambiguity, it is considered wise to indicate which is intended, by mentioning the support explicitly.

The geometric distribution gives the probability that the first occurrence of success requires formula_33 independent trials, each with success probability formula_34. If the probability of success on each trial is formula_34, then the probability that the formula_33-th trial is the first success is

:formula_37

for formula_38

The above form of the geometric distribution is used for modeling the number of trials up to and including the first success. By contrast, the following form of the geometric distribution is used for modeling the number of failures until the first success:

:formula_39

for formula_40

The geometric distribution gets its name because its probabilities follow a geometric sequence. It is sometimes called the Furry distribution after Wendell H. Furry.

==Definition==

The geometric distribution is the discrete probability distribution that describes when the first success in an infinite sequence of independent and identically distributed Bernoulli trials occurs. Its probability mass function depends on its parameterization and support. When supported on formula_41, the probability mass function isformula_42where formula_43 is the number of trials and formula_34 is the probability of success in each trial.

The support may also be formula_45, defining formula_30. This alters the probability mass function intoformula_47where formula_48 is the number of failures before the first success.

An alternative parameterization of the distribution gives the probability mass functionformula_49where formula_50 and formula_51.

An example of a geometric distribution arises from rolling a six-sided die until a &quot;1&quot; appears. Each roll is independent with a formula_52 chance of success. The number of rolls needed follows a geometric distribution with formula_53.

==Properties ==

=== Memorylessness ===

The geometric distribution is the only memoryless discrete probability distribution. It is the discrete version of the same property found in the exponential distribution. The property asserts that the number of previously failed trials does not affect the number of future trials needed for a success. 

Because there are two definitions of the geometric distribution, there are also two definitions of memorylessness for discrete random variables. Expressed in terms of conditional probability, the two definitions areformula_54

andformula_55

where formula_56 and formula_57 are natural numbers, formula_28 is a geometrically distributed random variable defined over formula_41, and formula_60 is a geometrically distributed random variable defined over formula_45. Note that these definitions are not equivalent for discrete random variables; formula_60 does not satisfy the first equation and formula_28 does not satisfy the second. 

===Moments and cumulants===
The expected value and variance of a geometrically distributed random variable formula_28 defined over formula_41 isformula_66 With a geometrically distributed random variable formula_60 defined over formula_45, the expected value changes intoformula_69while the variance stays the same.

For example, when rolling a six-sided die until landing on a &quot;1&quot;, the average number of rolls needed is formula_70 and the average number of failures is formula_71.

The moment generating function of the geometric distribution when defined over formula_72 and formula_45 respectively isformula_74The moments for the number of failures before the first success are given by
: formula_75

where formula_76 is the polylogarithm function.

The cumulant generating function of the geometric distribution defined over formula_45 is formula_78The cumulants formula_79 satisfy the recursionformula_80where formula_81, when defined over formula_45.

==== Proof of expected value ====
Consider the expected value formula_83 of &quot;X&quot; as above, i.e. the average number of trials until a success. 
On the first trial, we either succeed with probability formula_34, or we fail with probability formula_85. 
If we fail the remaining mean number of trials until a success is identical to the original mean.
This follows from the fact that all trials are independent.
From this we get the formula:

: formula_86

which, if solved for formula_87, gives:

: formula_88

The expected number of failures formula_60 can be found from the linearity of expectation, formula_90. It can also be shown in the following way:

: formula_91

The interchange of summation and differentiation is justified by the fact that convergent power series converge uniformly on compact subsets of the set of points where they converge.

=== Summary statistics ===
The mean of the geometric distribution is its expected value which is, as previously discussed in § Moments and cumulants, formula_92 or formula_15 when defined over formula_41 or formula_45 respectively.

The median of the geometric distribution is formula_96when defined over formula_41 and formula_98 when defined over formula_45.

The mode of the geometric distribution is the first value in the support set. This is 1 when defined over formula_41 and 0 when defined over formula_45.

The skewness of the geometric distribution is formula_20.

The kurtosis of the geometric distribution is formula_103. The excess kurtosis of a distribution is the difference between its kurtosis and the kurtosis of a normal distribution, formula_104. Therefore, the excess kurtosis of the geometric distribution is formula_105. Since formula_106, the excess kurtosis is always positive so the distribution is leptokurtic. In other words, the tail of a geometric distribution decays faster than a Gaussian.

==Entropy and Fisher&#x27;s Information==

===Entropy (Geometric Distribution, Failures Before Success)===
Entropy is a measure of uncertainty in a probability distribution. For the geometric distribution that models the number of failures before the first success, the probability mass function is:

:formula_107

The entropy formula_108 for this distribution is defined as:

:formula_109

The entropy increases as the probability formula_34 decreases, reflecting greater uncertainty as success becomes rarer.

===Fisher&#x27;s Information (Geometric Distribution, Failures Before Success)===
Fisher information measures the amount of information that an observable random variable formula_28 carries about an unknown parameter formula_34. For the geometric distribution (failures before the first success), the Fisher information with respect to formula_34 is given by:

:formula_114

Proof:

*The Likelihood Function for a geometric random variable formula_28 is:

:formula_116

*The Log-Likelihood Function is:

:formula_117

*The Score Function (first derivative of the log-likelihood w.r.t. formula_34) is:

:formula_119

*The second derivative of the log-likelihood function is:

:formula_120

*Fisher Information is calculated as the negative expected value of the second derivative:

:formula_121

Fisher information increases as formula_34 decreases, indicating that rarer successes provide more information about the parameter formula_34.

===Entropy (Geometric Distribution, Trials Until Success)===
For the geometric distribution modeling the number of trials until the first success, the probability mass function is:

:formula_124

The entropy formula_108 for this distribution is given by:

:formula_126

Entropy increases as formula_34 decreases, reflecting greater uncertainty as the probability of success in each trial becomes smaller.

===Fisher&#x27;s Information (Geometric Distribution, Trials Until Success)===
Fisher information for the geometric distribution modeling the number of trials until the first success is given by:

:formula_114

Proof:

*The Likelihood Function for a geometric random variable formula_28 is:

:formula_130

*The Log-Likelihood Function is:

:formula_131

*The Score Function (first derivative of the log-likelihood w.r.t. formula_34) is:

:formula_133

*The second derivative of the log-likelihood function is:

:formula_134

*Fisher Information is calculated as the negative expected value of the second derivative:

:formula_121

=== General properties ===

* The probability generating functions of geometric random variables formula_136 and formula_137 defined over formula_72 and formula_139 are, respectively,
::formula_140

* The characteristic function formula_141 is equal to formula_142 so the geometric distribution&#x27;s characteristic function, when defined over formula_72 and formula_139 respectively, isformula_145
* The entropy of a geometric distribution with parameter formula_34 isformula_147
* Given a mean, the geometric distribution is the maximum entropy probability distribution of all discrete probability distributions. The corresponding continuous distribution is the exponential distribution.
* The geometric distribution defined on formula_139 is infinitely divisible, that is, for any positive integer formula_57, there exist formula_57 independent identically distributed random variables whose sum is also geometrically distributed. This is because the negative binomial distribution can be derived from a Poisson-stopped sum of logarithmic random variables.
* The decimal digits of the geometrically distributed random variable &quot;Y&quot; are a sequence of independent (and &quot;not&quot; identically distributed) random variables. For example, the hundreds digit &quot;D&quot; has this probability distribution:

::formula_151
:where &quot;q&quot; = 1 − &quot;p&quot;, and similarly for the other digits, and, more generally, similarly for numeral systems with other bases than 10. When the base is 2, this shows that a geometrically distributed random variable can be written as a sum of independent random variables whose probability distributions are indecomposable.

* Golomb coding is the optimal prefix code for the geometric discrete distribution.

==Related distributions==

* The sum of formula_152 independent geometric random variables with parameter formula_34 is a negative binomial random variable with parameters formula_152 and formula_34. The geometric distribution is a special case of the negative binomial distribution, with formula_156.

*The geometric distribution is a special case of discrete compound Poisson distribution.
* The minimum of formula_57 geometric random variables with parameters formula_158 is also geometrically distributed with parameter formula_159.

* Suppose 0 &lt; &quot;r&quot; &lt; 1, and for &quot;k&quot; = 1, 2, 3, ... the random variable &quot;X&quot;&quot;k&quot; has a Poisson distribution with expected value &quot;r&quot;&quot;k&quot;/&quot;k&quot;. Then

::formula_160

:has a geometric distribution taking values in formula_45, with expected value &quot;r&quot;/(1 − &quot;r&quot;).

* The exponential distribution is the continuous analogue of the geometric distribution. Applying the floor function to the exponential distribution with parameter formula_162 creates a geometric distribution with parameter formula_163 defined over formula_45. This can be used to generate geometrically distributed random numbers as detailed in § Random variate generation.

* If &quot;p&quot; = 1/&quot;n&quot; and &quot;X&quot; is geometrically distributed with parameter &quot;p&quot;, then the distribution of &quot;X&quot;/&quot;n&quot; approaches an exponential distribution with expected value 1 as &quot;n&quot; → ∞, sinceformula_165More generally, if &quot;p&quot; = &quot;λ&quot;/&quot;n&quot;, where &quot;λ&quot; is a parameter, then as &quot;n&quot;→ ∞ the distribution of &quot;X&quot;/&quot;n&quot; approaches an exponential distribution with rate &quot;λ&quot;:formula_166 therefore the distribution function of &quot;X&quot;/&quot;n&quot; converges to formula_167, which is that of an exponential random variable.
* The index of dispersion of the geometric distribution is formula_92 and its coefficient of variation is formula_169. The distribution is overdispersed.

==Statistical inference==
The true parameter formula_34 of an unknown geometric distribution can be inferred through estimators and conjugate distributions.

=== Method of moments ===
Provided they exist, the first formula_171 moments of a probability distribution can be estimated from a sample formula_172 using the formulaformula_173where formula_174 is the formula_175th sample moment and formula_176. Estimating formula_83 with formula_178 gives the sample mean, denoted formula_179. Substituting this estimate in the formula for the expected value of a geometric distribution and solving for formula_180 gives the estimators formula_181 and formula_182 when supported on formula_41 and formula_45 respectively. These estimators are biased since formula_185 as a result of Jensen&#x27;s inequality. 

=== Maximum likelihood estimation ===
The maximum likelihood estimator of formula_34 is the value that maximizes the likelihood function given a sample. By finding the zero of the derivative of the log-likelihood function when the distribution is defined over formula_41, the maximum likelihood estimator can be found to be formula_188, where formula_189 is the sample mean. If the domain is formula_45, then the estimator shifts to formula_191. As previously discussed in § Method of moments, these estimators are biased.

Regardless of the domain, the bias is equal to

: formula_192

which yields the bias-corrected maximum likelihood estimator,

: formula_193

=== Bayesian inference ===
In Bayesian inference, the parameter formula_34 is a random variable from a prior distribution with a posterior distribution calculated using Bayes&#x27; theorem after observing samples. If a beta distribution is chosen as the prior distribution, then the posterior will also be a beta distribution and it is called the conjugate distribution. In particular, if a formula_195 prior is selected, then the posterior, after observing samples formula_196, isformula_197Alternatively, if the samples are in formula_45, the posterior distribution isformula_199Since the expected value of a formula_195 distribution is formula_201, as formula_202 and formula_203 approach zero, the posterior mean approaches its maximum likelihood estimate.

== Random variate generation ==

The geometric distribution can be generated experimentally from i.i.d. standard uniform random variables by finding the first such random variable to be less than or equal to formula_34. However, the number of random variables needed is also geometrically distributed and the algorithm slows as formula_34 decreases.

Random generation can be done in constant time by truncating exponential random numbers. An exponential random variable formula_206 can become geometrically distributed with parameter formula_34 through formula_208. In turn, formula_206 can be generated from a standard uniform random variable formula_210 altering the formula into formula_211.

== Applications ==
The geometric distribution is used in many disciplines. In queueing theory, the M/M/1 queue has a steady state following a geometric distribution. In stochastic processes, the Yule Furry process is geometrically distributed. The distribution also arises when modeling the lifetime of a device in discrete contexts. It has also been used to fit data including modeling patients spreading COVID-19.

== See also ==

* Hypergeometric distribution
* Coupon collector&#x27;s problem
* Compound Poisson distribution
* Negative binomial distribution

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="195" end="199" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="637" end="655" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="660" end="670" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q729523" start="676" end="698" title="Geometric distribution" label="geometric distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="720" end="753" title="discrete probability distribution" label="discrete probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077800" start="816" end="831" title="Bernoulli trial" label="Bernoulli trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q173523" start="2023" end="2041" title="geometric sequence" label="geometric sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982432" start="2095" end="2111" title="Wendell H. Furry" label="Wendell H. Furry"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="2164" end="2197" title="discrete probability distribution" label="discrete probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="2263" end="2302" title="Independent and identically distributed random variables" label="independent and identically distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077800" start="2303" end="2319" title="Bernoulli trial" label="Bernoulli trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q869887" start="2332" end="2357" title="probability mass function" label="probability mass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136376" start="2394" end="2401" title="Support (mathematics)" label="support"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="2962" end="2965" title="dice" label="die"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="3010" end="3021" title="Independence (probability theory)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="3324" end="3348" title="exponential distribution" label="exponential distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q327069" start="3650" end="3673" title="conditional probability" label="conditional probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="3761" end="3776" title="Natural number" label="natural numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="4151" end="4165" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="4170" end="4178" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="4210" end="4225" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q535587" start="4616" end="4642" title="Moment-generating function" label="moment generating function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238449" start="4857" end="4879" title="Polylogarithm" label="polylogarithm function"/>
<link wikidata="Q746007" start="4886" end="4914" title="cumulant generating function" label="cumulant generating function"/>
<link wikidata="Q746007" start="4986" end="4994" title="cumulant" label="cumulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="5670" end="5694" title="linearity of expectation" label="linearity of expectation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="5856" end="5868" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411887" start="5869" end="5887" title="uniform convergence" label="converge uniformly"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="5891" end="5898" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="5981" end="5985" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6075" end="6098" title="Geometric distribution#Moments and cumulants" label="§ Moments and cumulants"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="6187" end="6193" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q188224" start="6316" end="6320" title="Mode (statistics)" label="mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q330828" start="6470" end="6478" title="skewness" label="skewness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447221" start="6529" end="6537" title="Kurtosis risk" label="kurtosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q287251" start="6588" end="6603" title="excess kurtosis" label="excess kurtosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="6683" end="6702" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q287251" start="6875" end="6886" title="leptokurtic" label="leptokurtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q372071" start="9495" end="9526" title="probability-generating function" label="probability generating function"/>
<link wikidata="Q822139" start="9666" end="9689" title="Characteristic function (probability theory)" label="characteristic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q204570" start="9867" end="9874" title="Entropy (information theory)" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="9953" end="9957" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795892" start="9993" end="10033" title="maximum entropy probability distribution" label="maximum entropy probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="10126" end="10150" title="exponential distribution" label="exponential distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754066" start="10207" end="10227" title="infinite divisibility (probability)" label="infinitely divisible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867999" start="10492" end="10520" title="Logarithmic distribution" label="logarithmic random variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="10624" end="10635" title="statistical independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q122653" start="10909" end="10923" title="numeral system" label="numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015779" start="11123" end="11137" title="indecomposable distribution" label="indecomposable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638" start="11142" end="11155" title="Golomb coding" label="Golomb coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278039" start="11171" end="11182" title="prefix code" label="prefix code"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="11277" end="11288" title="Statistical Independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q743364" start="11347" end="11364" title="Negative binomial distribution" label="negative binomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711786" start="11586" end="11615" title="compound Poisson distribution" label="compound Poisson distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q205692" start="11892" end="11912" title="Poisson distribution" label="Poisson distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="12117" end="12141" title="exponential distribution" label="exponential distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="12213" end="12218" title="Floor and ceiling functions" label="floor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12457" end="12484" title="Geometric distribution#Random variate generation" label="§ Random variate generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="12668" end="12692" title="exponential distribution" label="exponential distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158178" start="13149" end="13168" title="index of dispersion" label="index of dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q623738" start="13221" end="13245" title="coefficient of variation" label="coefficient of variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113620" start="13282" end="13295" title="Overdispersion" label="overdispersed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348165" start="13753" end="13764" title="sample mean" label="sample mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264527" start="14036" end="14042" title="Biased estimator" label="biased"/>
<link wikidata="Q518131" start="14076" end="14100" title="Jensen&amp;#x27;s inequality" label="Jensen&amp;#x27;s inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045555" start="14146" end="14174" title="maximum likelihood estimator" label="maximum likelihood estimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q45284" start="14221" end="14240" title="likelihood function" label="likelihood function"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="14272" end="14276" title="Zero of a function" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="14284" end="14294" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q45284" start="14302" end="14325" title="Log-likelihood" label="log-likelihood function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14577" end="14596" title="Geometric distribution#Method of moments" label="§ Method of moments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14708" end="14751" title="Maximum likelihood estimation#Higher-order properties" label="bias-corrected maximum likelihood estimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="14799" end="14817" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="14872" end="14890" title="prior distribution" label="prior distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q278079" start="14898" end="14920" title="posterior distribution" label="posterior distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q182505" start="14938" end="14957" title="Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q756254" start="14988" end="15005" title="beta distribution" label="beta distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711784" start="15116" end="15138" title="conjugate distribution" label="conjugate distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="15628" end="15634" title="i.i.d." label="i.i.d."/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="15635" end="15651" title="Standard uniform distribution" label="standard uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="15915" end="15928" title="constant time" label="constant time"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="15943" end="15969" title="exponential random numbers" label="exponential random numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q847526" start="16306" end="16321" title="queueing theory" label="queueing theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736426" start="16327" end="16338" title="M/M/1 queue" label="M/M/1 queue"/>
<link wikidata="Q176737" start="16397" end="16417" title="Stochastic process" label="stochastic processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="16634" end="16642" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q730600" start="16663" end="16690" title="Hypergeometric distribution" label="Hypergeometric distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148012" start="16693" end="16724" title="Coupon collector&amp;#x27;s problem" label="Coupon collector&amp;#x27;s problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711786" start="16727" end="16756" title="Compound Poisson distribution" label="Compound Poisson distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q743364" start="16759" end="16789" title="Negative binomial distribution" label="Negative binomial distribution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45927" wikidata="Q3393084" url="?curid=45927" title="Podkayne of Mars">
<text>Podkayne of Mars is a science-fiction novel by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, originally serialised in &quot;Worlds of If&quot; (November 1962, January, March 1963), and published in hardcover in 1963. The novel features a teenage girl named Podkayne &quot;Poddy&quot; Fries and her younger brother, Clark, who leave their home on Mars to take a trip on a spaceliner to visit Earth, accompanied by their great-uncle.

==Plot summary==
The book is a first-person narrative consisting of the diary of Podkayne Fries, a 15-year-old (Earth years) girl living on Mars with her parents and 11-year-old brother Clark. Due to the unscheduled &quot;uncorking&quot; (birth) of their three test-tube babies, Podkayne&#x27;s parents cancel a much-anticipated trip to Earth. Disappointed, Podkayne confesses her misery to her uncle, Senator Tom Fries, an elder statesman of the Mars government. Tom arranges for Clark and Podkayne, escorted by himself, to get upgraded passage on a luxury liner to Earth.

During boarding, Clark is asked by a customs official &quot;Anything to declare?&quot; and facetiously answers &quot;Two kilos of happy dust!&quot; As he anticipated, his seemingly flippant remark gets him taken away and searched. This ploy serves to divert attention away from Podkayne&#x27;s luggage, where he has hidden a package he was paid to smuggle aboard. Podkayne suspects the reason behind her brother&#x27;s behavior, but cannot prove it. Clark was told it was a present for the captain, but is far too cynical to be taken in. He later carefully opens the package and finds a nuclear bomb, which he disarms and keeps.

Much of the description of the voyage is based on Heinlein&#x27;s own experiences as a naval officer and world traveler. Clark&#x27;s ploy is taken from a real-life incident, related in Heinlein&#x27;s &quot;Tramp Royale&quot;, in which his wife answers the same question with &quot;heroin&quot; substituted for the fictitious, but equally illegal, happy dust.

Once aboard, they are befriended by &quot;Girdie&quot;, an attractive, capable, experienced woman left impoverished by her late husband. Much to Podkayne&#x27;s surprise, the normally very self-centered Clark contracts a severe case of puppy love.

Podkayne overhears fellow passengers calling the Frieses &quot;criminals&quot; (Mars had been a convict colony) and &quot;savages&quot; (the Frieses have Māori ancestry).

The liner makes a stop at Venus, which is depicted as a latter-day Las Vegas gone ultra-capitalistic. The planet is controlled by a single corporation; the dream of most of the frantically enterprising residents is to earn enough to buy a single share in it, which guarantees lifelong financial security. Just about anything goes, as long as one can pay for it. The penalty for murder is a fine paid to the corporation for the victim&#x27;s estimated value plus his projected future earnings. On a less serious level, Heinlein anticipated, by over forty years, television ads in taxicabs (in the book, holographic), which have since been implemented in taxicabs in major cities worldwide.

The Frieses are given VIP treatment by the Venus Corporation and Podkayne is escorted by Dexter Cunha, the Chairman&#x27;s dashing son. She begins to realize that Tom is much more than just her pinochle-playing uncle. When Clark vanishes and even the corporation is unable to find him, Tom reveals that he is on a secret diplomatic mission, as the accredited representative of the Martian government to a vital conference on Luna (the Moon). The children have been his protective coloration—Tom appearing to be a doddering uncle escorting two young people on a tour of the solar system. Clark has been kidnapped by members of a political faction opposed to Tom.

Podkayne makes an ill-judged attempt to rescue Clark by herself and falls into the kidnappers&#x27; clutches as well—only to find her uncle caught too. The captors&#x27; scheme is to use the children to blackmail the uncle into doing their bidding at the Luna conference. They return Uncle Tom to Venusberg after showing him that they have the children. Clark realizes that once Uncle Tom is released, no matter what happens, their kidnappers will have little reason to keep their prisoners alive. He is prepared, however: he engineers an escape, kills his captors, but forgets to disable the nuclear bomb he had intended to go off only if they failed in their escape.

===Two versions of the ending===
In Heinlein&#x27;s original ending, Podkayne is killed. This did not please his publisher, who demanded and got a rewrite over the author&#x27;s bitter objections. In a letter to Lurton Blassingame, his literary agent, Heinlein complained that it would be like &quot;revising Romeo and Juliet to let the young lovers live happily ever after.&quot; He also declared that changing the end &quot;isn&#x27;t real life, because in real life, not everything ends happily.&quot;

In the original ending, after they escape from the kidnappers to a safe distance, Podkayne remembers that a semi-intelligent Venerian &quot;fairy&quot; baby has been left behind, and returns to rescue it. When the bomb that Clark leaves for the kidnappers blows up, Podkayne is killed, shielding the young fairy with her body. Clark takes over the narrative for the last chapter. The story ends with a hint of hope for him, as he admits his responsibility for what happened to Podkayne—that he &quot;fubbed it, mighty dry&quot;—then shows some human feeling by regretting his inability to cry and describes his plan to raise the fairy himself.

In the revised version, Podkayne is badly injured by the bomb, but not fatally. Uncle Tom, in a phone conversation with Podkayne&#x27;s father, blames the parents—especially the mother—for neglecting the upbringing of the children. Uncle Tom feels that Clark is dangerous and maladjusted, and attributes this to the mother giving priority to her career. Clark still takes over as the narrator, and, again, regrets that Podkayne was hurt and plans to take care of the fairy, this time because Podkayne will want to see it when she is better. This is the ending that appeared when the book was published in 1963.

The 1993 Baen edition included both endings (which differ only on the last page) and featured a &quot;pick the ending&quot; contest, in which readers were asked to submit essays on which ending they preferred. The 1995 edition included both endings, Jim Baen&#x27;s own postlude to the story, and twenty-seven of the essays. The ending in which Podkayne dies was declared the winner. Among the reasons readers favored this ending were that they felt Heinlein should have been free to create his own story, and they believed the changed ending turned a tragedy into a mere adventure, and not a very well constructed one at that. This ending has appeared in all subsequent editions.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;Podkayne of Mars&quot; as serialized in &quot;Worlds of If&quot;, parts one, two, and three on the Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="22" end="37" title="science-fiction" label="science-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="63" end="81" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382305" start="114" end="126" title="Worlds of If" label="Worlds of If"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="336" end="340" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="361" end="371" title="spacecraft" label="spaceliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="381" end="386" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="684" end="700" title="In vitro fertilisation" label="test-tube babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="1715" end="1728" title="naval officer" label="naval officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833176" start="1836" end="1848" title="Tramp Royale" label="Tramp Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226087" start="2226" end="2236" title="puppy love" label="puppy love"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="2393" end="2398" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="2437" end="2442" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="2478" end="2487" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="3013" end="3024" title="Holography" label="holographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="3422" end="3432" title="diplomacy" label="diplomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6704976" start="4646" end="4664" title="Lurton Blassingame" label="Lurton Blassingame"/>
<link wikidata="Q278919" start="4670" end="4684" title="literary agent" label="literary agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510491" start="6447" end="6455" title="Jim Baen" label="Jim Baen"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="7023" end="7039" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45929" wikidata="Q578623" url="?curid=45929" title="Dark Angel (American TV series)">
<text>Dark Angel is an American science fiction action drama television series that premiered on the Fox network on October 3, 2000. Created by James Cameron and Charles H. Eglee, it stars Jessica Alba in her breakthrough role. Set in 2019, the series chronicles the life of Max Guevara (Alba), a runaway genetically enhanced supersoldier who escapes from a covert military facility as a child. In a dystopian near-future Seattle, she tries to lead a normal life while eluding capture by government agents and searching for her brothers and sisters scattered in the aftermath of their escape. &quot;Dark Angel&quot; was the only show produced by the company Cameron/Eglee Productions, and was filmed in Vancouver at Lions Gate Studios.

The high-budget pilot episode marked Cameron&#x27;s television debut and was heavily promoted by Fox, reaching 17.4 million viewers. The first season, which was shown on Tuesday nights in the United States, received mainly positive reviews and won several awards, including the People&#x27;s Choice Award for Favorite New TV Drama, and averaged 10.4 million viewers per episode. Alba&#x27;s portrayal of Max also received mostly positive reviews and several awards. For the second season, the show was moved to the less desirable air time of Friday night and received some criticism for new plot elements. It suffered from a drop in ratings, averaging 6 million viewers per episode, and was canceled.

A series of novels continued the storyline, and a video game adaptation was also released. &quot;Dark Angel&quot; is considered to have gothic and female empowerment themes; Max followed a long line of strong female characters in Cameron&#x27;s work, including Sarah Connor and Ellen Ripley. Cameron was also influenced by the manga &quot;Battle Angel Alita&quot;. &quot;Dark Angel&quot; is considered to be part of a wave of shows in the late 1990s and early 2000s that feature strong female characters, alongside &quot;&quot;, &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot;, &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot;, and &quot;Alias&quot;.

==Plot==

===Season one===
In February 2009, a genetically enhanced nine-year-old female supersoldier designated as X5-452 (Geneva Locke) escapes along with eleven others from a secret U.S. government institution code-named Manticore, where they were born, raised, and trained to be soldiers and assassins. On June 1, 2009, months after the twelve X5s&#x27; escape, terrorists detonate an electromagnetic pulse weapon in the atmosphere over the U.S., which destroys the vast majority of computer and communication systems, throwing the country into chaos.

Ten years later in 2019, the now 19-year-old X5-452 (Jessica Alba), who calls herself Max Guevara, struggles to search for her Manticore brothers and sisters. In the recovering United States, which is now barely more than a developing country, she tries to live a relatively normal life and evade capture by Manticore, which wishes to recover its lost asset. Logan Cale (Michael Weatherly), an underground cyber-journalist with the alias Eyes Only, attempts to recruit her to help fight corruption in the post-Pulse world. She initially refuses but accepts after Cale is rendered a paraplegic while attempting the assignment for which he was attempting to recruit her. A romantic interest buds between the two. While assisting Cale, Max also makes a living as a bicycle messenger at Jam Pony, a courier company, along with her friends Original Cindy (Valarie Rae Miller), Herbal Thought (Alimi Ballard), and Sketchy (Richard Gunn). Other X5s are periodically introduced, most significantly the unit leader Zack (William Gregory Lee). The Manticore hunt for the escaped X5s is led by Colonel Donald Lydecker (John Savage). Near the end of the season, Lydecker is betrayed by his superior, the even more ruthless Elizabeth Renfro (Nana Visitor), and he defects from Manticore. He aids Max and Zack in an assault on Manticore headquarters. Max is badly wounded and captured. Zack, who has also been captured, commits suicide to provide Max with his heart, as she needs an X5 heart transplant to survive.

===Season two===
Cale exposes Manticore to the world. Renfro decides to burn the facility to cover up the evidence and is killed in the process. Aided by Joshua (Kevin Durand), a transgenic with conspicuous canine DNA, Max escapes the facility and frees the other transgenics, including Alec (Jensen Ackles), a fellow X5 and clone of Max&#x27;s brother Ben (also Jensen Ackles) whom she was forced to kill in the first season, who later joins Jam Pony. When Max is reunited with Cale he immediately becomes ill and almost dies. Max discovers that Manticore has infected her with a virus specifically designed to kill Cale, and the two must avoid all physical contact to keep him alive. Max learns that Joshua was the first transgenic created by Sandeman, Manticore&#x27;s founder. Over the course of the season, it is revealed that a millennia-old breeding cult has bred their own advanced humans who rival the Manticore-produced transgenics in their abilities. Ames White (Martin Cummins), a government agent tasked with eliminating the freed transgenics, is revealed to be a member of the cult. When a strange message written in Max&#x27;s genetic code makes an appearance on her skin it is revealed that Sandeman is a renegade from the breeding cult and Ames White is his son. White is still loyal to the cult and hates his father&#x27;s transgenic creations with a passion. Believing that the special sequences Sandeman buried in Max&#x27;s DNA are a threat to the breeding cult&#x27;s plans for the extinction of normal humanity, they attempt to kill her, but she escapes to Terminal City, an abandoned part of Seattle where hundreds of outcast transgenics have been hiding. When the police begin to surround Terminal City Max convinces the other transgenics to stand their ground rather than run. The series ends with the military surrounding Terminal City as the residents raise their newly designed flag from one of the buildings, and wait for a possible invasion.

==Cast and characters==


The first season introduced Jessica Alba as the main character Max Guevara (X5-452), a genetically enhanced transgenic super-soldier who escaped from a government facility named Manticore. She works as a bike messenger for the courier company Jam Pony during the day and as a cat burglar at night. Michael Weatherly played Logan Cale, the show&#x27;s second most prominent character. Cale is a wealthy cyber-journalist and vigilante who operates under the alias Eyes Only. He recruits Max to assist with his campaign against corruption and crime in return for helping her find information on her fellow Manticore escapees. Main roles were given to several of the couriers at Jam Pony, including Valarie Rae Miller as Cynthia &quot;Original Cindy&quot; McEachin, Richard Gunn as Calvin &quot;Sketchy&quot; Theodore, and Alimi Ballard as Herbal Thought. J. C. MacKenzie played Reagan &quot;Normal&quot; Ronald, the company&#x27;s boss, and Jennifer Blanc played Kendra Maibaum, Max&#x27;s first roommate, and John Savage played the main antagonist, Col. Donald Lydecker, who is trying to recapture Max and the other Manticore escapees.

The Lydecker character is written out of the series early in the second season, and Herbal Thought and Kendra Maibaum do not appear at all. Season two introduces Kevin Durand as Joshua, an experimental creature from Manticore who has distinct canine facial features. It also brings back Jensen Ackles as Alec McDowell (X5-494), who is an identical twin of Ben (X5-493), one of the original 12 escapees from Manticore, and introduces Ashley Scott as Asha Barlow, a resistance fighter who has a romantic interest in Cale. Martin Cummins portrayed the season&#x27;s main antagonist Ames White, a National Security Agency agent tasked with destroying the Manticore escapees.

==Production==

===Background===
Following his success with the film &quot;Titanic&quot;, director James Cameron teamed up with Charles H. Eglee with whom he had previously worked on projects including &quot;Piranha II: The Spawning&quot;. The two formed a production company, Cameron/Eglee Productions, and began working on ideas for a television series. They considered several options, including a family drama, before deciding on the idea of &quot;Dark Angel&quot;. Cameron said they began with the idea that Max would be a genetic construct who &quot;looked normal on the outside but was different on the cellular, genetic level. We explore what that could mean.&quot; Cameron was influenced by the manga &quot;Battle Angel Alita&quot;, which he was originally intending to after completing &quot;Dark Angel&quot;.

&quot;Dark Angel&quot; would be the first and only work by Cameron/Eglee Productions. Max followed a long line of strong female characters in Cameron&#x27;s work, including Sarah Connor and Ellen Ripley. Cameron said &quot;it&#x27;s a win/win situation&quot; as &quot;women respond to characters who appear strong and capable&quot; and young male audiences &quot;want to see girls kick ass&quot;. Later they decided to set the series in a post-social collapse world, saying that the hysteria surrounding Y2K served as inspiration; in the series, an electromagnetic pulse previously destroyed every computer in the United States. Working titles for the series included &quot;Experimental Girl&quot; and &quot;Maximum Girl&quot;. The project marked Cameron&#x27;s television debut; he worked mainly as a writer and executive producer for the series.

===Casting and filming===
More than a thousand young actresses were considered for the part of Max. Cameron started reviewing audition tapes when the field had been narrowed down to twenty or thirty applicants. He was initially not impressed with Alba&#x27;s audition tape, saying &quot;she had her head down, she was reading out of the script ... she didn&#x27;t present herself all that well. But there was something about the way she read the script that copped an attitude that I liked.&quot; Cameron continually reviewed the audition tapes but kept coming back to Alba&#x27;s, eventually deciding that he needed to meet her. Alba was hired for the role before the script was written. Eglee said: &quot;We had the benefit of being able to write a script kind of backward, we were writing for this actress, with her cadences and her rhythms and her sensibilities and her attitude and her slang.&quot; To train for the role, Alba spent a year doing martial arts and gymnastics and riding motorcycles.

The two-hour premiere episode cost up to $10 million to produce, and Cameron reportedly &quot;brought the pilot in on time and on budget&quot;. Subsequent episodes had a considerably smaller budget. Fox spent heavily on the promotional campaign for the premiere, paying for theatrical trailers, billboards, and guerilla marketing. Cameron took a &quot;very basic view&quot; of the show&#x27;s chance of success, saying: &quot;If it flies, it flies. If it doesn&#x27;t, it doesn&#x27;t ... If people connect with it, which I hope they will, fine. If we don&#x27;t find an audience, we deserve to be off the air. It&#x27;s that simple.&quot; Eglee admitted the series had been &quot;routinely over budget&quot; in the first season, and feared that this would be a factor in whether or not the show was renewed for a second season, though Cameron downplayed these concerns.

Fox &quot;just barely&quot; renewed the series for a second season. The budget for episodes in season two was $1.3 million each. After the intended director of the final episode did not work out, Cameron decided to step in and fill the position. He did this partially for the experience but also to show the network the potential for a third season. It was his first experience directing a TV drama.

The producers were initially told a third season had been approved, but two days later Fox informed them that the series had been canceled.

&quot;Dark Angel&quot; was set in Seattle, and filmed in Vancouver, British Columbia at Lions Gate Studios. Other filming locations included the Vancouver Art Gallery, as well as Buntzen Lake and Riverview Hospital, also in British Columbia.

===Unproduced season===
In the DVD commentary for &quot;Freak Nation&quot;, the series finale, Charles H. Eglee explained what had been planned for season three. The intention was to bring together the storylines of seasons one (&quot;Manticore&quot;) and two (&quot;Breeding Cult&quot;) and reveal the mythology of &quot;Dark Angel&quot;. The season would reveal that thousands of years ago, Earth passed through a comet&#x27;s tail which deposited viral material that killed 97% of the human race. The breeding cult preserved the survivors&#x27; genetic immunity so that when the comet returned, only members of the cult would survive. Sandeman, a cult member, and Max&#x27;s creator betrayed the cult and decided to give this genetic immunity to the rest of humanity through Max, who would be the savior of the human race. There were multiple ideas on how to spread Max&#x27;s immunity, including an air burst that would disperse the antibody through the atmosphere, or attaching the immunity to a common cold virus (Eglee detailed how a scene would show Original Cindy sneezing as part of the beginning of the immunity spread). This storyline is expanded upon in the final &quot;Dark Angel&quot; novel &quot;After the Dark&quot; though when the comet returns nobody falls ill, and it is believed that the cult simply had a false prediction.

===Broadcast history===

The first season premiered in the United States on Tuesday, October 3, 2000, from 9:00 pm until 11:00 pm. Fox had to obtain agreements from its affiliates to broadcast past 10:00 pm, as most of them air local news programs at this time. In subsequent weeks the show aired from 9:00 pm till 10:00 pm Tuesdays. During its first season, the show was preempted on several occasions, including by the 2000 World Series, the Billboard Music Awards and coverage of the presidential election. The frequent preemptions became a running joke on the set. &quot;Dark Angel&#x27;s&quot; scheduled air time put it in direct competition with &quot;Angel&quot; on The WB. Critics debated which of the similarly named shows would dominate the time-slot. Jonathon Storm from &quot;Philadelphia Media Network&quot; believed that &quot;Dark Angel&quot; would prove victorious, while Brad Adgate, a research director at &quot;Horizon Media&quot;, predicted that &quot;Dark Angel&quot; would only initially take the lead in the ratings, as &quot;Angel&#x27;s&quot; strong fanbase would prevail in the long run. Brad Turrell, executive vice-president of Network Communication for the &quot;WB&quot; conceded that the heavy promotion for &quot;Dark Angel&quot; would give it higher initial ratings at first but believed that as &quot;Angel&quot; was a &quot;better show&quot; it would not be affected long-term. Concerned that there might be confusion between the two shows, the &quot;WB&quot; took out a full page ad in &quot;TV Guide&quot;, which read &quot;There is only ONE. David Boreanaz is ANGEL.&quot; &quot;Angel&quot; won the time slot when Fox moved the broadcast time of &quot;Dark Angel&quot; to 8:00 pm on Fridays for its second season, where it preceded the new series &quot;Pasadena&quot;.

The final episode of the series aired on May 3, 2002, as a special 90-minute episode. &quot;Dark Angel&quot; has been syndicated on Syfy and the El Rey Network in the United States and on E4 and the Horror Channel in the UK.

===Music===
The score for the &quot;Dark Angel&quot; pilot was composed and conducted by Joel McNeely. The pilot score track &quot;Bicycle Ride&quot; was used in the end credits for the duration of the series. The pilot score was released in full as part of the original publicity press kit, titled &quot;Dark Angel: Complete Score from the Dark Angel Pilot&quot;. The 37-track CD was for promotional use only and not for resale. McNeely returned to score the entire series, making frequent use of &quot;grumbling timpani rolls, bass drum beats and shrill brass and violin crescendos that familiarly sketch the action arcs of the narrative.&quot; Traditional orchestral elements are integrated with innovative electronic sounds and female vocals to create a sense of Max&#x27;s &quot;otherworldliness&quot;, &quot;haunting wind chimes, pseudo-Orientalist refrains and extenuated high-pitched eerie sounds&quot; evoke Max&#x27;s super-human abilities, and &quot;driving hip hop bass beats with heavy percussive effects [and] high-pitched feedback and reverberation&quot; convey Max&#x27;s struggles with violence and her memories of Manticore. The theme song for the series was composed by Chuck D and Gary G-Wiz. Both McNeely and G-Wiz cited &quot;Dark Angel&quot; as an opportunity to push sonic boundaries; G-Wiz stated that Eglee and music supervisor Randy Gerston kept calling him and telling him to make the theme song &quot;crazier&quot;. McNeely said scoring the series was &quot;like the difference between jazz and classical music. I&#x27;m a jazz player, so &quot;Dark Angel&quot; is as free form and as weird as we want to get.&quot;

A soundtrack album consisting of hip hop and R&amp;B songs was released on April 23, 2002, through Artemis Records. Eglee explained that he and Cameron began with the idea that they could do a &quot;hip hop youth ensemble thing&quot;, noting that &quot;hip hop had become the dominant influence in the country [and] in the world&quot; and that they saw an opportunity to give the future of &quot;Dark Angel&quot; the soundtrack of contemporary American popular culture. In the soundtrack&#x27;s liner notes, Eglee writes:Reminiscent of another time and place ... that part of the Bronx in the late 1970s known as Fort Apache: a place that for white America, defined lack and limitation, violence and hopelessness. What white Americans couldn&#x27;t see or hear then was the beautiful thing being birthed there, which, years later, would come to be known as Hip Hop. ... This album remembers the foundations of Hip Hop as it contemplates its future. Randy Gerston said that because of the near future setting of the series, he avoided any major hit songs as these would not sound futuristic. This gave them the opportunity to discover new talent instead. The album features predominately female hip hop and neo soul artists whose lyrics typically &quot;focus on the expression of female agency and power – particularly with regard to sexuality.&quot; It peaked at No. 50 on the Top Independent Albums chart. Jason Birchmeier of AllMusic gave the soundtrack three out of five stars. He noted the lack of major artists on the album and commented that it &quot;seems to be a female-orientated soundtrack, perhaps because of the show&#x27;s female lead character&quot;. Birchmeier said many of the songs were &quot;quite impressive&quot; and that it &quot;exceeds your expectations for a television show soundtrack&quot;.

==Themes==
&quot;Dark Angel&quot; is considered to be in the cyberpunk genre. Writing in &quot;Reconstruction: Studies in Contemporary Culture&quot;, Lorna Jowett considered &quot;Dark Angel&quot; to be a &quot;hybrid of science fiction, Gothic, and action&quot; which incorporated forms and themes from all three genres. Jowett compared &quot;Dark Angel&quot; to the Gothic novel &quot;Frankenstein&quot;, saying that Max&#x27;s genetic engineering makes her a &quot;postmodern Frankenstein&#x27;s monster, blurring boundaries between human and monster&quot;. Kathleen McConnell in &quot;Gothic Studies&quot; also compared Max&#x27;s unconventional conception to Frankenstein&#x27;s monster, and cited several other Gothic themes in the series. She states that Max fits the model of a Gothic heroine who &quot;ostensibly appear[s] to be conforming to their accepted role within the patriarchy but who actually subvert the father&#x27;s power at every possible occasion.&quot; In her book &quot;Post-feminist Impasses in Popular Heroine Television&quot;, Alison Horbury theorizes that &quot;Dark Angel&quot;, along with the shows &quot;Alias&quot;, &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot;, and &quot;Dollhouse&quot; have themes of abduction, physical and symbolic rape, motherlessness, and the discovery of a sister.

Several academics have considered &quot;Dark Angel&quot; to be part of a wave of shows in the late 90s and early 2000s including &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;La Femme Nikita&quot; that feature strong female characters. Writing in &quot;Science Fiction Film &amp; Television&quot;, Clarice Butkus noted Max has been considered to be a &quot;distinctly millennial post-third-wave feminist warrior. She also felt that Max&#x27;s relationship and dialogue with Original Cindy, an African American lesbian, conveyed female empowerment. For example, Cindy encourages Max not to feel guilt over her sexual behaviour and instead to embrace a traditionally masculine approach to sex. McConnell and Jowett also cited Max as an example of female empowerment; Jowett considered Max to be the &quot;usual postmodern, postfeminist representation of the female action hero with [at least] a reversal or [at most] a mixture of traditional gender traits.&quot;

Butkus stated that &quot;Dark Angel&quot; repeatedly paid homage to the film &quot;Blade Runner&quot;. Lydecker, the &quot;flawed antagonist&quot; of &quot;Dark Angel&quot; is said to be a transposition of Deckard, the &quot;flawed hero&quot; of &quot;Blade Runner&quot;. Alec McDowell/X5-494&#x27;s love interest is named Rachel, believed to be a reference to the replicant Rachael, though in &quot;Dark Angel&quot; it is McDowell and not Rachel who is bio-engineered. His flashbacks of this traumatic relationship use piano music similar to that used in &quot;Blade Runner&quot; to denote memories and a desire for former times. Alec&#x27;s genetic memory enhancements enable him, with only a few hours practice, to play a detailed piano piece by Frédéric Chopin, the composer originally scripted for the scene in &quot;Blade Runner&quot; where Rachael inexplicably finds herself able to play the piano; both characters are considered to be pre-programmed by state forces to master superhuman skills.

==Reception and legacy==
Initial reaction to the series and Max&#x27;s character was mostly positive, with favorable reviews in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; and &quot;Time&quot;. Hal Boedeker of the &quot;Orlando Sentinel&quot; said: &quot;Television&#x27;s newest warrior woman possesses skills worthy of Catwoman, Xena, Emma Peel, and Wonder Woman.&quot; Howard Rosenberg said: &quot;If pouty faces and sexy walks could destroy, the highly arresting Max would be wiping out the entire planet.&quot; However Joyce Millman said Max was &quot;little more than lips and ass&quot; and considered the series to be an expensive Britney Spears music video. &quot;People&quot; ran a negative review of the Pilot episode in October 2000, though in December they listed Alba&#x27;s portrayal of Max as among the &quot;breakthrough&quot; performances of 2000.

The first episode was behind only &quot;&quot; as the most watched new show of the week, albeit in a week with fewer new shows because of the presidential debate coverage. Fox chose to debut &quot;Dark Angel&quot; instead of airing the first presidential debate, a move which TV analyst Marc Berman praised, saying: &quot;The people who watch the debates aren&#x27;t the people who&#x27;ll tune into &quot;Dark Angel&quot; anyway&quot;, though he predicted that the premiere&#x27;s high ratings would not hold up as the show competed against more varied competition in subsequent weeks. It was the tenth most popular show overall that week, attracting 17.4 million viewers. The first season averaged 10.4 million viewers per episode, ranking number 59 for the 2000–01 season. Cameron said he did not know if the broadcast time change for the second season would have a positive or negative effect on the show&#x27;s ratings, though R. D. Heldenfels of the &quot;Sun Journal&quot; noted the poor ratings of Friday night television, especially the low viewing rates among 18 to 24-year-olds, the age-group that &quot;Dark Angel&quot; was most popular with. The new time slot saw a ratings drop; for the second season &quot;Dark Angel&quot; averaged 6 million viewers, ranking number 114 for the 2001–02 season in the Nielsen ratings.

Commenting on the release of the second season, Cynthia Fuchs of &quot;PopMatters&quot; said the first season of &quot;Dark Angel&quot; was one of the &quot;few straight-up successes, a ratings hit among the coveted &#x27;youth&#x27; demographic.&quot; She praised the series but clarified: &quot;I&#x27;m not getting carried away: Jim Cameron is not going to be making revolutionary art anytime soon.&quot; Michael Sauter of &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; gave the first season a B+ and spoke highly of Alba, saying that &quot;for a while [she was] TV&#x27;s hottest kick-butt heroine&quot;. Elka Karl of Common Sense Media gave the entire series 3 out of 5 stars, saying: &quot;While the dialogue sometimes falls flat, overall the show is well-scripted and well acted, and Alba does an excellent job of carrying the series. Dark Angel isn&#x27;t perfect by any stretch of the imagination, but it is compelling television that teen sci-fi fans will enjoy.&quot; While praising the first season, Randy Dankievitch of &quot;TVOvermind&quot; labelled the second season &quot;silly&quot;, criticizing &quot;dumb stories&quot; like Max&#x27;s dream episode &quot;Boo&quot;, the virus that prevents Logan and Max having physical contact, and the various half-animal Manticore experiments that are revealed.

Writing in his book &quot;The Encyclopedia of Superheroes on Film and Television&quot;, John Kenneth Muir said it was necessary for Cameron to set &quot;Dark Angel&quot; in the future because the prosperity of the U.S. in 2000 &quot;offered little possibility for crime, squalor and other societal problems&quot;. While criticizing certain plot elements in the second season as contributing to the show&#x27;s downfall, Muir said that larger factors in ratings dropping were the September 11 attacks, the Enron scandal, and the depletion of the U.S. government&#x27;s surplus, which changed &quot;Dark Angel&#x27;s&quot; &quot;futuristic vision of recession in a Third-World America&quot; from an interesting, far-fetched premise to a &quot;depressing reminder that things could still get worse&quot;.

In 2004, Max was ranked number 17 on &quot;TV Guide&quot;″s list of the 25 Greatest Sci-Fi Legends, and in 2012, Dave Golder of GamesRadar ranked her number 49 on his list of the 100 sexiest women in sci-fi. In 2009, AfterEllen ranked Original Cindy number 6 on their list of the Top 11 Lesbian/Bi Sidekicks. In 2015, Kayti Burt of &quot;Den of Geek&quot; included &quot;Dark Angel&quot; at the top of her list of &quot;10 Sci-Fi Shows That Don&#x27;t Get Enough Love&quot;. In 2016, it was recognized that &quot;Dark Angel&quot; was the first American television series to feature an openly transgender actress playing a transgender character. In the season one episode &quot;Out&quot;, transgender actress Jessica Crockett portrayed &quot;Louise&quot;, a young woman on a date with Normal.

The 2007 film &quot;Hitman&quot; re-used footage of Max and other Manticore children in training from &quot;Dark Angel&quot;. It was used to portray the Hitman protagonist Agent 47, a cloned assassin who, like the Manticore children, has a barcode on the back of his head.

===Accolades===
In its first season &quot;Dark Angel&quot; won the Favorite Television New Dramatic Series award at the 27th People&#x27;s Choice Awards, and was nominated for Best Television by the International Horror Guild Awards. The production team was nominated for the Excellence in Production Design Award by the Art Directors Guild. Editor Stephen Mark won Best Edited Motion Picture for Commercial Television at the Eddie Awards for the pilot episode, and the pilot was also nominated for Outstanding Special Visual Effects for the 53rd Primetime Emmy Awards and &quot;Best Visual Effects: Dramatic Series&quot; by the Leo Awards. &quot;Dark Angel&quot; was nominated for the 2001 Golden Reel Award for Best Sound Editing – Television Movies and Specials – Dialogue &amp; ADR, and for Choice Drama at the 2001 Teen Choice Awards.

Jessica Alba won Best Actress on Television at the 27th Saturn Awards, Breakout Star of the Year at the TV Guide Awards, Outstanding Actress in a New Television Series at the ALMA Awards, and Choice Actress at the 2001 Teen Choice Awards. She also received nominations for Best Actress – Television Series Drama for the 58th Golden Globe Awards and Best Performance in a TV Drama Series – Leading Young Actress for the 22nd Young Artist Awards.

&quot;Dark Angel&quot; was nominated for fewer awards in its second season. It was nominated for Choice Drama/Action Adventure for the 2002 Teen Choice Awards, where Alba was also nominated for Choice Actress, Drama. Alba was also nominated for Outstanding Actress in a Television Series for the ALMA Awards. At the Leo Awards the episode &quot;Boo&quot; received a nomination for Best Visual Effects: Dramatic Series, and David Geddes won Best Cinematography: Dramatic Series for the episode &quot;Two&quot;.

==Home media==
20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released seasons 1 and 2 of &quot;Dark Angel&quot; on DVD in region 1 (R1), as well as a dual-coded region 2 and 4 (R2/4) set in 2003, as six-disc sets packaged in cardboard sleeves containing three DVD cases each of two discs. Season 1 was released in R2/4 in February and R1 in May, and season 2 was released in R2/4 in June and R1 in October.

The R1 releases contain several special features, including four episodes with optional commentary in each season, bloopers, deleted scenes, and featurettes. The R2/4 releases contain no commentaries and fewer other special features, but the episodes are presented in anamorphic widescreen, while R1 releases are fullscreen. Adam Tyner of &quot;DVD Talk&quot; gave the R1 first season three out of five stars for audio and video, and three and a half stars for special features. Shannon Nutt of &quot;DVD Talk&quot; gave the R1 second season three stars out of five for audio and video, and two and a half stars for extras, stating: &quot;it appears [to have] a decent number of features, but then you discover the length of each one and really feel short-changed by Fox&quot;. She also noted the episode&#x27;s commentary was mainly by writers and producers, and did not feature James Cameron or any of the actors.

Both seasons were re-released in R1 on June 5, 2007, with slim packaging consisting of one plastic case containing all six discs (which were unchanged in content and cosmetics).

==Related media==
A video game of the same name based on the series was developed by Radical Entertainment, published by Sierra Entertainment and released for PlayStation 2 on November 18, 2002, and later on Xbox. Alba and Weatherly voiced their respective characters in the game. Development of the game started before the series was cancelled, and the game was met with mixed to negative reception upon release. Brett Todd of GameSpot gave the game 3.8 out of 10, saying: &quot;Although it&#x27;s impossible to say whether or not the developers&#x27; morale was affected by the cancellation of the series, this third-person action adventure plays like it was cranked out to fulfill a contract&quot; and concluded &quot;the development of this game probably should have been cancelled at the same time as the television series&quot;. Duke Ferris from Game Revolution gave the game a &#x27;D+&#x27;, saying that while fans of &quot;Dark Angel&quot; would enjoy it as it &quot;mirrors an episode of the show almost exactly&quot;, anybody else was likely to find it boring.

Three original novels written by Max Allan Collins expand upon the &quot;Dark Angel&quot; television series, with two picking up directly where the series ended, and another serving as a prequel. A companion book, &quot;Dark Angel: The Eyes Only Dossier&quot;, was written by D.A. Stern.
* &quot;Dark Angel: Before the Dawn&quot; (2002) is a prequel to the television series, detailing Max&#x27;s life after her escape from Manticore in 2009. After witnessing footage taken in Seattle of a man she believes to be one of her X5 siblings, Max moves from Los Angeles to Seattle, meeting Original Cindy and Kendra on the way, before finding employment at Jam Pony. Max eventually discovers the man in the footage is her brother Seth, who unbeknown to her has been working for Logan as a personal agent. Shortly after being reunited with him at the Space Needle, Seth, who has been injured, commits suicide by falling from it to avoid being captured by Lydecker. Max begins returning to the Space Needle to think and &quot;to be with Seth&quot;.
* &quot;Dark Angel: Skin Game&quot; (2003) immediately follows the events of &quot;Freak Nation&quot;, the final episode of season two, describing days in May 2021. &quot;Skin Game&quot; focuses on a killer terrorizing the streets of Seattle and the growing suspicion and evidence that the killer could be transgenic. As the killings escalate, the U.S. Army and National Guard prepare themselves for an invasion of Terminal City. Max uncovers that the killer is a shapeshifting transgenic named Kelpy, though he has been unwillingly given a drug by Ames White that is causing his psychosis. When Max reveals this information to the public through Eyes Only, Ames White goes into hiding, and the invasion of Terminal City is called off. When Kelpy takes on Logan&#x27;s form he is killed by the virus Max carries which was designed to kill Logan.
* &quot;Dark Angel: After the Dark&quot; (2003) follows &quot;Skin Game&quot;. It is revealed that Max&#x27;s virus is gone, the most likely explanation being that when the virus killed Kelpy it went dormant as it believed its mission to kill Logan was accomplished. However, Logan and Max&#x27;s relationship is thrown into turmoil when he reveals that he inadvertently caused Seth&#x27;s death by sending him on an assignment. Just as Max is ready to forgive him, Logan is kidnapped by Ames White and the breeding cult, who are preparing for the coming of a comet they believe will destroy everyone except cult-members and transgenics through depositing viral material into Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. They are trying to kill Max as they believe she possesses a genetic code that will save ordinary humans from the comet&#x27;s viral material. With the aid of a team of transgenics, Max eventually rescues Logan and destroys the headquarters of the breeding cult; Joshua kills Ames White. When the comet arrives, nobody falls ill, and it is believed the cult&#x27;s prediction was false. Max finds Lydecker in a prison cell at the cult&#x27;s headquarters. He promises to help her find her mother if she saves him, and she agrees. The book ends with Logan and Max finally consummating their relationship.

The companion book, &quot;Dark Angel: The Eyes Only Dossier&quot;, begins with a letter written by Logan Cale during the stand-off at Terminal City. It is addressed to Detective Matt Sung, a recurring character from the series who aides Logan, instructing him that the package he is sending him contains documents pertaining to the four most critical Eyes Only investigations. If he is killed by the potential invasion of Terminal City, Logan wants Sung to carry on the investigations. The rest of the book contains the documents relating to the four investigations.

==References==
Bibliography
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* Official website at Wayback Machine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="26" end="41" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="42" end="48" title="Action film" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="49" end="54" title="Drama (film and television)" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="95" end="98" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="138" end="151" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666404" start="156" end="172" title="Charles H. Eglee" label="Charles H. Eglee"/>
<link wikidata="Q44077" start="183" end="195" title="Jessica Alba" label="Jessica Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959682" start="203" end="220" title="breakthrough role" label="breakthrough role"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302138" start="269" end="280" title="Max Guevara" label="Max Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975749" start="320" end="332" title="supersoldier" label="supersoldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="394" end="403" title="dystopian" label="dystopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="416" end="423" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q733847" start="710" end="728" title="Lions Gate Studios" label="Lions Gate Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="747" end="760" title="Television pilot" label="pilot episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q501058" start="1009" end="1035" title="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards" label="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503551" start="1273" end="1285" title="Friday night death slot" label="Friday night"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702705" start="1483" end="1504" title="Dark Angel (video game)" label="video game adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="1569" end="1575" title="Gothic fiction" label="gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15675642" start="1580" end="1598" title="Women&amp;#x27;s empowerment" label="female empowerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q496437" start="1694" end="1706" title="Sarah Connor (Terminator)" label="Sarah Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q988925" start="1711" end="1723" title="Ellen Ripley" label="Ellen Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q810987" start="1772" end="1790" title="Battle Angel Alita" label="Battle Angel Alita"/>
<link wikidata="Q14881077" start="1912" end="1935" title="strong female character" label="strong female character"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="1968" end="1992" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869406" start="2006" end="2021" title="La Femme Nikita (TV series)" label="La Femme Nikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q212807" start="2039" end="2044" title="Alias (TV series)" label="Alias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975749" start="2142" end="2154" title="supersoldier" label="supersoldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="2419" end="2428" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982668" start="2442" end="2463" title="Nuclear electromagnetic pulse" label="electromagnetic pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q44077" start="2663" end="2675" title="Jessica Alba" label="Jessica Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q462420" start="2969" end="2979" title="List of Dark Angel characters" label="Logan Cale"/>
<link wikidata="Q221923" start="2981" end="2998" title="Michael Weatherly" label="Michael Weatherly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049655" start="3192" end="3202" title="Paraplegia" label="paraplegic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203797" start="3372" end="3389" title="bicycle messenger" label="bicycle messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q848466" start="3405" end="3412" title="courier" label="courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q453443" start="3461" end="3479" title="Valarie Rae Miller" label="Valarie Rae Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q725034" start="3498" end="3511" title="Alimi Ballard" label="Alimi Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326112" start="3527" end="3539" title="Richard Gunn (actor)" label="Richard Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713570" start="3622" end="3641" title="William Gregory Lee" label="William Gregory Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q249865" start="3718" end="3729" title="John Savage (actor)" label="John Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q231576" start="3839" end="3851" title="Nana Visitor" label="Nana Visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q643396" start="4082" end="4098" title="Heart transplantation" label="heart transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q320084" start="4274" end="4286" title="Kevin Durand" label="Kevin Durand"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324" start="4319" end="4325" title="Canidae" label="canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q462420" start="4399" end="4403" title="Alec McDowell" label="Alec"/>
<link wikidata="Q193513" start="4405" end="4418" title="Jensen Ackles" label="Jensen Ackles"/>
<link wikidata="Q712761" start="5086" end="5100" title="Martin Cummins" label="Martin Cummins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302138" start="6175" end="6186" title="Max Guevara" label="Max Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q13717403" start="6964" end="6979" title="J. C. MacKenzie" label="J. C. MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755685" start="7050" end="7064" title="Jennifer Blanc" label="Jennifer Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q254362" start="7680" end="7692" title="Ashley Scott" label="Ashley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="7840" end="7864" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="7994" end="8001" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="8018" end="8031" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666404" start="8047" end="8063" title="Charles H. Eglee" label="Charles H. Eglee"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8127" end="8151" title="Piranha II: The Spawning" label="Piranha II: The Spawning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="8623" end="8628" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q810987" start="8635" end="8653" title="Battle Angel Alita" label="Battle Angel Alita"/>
<link wikidata="Q496437" start="8913" end="8925" title="Sarah Connor (Terminator)" label="Sarah Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q988925" start="8930" end="8942" title="Ellen Ripley" label="Ellen Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q218941" start="9244" end="9247" title="Year 2000 problem" label="Y2K"/>
<link wikidata="Q64122" start="9289" end="9310" title="electromagnetic pulse" label="electromagnetic pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170216" start="9369" end="9382" title="Working title" label="Working title"/>
<link wikidata="Q24637" start="10904" end="10922" title="guerilla marketing" label="guerilla marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="12064" end="12073" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="12075" end="12091" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q733847" start="12095" end="12113" title="Lions Gate Studios" label="Lions Gate Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q371960" start="12152" end="12173" title="Vancouver Art Gallery" label="Vancouver Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q316407" start="12186" end="12198" title="Buntzen Lake" label="Buntzen Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338753" start="12203" end="12221" title="Riverview Hospital (Coquitlam)" label="Riverview Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125" start="13251" end="13262" title="common cold" label="common cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q922550" start="14017" end="14034" title="2000 World Series" label="2000 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="14040" end="14062" title="Billboard Music Awards" label="Billboard Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="14083" end="14104" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q212156" start="14254" end="14259" title="Angel (1999 TV series)" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q844972" start="14269" end="14275" title="The WB" label="The WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182742" start="14384" end="14410" title="Philadelphia Media Network" label="Philadelphia Media Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="15124" end="15132" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q206364" start="15176" end="15190" title="David Boreanaz" label="David Boreanaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669902" start="15387" end="15395" title="Pasadena (TV series)" label="Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q276542" start="15536" end="15540" title="Syfy" label="Syfy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352017" start="15549" end="15563" title="El Rey Network" label="El Rey Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156382" start="15592" end="15594" title="E4 (channel)" label="E4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786807" start="15603" end="15617" title="Horror Channel" label="Horror Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="15646" end="15651" title="film score" label="score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382830" start="15719" end="15731" title="Joel McNeely" label="Joel McNeely"/>
<link wikidata="Q189737" start="16144" end="16151" title="timpani" label="timpani"/>
<link wikidata="Q733373" start="16819" end="16826" title="Chuck D" label="Chuck D"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525103" start="16831" end="16841" title="Gary G-Wiz" label="Gary G-Wiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="17309" end="17316" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797479" start="17375" end="17390" title="Artemis Records" label="Artemis Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470738" start="17889" end="17900" title="Fort Apache (hostile place)" label="Fort Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="17919" end="17932" title="White Americans" label="white America"/>
<link wikidata="Q268253" start="18482" end="18490" title="neo soul" label="neo soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642564" start="18653" end="18675" title="Top Independent Albums" label="Top Independent Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="18703" end="18711" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="19155" end="19164" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="19332" end="19338" title="Gothic fiction" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762165" start="19344" end="19350" title="Action fiction" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="19481" end="19493" title="Frankenstein" label="Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="19573" end="19600" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="19977" end="19987" title="patriarchy" label="patriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212807" start="20230" end="20235" title="Alias (TV series)" label="Alias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869406" start="20249" end="20264" title="La Femme Nikita (TV series)" label="La Femme Nikita"/>
<link wikidata="Q632022" start="20282" end="20291" title="Dollhouse (TV series)" label="Dollhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="20346" end="20350" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="20535" end="20559" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914319" start="20800" end="20819" title="Third-wave feminism" label="third-wave feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="20909" end="20925" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q15675642" start="20944" end="20962" title="Women&amp;#x27;s empowerment" label="female empowerment"/>
<link wikidata="Q143823" start="21237" end="21249" title="postfeminism" label="postfeminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q184843" start="21461" end="21473" title="Blade Runner" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q943048" start="21584" end="21591" title="Rick Deckard" label="Deckard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174429" start="21743" end="21752" title="replicant" label="replicant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21753" end="21760" title="List of Blade Runner characters#Rachael" label="Rachael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="22127" end="22142" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="22516" end="22529" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="22546" end="22550" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q746424" start="22584" end="22600" title="Orlando Sentinel" label="Orlando Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q158952" start="22685" end="22693" title="Catwoman" label="Catwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q545694" start="22695" end="22699" title="Xena" label="Xena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248019" start="22701" end="22710" title="Emma Peel" label="Emma Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q338430" start="22716" end="22728" title="Wonder Woman" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631899" start="22736" end="22752" title="Howard Rosenberg" label="Howard Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297588" start="22888" end="22901" title="Joyce Millman" label="Joyce Millman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="23002" end="23016" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="23036" end="23042" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23466" end="23491" title="United States presidential election debates, 2000#First Presidential Debate — October 3" label="first presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638356" start="24192" end="24203" title="Sun Journal (Lewiston)" label="Sun Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503551" start="24220" end="24259" title="Friday night death slot" label="poor ratings of Friday night television"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="24545" end="24560" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="24634" end="24644" title="PopMatters" label="PopMatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="24995" end="25015" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153474" start="25171" end="25189" title="Common Sense Media" label="Common Sense Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066356" start="25588" end="25598" title="TVOvermind" label="TVOvermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="26347" end="26367" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723024" start="26373" end="26386" title="Enron scandal" label="Enron scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="26714" end="26722" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q960011" start="26799" end="26809" title="GamesRadar" label="GamesRadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q98399873" start="26888" end="26898" title="AfterEllen" label="AfterEllen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="26966" end="26968" title="Bisexuality" label="Bi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073063" start="27009" end="27020" title="Den of Geek" label="Den of Geek"/>
<link wikidata="Q691916" start="27484" end="27490" title="Hitman (2007 film)" label="Hitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996431" start="27636" end="27644" title="Agent 47" label="Agent 47"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632645" start="27858" end="27890" title="27th People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards" label="27th People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050945" start="27937" end="27969" title="International Horror Guild Award" label="International Horror Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415185" start="28059" end="28078" title="Art Directors Guild" label="Art Directors Guild"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28164" end="28176" title="American Cinema Editors#Eddie Award" label="Eddie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243513" start="28237" end="28271" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Visual Effects" label="Outstanding Special Visual Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338861" start="28280" end="28306" title="53rd Primetime Emmy Awards" label="53rd Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q740089" start="28367" end="28377" title="Leo Awards" label="Leo Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q85763913" start="28429" end="28523" title="Golden Reel Award for Outstanding Achievement in Sound Editing – Series 1 Hour – Dialogue/ADR" label="Golden Reel Award for Best Sound Editing – Television Movies and Specials – Dialogue &amp;amp; ADR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796229" start="28553" end="28576" title="2001 Teen Choice Awards" label="2001 Teen Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226446" start="28630" end="28648" title="27th Saturn Awards" label="27th Saturn Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672338" start="28683" end="28697" title="TV Guide Award" label="TV Guide Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q72769" start="28754" end="28764" title="ALMA Award" label="ALMA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257501" start="28852" end="28890" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama" label="Best Actress – Television Series Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087779" start="28899" end="28923" title="58th Golden Globe Awards" label="58th Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959041" start="28998" end="29022" title="22nd Young Artist Awards" label="22nd Young Artist Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769729" start="29160" end="29183" title="2002 Teen Choice Awards" label="2002 Teen Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084961" start="29551" end="29586" title="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment" label="20th Century Fox Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q746611" start="29648" end="29656" title="DVD region code" label="region 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930201" start="30049" end="30056" title="blooper" label="blooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q122813195" start="30079" end="30089" title="featurette" label="featurette"/>
<link wikidata="Q20670005" start="30279" end="30287" title="DVD Talk" label="DVD Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702705" start="31050" end="31077" title="Dark Angel (video game)" label="video game of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515682" start="31115" end="31136" title="Radical Entertainment" label="Radical Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q494614" start="31151" end="31171" title="Sierra Entertainment" label="Sierra Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="31189" end="31202" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281614" start="31238" end="31242" title="Xbox" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="31458" end="31466" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310127" start="31882" end="31897" title="Game Revolution" label="Game Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="32118" end="32124" title="novels" label="novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q690233" start="32136" end="32153" title="Max Allan Collins" label="Max Allan Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="32445" end="32452" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317" start="32947" end="32959" title="Space Needle" label="Space Needle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="33608" end="33621" title="shapeshifting" label="shapeshifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q648266" start="35954" end="35969" title="Wayback Machine" label="Wayback Machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45930" wikidata="Q502892" url="?curid=45930" title="List of index fossils">
<text>Index fossils (also known as guide fossils or indicator fossils) are fossils used to define and identify geologic periods (or faunal stages). Index fossils must have a short vertical range, wide geographic distribution and rapid evolutionary trends. Another term, &quot;zone fossil&quot;, is used when the fossil has all the characters stated above except wide geographical distribution; thus, they correlate the surrounding rock to a biozone rather than a specific time period. 
==See also==
*Biostratigraphy#Index fossils

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q502892" start="0" end="13" title="List of index fossils" label="Index fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="69" end="75" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="105" end="121" title="geologic column" label="geologic periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110260" start="435" end="442" title="biozone" label="biozone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="494" end="523" title="Biostratigraphy#Index fossils" label="Biostratigraphy#Index fossils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45936" wikidata="Q1782082" url="?curid=45936" title="Spirit possession">
<text>Spirit possession is an unusual or an altered state of consciousness and associated behaviors which are purportedly caused by the control of a human body and its functions by spirits, ghosts, demons, angels, or gods. The concept of spirit possession exists in many cultures and religions, including Buddhism, Christianity, Haitian Vodou, Dominican Vudú, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Wicca, and Southeast Asian, African, and Native American traditions. Depending on the cultural context in which it is found, possession may be thought of as voluntary or involuntary and may be considered to have beneficial or detrimental effects on the host. The experience of spirit possession sometimes serves as evidence in support of belief in the existence of spirits, deities or demons.
In a 1969 study funded by the National Institute of Mental Health, spirit-possession beliefs were found to exist in 74% of a sample of 488 societies in all parts of the world, with the highest numbers of believing societies in Pacific cultures and the lowest incidence among Native Americans of both North and South America. As Pentecostal and Charismatic Christian churches move into both African and Oceanic areas, a merger of belief can take place, with demons becoming representative of the &quot;old&quot; indigenous religions, which Christian ministers attempt to exorcise.

== Organized religions ==
=== Christianity ===
From the beginning of Christianity, adherents have held that possession derives from the Devil (i.e. Satan) and demons. In the battle between Satan and Heaven, Satan is believed to engage in &quot;spiritual attacks&quot;, including demonic possession, against human beings by the use of supernatural powers to harm them physically or psychologically. Prayer for deliverance, blessings upon the man or woman&#x27;s house or body, sacraments, and exorcisms are generally used to drive the demon out.

Some theologians, such as Ángel Manuel Rodríguez, say that mediums, like the ones mentioned in Leviticus 20:27, were possessed by demons. Another possible case of demonic possession in the Old Testament includes the false prophets that King Ahab relied upon before re-capturing Ramoth-Gilead in 1 Kings 22. They were described as being empowered by a deceiving spirit.
The New Testament mentions several episodes in which Jesus drove out demons from persons. Whilst most Christians believe that demonic possession is an involuntary affliction, some biblical verses have been interpreted as indicating that possession can be voluntary. For example, Alfred Plummer writes that when Devil entered into Judas Iscariot in John 13:27, this was because Judas had continually agreed to Satan&#x27;s suggestions to betray Jesus and had wholly submitted to him.

The New Testament indicates that people can be possessed by demons, but that the demons respond and submit to Jesus Christ&#x27;s authority:
 and 

It also indicates that demons can possess animals as in the exorcism of the Gerasene demoniac.
This is dramatic in European literature and for adherents to Christianity.
See also Luke 8:26-37.
The Gospel writings state that Mary Magdelene had demons cast out as well.

==== Catholicism ====

Roman Catholic doctrine states that angels are non-corporeal, spiritual beings with intelligence and will. Fallen angels, or demons, are able to &quot;demonically possess&quot; individuals without the victim&#x27;s knowledge or consent, leaving them morally blameless.
The &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; says that there is only one apparent case of demonic possession in the Old Testament, of King Saul being tormented by an &quot;evil spirit&quot; (1 Samuel 16:14), but this depends on interpreting the Hebrew word &quot;rûah&quot; as implying a personal influence which it may not; as a result, even this example is described as &quot;not very certain&quot;. In addition, Saul was only described to be tormented, rather than possessed, and he was relieved from these torments by having David play the lyre to him.
Catholic exorcists differentiate between &quot;ordinary&quot; Satanic/demonic activity or influence (mundane everyday &quot;temptations&quot;) and &quot;extraordinary&quot; Satanic/demonic activity, which can take six different forms, ranging from complete control by Satan or demons to voluntary submission:
# Possession, in which Satan or demons take full possession of a person&#x27;s body without their consent. This possession usually comes as a result of a person&#x27;s actions; actions that lead to an increased susceptibility to Satan&#x27;s influence.
# Obsession, which typically influences dreams. It includes sudden attacks of irrationally obsessive thoughts, usually culminating in suicidal ideation.
# Oppression, in which there is no loss of consciousness or involuntary action, such as in the biblical Book of Job in which Job was tormented by Satan through a series of misfortunes in business, material possessions, family, and health.
# External physical pain caused by Satan or demons.
# Infestation, which affects houses, objects/things, or animals; and
# Subjection, in which a person voluntarily submits to Satan or demons.

In the Roman Ritual, true demonic or Satanic possession has been characterized since the Middle Ages, by the following four typical characteristics:
# Manifestation of superhuman strength.
# Speaking in tongues or languages that the victim cannot know.
# Revelation of knowledge, distant or hidden, that the victim cannot know.
# Blasphemous rage, obscene hand gestures, using profanity and an to holy symbols, names, relics or places.

The &quot;New Catholic Encyclopedia&quot; states, &quot;Ecclesiastical authorities are reluctant to admit diabolical possession in most cases, because many can be explained by physical or mental illness alone. Therefore, medical and psychological examinations are necessary before the performance of major exorcism. The standard that must be met is that of moral certitude (&quot;De exorcismis&quot;, 16). For an exorcist to be morally certain, or beyond reasonable doubt, that he is dealing with a genuine case of demonic possession, there must be no other reasonable explanation for the phenomena in question&quot;.

Official Catholic doctrine affirms that demonic possession can occur as distinguished from mental illness, but stresses that cases of mental illness should not be misdiagnosed as demonic influence. Catholic exorcisms can occur only under the authority of a bishop and in accordance with strict rules; a simple exorcism also occurs during baptism.

==== Anglican ====
The infliction of demonic torment upon an individual has been chronicled in premodern Protestant literature. In 1597, King James discussed four methods of daemonic influence upon an individual in his book Daemonologie:
# Spectra, being the haunting and troubling of certain houses or solitary places.
# Obsession, the following and outwardly torment of an individual at diverse hours to either weaken or cast diseases upon the body, as in the Book of Job.
# Possession, the entrance inwardly into an individual to beget uncontrollable fits, induce blasphemies, 
# Faerie, being the influence those who voluntarily submit to consort, prophesy, or servitude.

King James attested that the symptoms derived from demonic possession could be discernible from natural diseases. He rejected the symptoms and signs prescribed by the Catholic church as vain (e.g. rage begotten from Holy Water, fear of the Cross, etc.) and found the exorcism rites to be troublesome and ineffective to recite. The Rites of the Catholic Church to remedy the torment of demonic spirits were rejected as counterfeit since few possessed could be cured by them. In James&#x27; view: &quot;It is easy then to understand that the casting out of Devils, is by virtue of fasting and prayer, and in-calling of the name of God, suppose many imperfections be in the person that is the instrument, as CHRIST himself teaches us (Mat. 7) of the power that false Prophets all have cast out devils&quot;.

In medieval Great Britain, the Christian church had offered suggestions on safeguarding one&#x27;s home. Suggestions ranged from dousing a household with holy water, placing wax and herbs on thresholds to &quot;ward off witches occult&quot;, and avoiding certain areas of townships known to be frequented by witches and Devil worshippers after dark. Afflicted persons were restricted from entering the church, but might share the shelter of the porch with lepers and persons of offensive life. After the prayers, if quiet, they might come in to receive the bishop&#x27;s blessing and listen to the sermon. They were fed daily and prayed over by the exorcists and, in case of recovery, after a fast of from 20 to 40 days, were admitted to the Eucharist, and their names and cures entered in the church records. In 1603, the Church of England forbade its clergy from performing exorcisms because of numerous fraudulent cases of demonic possession.

==== Baptist ====
In May 2021, the Baptist Deliverance Study Group of the Baptist Union of Great Britain, a Christian denomination, issued a &quot;warning against occult spirituality following the rise in people trying to communicate with the dead&quot;. The commission reported that &quot;becoming involved in activities such as Spiritualism can open up a doorway to great spiritual oppression which requires a Christian rite to set that person free&quot;.

In September 2023, Pastor Rick Morrow of Beulah Church in Richland, Missouri gave a sermon in which he presented the cause of autism as, &quot;the devil&#x27;s attacked them, he&#x27;s brought this infirmity upon them, he&#x27;s got them where he wants them&quot;. He asserted that the cure for the neurodevelopmental disorder was prayer by claiming to &quot;know a minister who has seen lots of kids that are autistic, that he cast that demon out, and they were healed, and then he had to pray and their brain was rewired and they were fixed.&quot;
Members of the pastor&#x27;s community found his comment to be &quot;derogatory toward individuals with certain disabilities.&quot; Their public outcry led to Morrow&#x27;s resignation from the school board on which he was a member.

====Evangelical====
In both charismatic and evangelical Christianity, exorcisms of demons are often carried out by individuals or groups belong to the deliverance ministries movement. According to these groups, symptoms of such possessions can include chronic fatigue syndrome, homosexuality, addiction to pornography, and alcoholism. The New Testament&#x27;s description of people who had evil spirits includes a knowledge of future events (Acts 16:16) and great strength (Act 19:13–16), among others, and shows that those with evil spirits can speak of Christ (Mark 3:7–11). Some Evangelical denominations believe that demonic possession is not possible if one has already professed their faith in Christ, because the Holy Spirit already occupies the body and a demon cannot enter.

=== Islam ===
Various types of creatures, such as &quot;jinn&quot;, &quot;shayatin&quot;, &quot;ʻafarit&quot;, found within Islamic culture, are often held to be responsible for spirit possession. Spirit possession appears in both Islamic theology and wider cultural tradition.
Although opposed by some Muslim scholars, sleeping near a graveyard or a tomb is believed to enable contact with the ghosts of the dead, who visit the sleeper in dreams and provide hidden knowledge. Possession by &quot;ʻafarit&quot; (a vengeful ghost) are said to grant the possessed some supernatural powers, but it drives them insane as well.
&quot;Jinn&quot; (singular &quot;jinni&quot;) are much more physical than spirits. Due to their subtle bodies, which are composed of fire and air (&quot;marijin min nar&quot;), they are purported to be able to possess the bodies of humans. Such physical intrusion of the jinn is conceptually different from the whisperings of the devils. Since &quot;jinn&quot; are not necessarily evil, they are distinguished from cultural concepts of possession by devils/demons.

Since such &quot;jinn&quot; are said to have free will, they can have their own reasons to possess humans and are not necessarily harmful. There are various reasons given as to why a &quot;jinni&quot; might seek to possess an individual, such as falling in love with them, taking revenge for hurting them or their relatives, or other undefined reasons. At an intended possession, the covenant with the &quot;jinni&quot; must be renewed. Soothsayers (&quot;kāhin&quot; pl. &quot;kuhhān&quot;), would use such possession to gain hidden knowledge. Inspirations from jinn by poets requires neither possession nor obedience to the jinn. Their relationship is rather described as mutual.

The concept of jinn-possession is alien to the Quran and derives from pagan notions. It is widespread among Muslims and also accepted by most Islamic scholars. It is part of the &quot;aqida&quot; (theological doctrines) in the tradition of Ashari, and the Atharis, such as ibn Taimiyya and ibn Qayyim. Among Maturidites it is debated, as some accept it, but it has been challenged since the early years by Maturidite scholars such as al-Rustughfanī. The Mu&#x27;tazila are associated with substituting jinn-possession by devilish-whisperings, denying bodily possession altogether.
In contrast to &quot;jinn&quot;, the devils (&quot;shayatin&quot;) are inherently evil. Iblis, the father of the devils, dwells in the fires of hell, although not suffering wherein, he and his children try to draw people into damnation of hell. Devils don&#x27;t physically possess people, they only tempt humans into sin by following their lower &quot;nafs&quot;. Hadiths suggest that the devils whisper from within the human body, within or next to the heart, and so &quot;devilish whisperings&quot; ( وَسْوَاس) are sometimes thought of as a kind of possession. Unlike possession by &quot;jinn&quot;, the whispering of devils affects the soul instead of the body.

Demons (also known as &quot;div&quot;), though part of the human conception, get stronger through acts of sin. By acts of obedience (to God), they get weaker. Although a human might find pleasure in obeying the demons first, according to Islamic thought, the human soul can only be free if the demons are bound by the spirit (ruh). Sufi literature, as in the writings of Rumi and Attar of Nishapur, pay a lot of attention to how to bind the inner demons. Attar of Nishapur writes: &quot;If you bind the &quot;div&quot;, you will set out for the royal pavilion with Solomon&quot; and &quot;You have no command over your self&#x27;s kingdom [body and mind], for in your case the &quot;div&quot; is in the place of Solomon&quot;. He further links the demons to the story alluded in the Quran (38:34) that a demon replaced the prophet Solomon: one must behave like a triumphant &#x27;Solomon&#x27; and chain the demons of the &quot;nafs&quot; or lower self, locking the demon-prince into a &#x27;rock&#x27;, before the &quot;rūḥ&quot; (soul) can make the first steps to the Divine.

=== Judaism ===
Although forbidden in the Hebrew Bible, magic was widely practiced in the late Second Temple Period and well documented in the period following the destruction of the Temple into the 3rd, 4th, and 5th centuries C.E. Jewish magical papyri were inscriptions on amulets, ostraca and incantation bowls used in Jewish magical practices against &quot;shedim&quot; and other unclean spirits. According to the &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;, Jewish methods of exorcism were described in the Book of Tobias.

In the 16th century, Isaac Luria, a Jewish mystic, wrote about the transmigration of souls seeking perfection. His disciples took his idea a step further, creating the idea of a &quot;dybbuk&quot;, a soul inhabiting a victim until it had accomplished its task or atoned for its sin. The &quot;dybbuk&quot; appears in Jewish folklore and literature, as well as in chronicles of Jewish life. In Jewish folklore, a &quot;dybbuk&quot; is a disembodied spirit that wanders restlessly until it inhabits the body of a living person. The Baal Shem could expel a harmful &quot;dybbuk&quot; through exorcism.

Possession-trance and adorcism are also engaged with by some Jews. Notably, Ethiopian Jewish women may participate in zār, and Tuisinian Jewish women have a practice called Stambali.

Stambali uses incense, music (traditionally performed by Black musicians from fraternal orders), dance, animal sacrifice, and large spreads of food to induce trance and to appease jinn which may be afflicting someone, and ceremonies may be regularly repeated by that person. Stambali is also sometimes done preventatively as part of wedding, bnei mitzvah, and housewarming festivities to ward away the evil eye. The afflictions of jinn may simply be buildups of emotional stress or more serious illness. During trance, the jinn enter the body, and the participants do not remember what occurred during trance afterwards. If a particular person has needed a Stambali ceremony organized, the jinn afflicting them will be asked what it wants as it possesses them. Usually requests involve clothes and an animal for sacrifice. The atmosphere is festive, and participants wear bright clothes and henna. Aside from musicians, the participants are all women. The dances and lyrics are improvised. Those seen as particularly susceptible to jinn affliction are the victims and perpetrators of aggression, those who are frightened, and those who may have the evil eye directed at them. Showers are also seen as particularly vulnerable places where a jinn may attach themselves to a person.

== African traditions ==

===Central Africa===
====Democratic Republic of the Congo====
Zebola is a women&#x27;s spirit possession dance ritual practised by certain ethnic groups of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is believed to have therapeutic qualities and has been noted in the West as a traditional form of psychotherapy.

It originated among the Mongo people but is also practised among various ethnic groups in Kinshasa.

===Horn of Africa===

====Ethiopia====
Among the Gurage people of Ethiopia, spirit possession is a common belief. William A. Shack postulated that it is caused by Gurage cultural attitudes about food and hunger, while they have a plentiful food supply, cultural pressures that force the Gurage to either share it to meet social obligations, or hoard it and eat it secretly cause feelings of anxiety. Distinctions are drawn between spirits that strictly possess men, spirits that possess women, and spirits that possess victims of either sex. A ritual illness that only affects men is believed to be caused by a spirit called &quot;awre&quot;. This affliction presents itself by loss of appetite, nausea, and attacks from severe stomach pains. If it persists, the victim may enter a trance-like stupor, in which he sometimes regains consciousness long enough to take food and water. Breathing is often labored. Seizures and trembling overcome the patient, and in extreme cases, partial paralysis of the extremities.

If the victim does not recover naturally, a traditional healer, or &quot;sagwara&quot;, is summoned. Once the &quot;sagwara&quot; has determined the spirit&#x27;s name through the use of divination, he prescribes a routine formula to exorcise the spirit. This is not a permanent cure, it merely allows the victim to form a relationship with the spirit while subject to chronic repossession, which is treated by repeating the formula. This formula involves the preparation and consumption of a dish of &quot;ensete&quot;, butter, and red pepper. During this ritual, the victim&#x27;s head is covered with a drape, and he eats the &quot;ensete&quot; ravenously while other ritual participants participate by chanting. The ritual ends when the possessing spirit announces that it is satisfied. Shack notes that the victims are overwhelmingly poor men, and that women are not as food-deprived as men, due to ritual activities that involve food redistribution and consumption. Shack postulates that the &quot;awre&quot; serves to bring the possessed man to the center of social attention, and to relieve his anxieties over his inability to gain prestige from redistributing food, which is the primary way in which Gurage men gain status in their society.

The belief in spirit possession is part of the native culture of the Sidama people of southwest Ethiopia. Anthropologists Irene and John Hamer postulated that it is a form of compensation for being deprived within Sidama society, although they do not draw from I.M. Lewis (see Cultural anthropology section under Scientific views). The majority of the possessed are women whose spirits demand luxury goods to alleviate their condition, but men can be possessed as well. Possessed individuals of both sexes can become healers due to their condition. Hamer and Hamer suggest that this is a form of compensation among deprived men in the deeply competitive society of the Sidama, for if a man cannot gain prestige as an orator, warrior, or farmer, he may still gain prestige as a spirit healer. Women are sometimes accused of faking possession, but men never are.

===East Africa===
Kenya

* The Digo people of Kenya refer to the spirits that supposedly possess them as &quot;shaitani&quot;. These &quot;shaitani&quot; typically demand luxury items to make the patient well again. Despite the fact that men sometimes accuse women of faking the possessions in order to get luxury items, attention, and sympathy, they do generally regard spirit possession as a genuine condition and view victims of it as being ill through no fault of their own. Other men suspect women of actively colluding with spirits in order to be possessed.
* The Giriama people of coastal Kenya believe in spirit possession.

Mayote
* In Mayotte, approximately 25% of the adult population, and five times as many women as men, enter trance states in which they are supposedly possessed by certain identifiable spirits who maintain stable and coherent identities from one possession to the next.

Mozambique
* In Mozambique, a new belief in spirit possession appeared after the Mozambican Civil War. These spirits, called &quot;gamba&quot;, are said to be identified as dead soldiers, and allegedly overwhelmingly possess women. Prior to the war, spirit possession was limited to certain families and was less common.

Uganda
* In Uganda, a woman named Alice Auma was reportedly possessed by the spirit of a male Italian soldier named Lakwena (&#x27;messenger&#x27;). She ultimately led a failed insurrection against governmental forces.

Tanzania
* The Sukuma people of Tanzania believe in spirit possession.
* A now-extinct spirit possession cult existed among the Hadimu women of Zanzibar, revering a spirit called &quot;kitimiri&quot;. This cult was described in an 1869 account by a French missionary. The cult faded by the 1920s and was virtually unknown by the 1960s.

===Southern Africa===

* A belief in spirit possession appears among the Xesibe, a Xhosa-speaking people from Transkei, South Africa. The majority of the supposedly possessed are married women. The condition of spirit possession among them is called &quot;intwaso&quot;. Those who develop the condition of &quot;intwaso&quot; are regarded as having a special calling to divine the future. They are first treated with sympathy, and then with respect as they allegedly develop their abilities to foretell the future.

===West Africa===
* One religion among Hausa people of West Africa is that of Hausa animism, in which belief in spirit possession is prevalent.

==African diasporic traditions==
In many of the African diaspora religions possessing spirits are not necessarily harmful or evil, but are rather seeking to rebuke misconduct in the living. Possession by a spirit in the African diaspora and traditional African religions can result in healing for the person possessed and information gained from possession as the spirit provides knowledge to the one they possessed.

===Haitian Vodou===
In Haitian Vodou and related African diaspora religions, one way that those who participate or practice can have a spiritual experience is by being possessed by the &quot;Loa&quot; (or &quot;lwa&quot;). When the &quot;Loa&quot; descends upon a practitioner, the practitioner&#x27;s body is being used by the spirit, according to the tradition. Some spirits are believed to be able to give prophecies of upcoming events or situations pertaining to the possessed one, also called a &quot;Chwal&quot; or the &quot;Horse of the Spirit&quot;. Practitioners describe this as a beautiful but very tiring experience. Most people who are possessed by the spirit describe the onset as a feeling of blackness or energy flowing through their body.

===Umbanda===
The concept of spirit possession is also found in Umbanda, an Afro-Brazilian folk religion that has origins in Yoruba people. According to tradition, there is some guiding spirits that possess a voluntary person, this normally are made when there is a person that wants to ask for some guidance, when the person are possessed by a guiding spirit, the possessed person the give guidance to people that ask for consultation, they answer questions and sometimes explain rituals to help the consulting person to achieve their goals or solve problems in their life, exemples of such spirits are Pomba Gira (female guardian spirit) or Exu (male guardian spirit), who possesses both women and males. According to the tradition everyone has a Pomba Gira and a Exu to can call for help and protection even if they don’t possess the person asking for help, and they can be called always the person feels necessary.

===Hoodoo===
The culture of Hoodoo was created by African-Americans. There are regional styles to this tradition, and as African-Americans traveled, the tradition of Hoodoo changed according to African-Americans&#x27; environment. Hoodoo includes reverence to ancestral spirits, African-American quilt making, herbal healing, Bakongo and Igbo burial practices, Holy Ghost shouting, praise houses, snake reverence, African-American churches, spirit possession, some Nkisi practices, Black Spiritual churches, Black theology, the ring shout, the Kongo cosmogram, Simbi water spirits, graveyard conjuring, the crossroads spirit, making conjure canes, incorporating animal parts, pouring of libations, Bible conjuring, and conjuring in the African-American tradition. In Hoodoo, people become possessed by the Holy Ghost. Spirit possession in Hoodoo was influenced by West African Vodun spirit possession. As Africans were enslaved in the United States, the Holy Spirit (Holy Ghost) replaced the African gods during possession. &quot;Spirit possession was reinterpreted in Christian terms.&quot; In African-American churches this is called being filled with the Holy Ghost. &quot;Walter Pitts (1993) has demonstrated the modern importance of &#x27;possession&#x27; within African- American Baptist ritual, tracing the origins of the ecstatic state (often referred to as &#x27;getting the spirit&#x27;) to African possessions.&quot; Church members in Black Spiritual churches become possessed by spirits of deceased family members, the Holy Spirit, Christian saints, and other biblical figures from the Old and New Testament of the Bible. It is believed when people become possessed by these spirits they gain knowledge and wisdom and act as intercessors between people and God. William Edward Burghardt Du Bois (W. E. B. Du Bois) studied African-American churches in the early twentieth century. Du Bois asserts that the early years of the Black church during slavery on plantations was influenced by Voodooism.

Through counterclockwise circle dancing, ring shouters built up spiritual energy that resulted in the communication with ancestral spirits, and led to spirit possession. Enslaved African Americans performed the counterclockwise circle dance until someone was pulled into the center of the ring by the spiritual vortex at the center. The spiritual vortex at the center of the ring shout was a sacred spiritual realm. The center of the ring shout is where the ancestors and the Holy Spirit reside at the center. The Ring Shout (a sacred dance in Hoodoo) in Black churches results in spirit possession. The Ring Shout is a counterclockwise circle dance with singing and clapping that results in possession by the Holy Spirit. It is believed when people become possessed by the Holy Spirit their hearts become filled with the Holy Ghost which purifies their heart and soul from evil and replace it with joy. The Ring Shout in Hoodoo was influenced by the Kongo cosmogram a sacred symbol of the Bantu-Kongo people in Central Africa. It symbolizes the cyclical nature of life of birth, life, death, and rebirth (reincarnation of the soul). The Kongo cosmogram also symbolizes the rising and setting of the sun, the sun rising in the east and setting in the west that is counterclockwise, which is why ring shouters dance in a circle counterclockwise to invoke the spirit.

===Mardi Gras Indians===

In New Orleans, Louisiana the practice of spirit possession continues in the cultural traditions of Mardi Gras Indians. Mardi Gras Indians are African Americans that practice a masking creole tradition that combines Native American traditions from Louisiana, West African masking traditions, and Afro-Caribbean carnival practices. During Mardi Gras, some Black maskers wear masks and suits (regalia) to invite the spirits and gods to possess them. This is a continued African tradition of spirit communication and possession. Masking Indian &quot;Big Chief&quot; Allison Montana said: &quot;...You&#x27;re dancing with a spirit, with a feeling. If there are five or six chiefs in my practice, I&#x27;ll out dance all of them until they short-winded and they have to run outside looking for air. I&#x27;ll still be on the dance floor soaking wet. Look like I can&#x27;t stop. My duty was to out dance every one of them. I&#x27;m just dancing with a spirit. I&#x27;m not just dancing to be dancing.&quot;

==Asian traditions==

===Yahwism===
There are indications that trance-related practices might have played a role in the prophetic experiences of adherents of Yahwism. According to Martti Nissinen, Yahwist prophets may have received messages from the different gods and goddesses in the Yahwist Pantheon through a state of trance possession. This theory can be reconstructed from Sumerian Mythology, a similar theology to that of Yahwism, where the standard prophetic designations in the Akkadian language, muḫḫûm/muḫḫūtum (masc./fem., Old Babylonian) and maḫḫû/maḫḫūtu (masc./fem., Neo-Assyrian), are derived from the Akkadian verb maḫû &quot;to become crazy, to go into a frenzy.&quot; According to bible scholar Simon B. Parker, trance rituals may have occurred such as nudity or a less extreme alternative, a trance where the person to enter trance receives the god or spirit into their body.

Further according to Nissinen, the Hebrew Bible, may contain evidence that trance-related practices may have been the origins of the Jewish traditions of prophetic messages. However, these instances may have been limited, with trance instead being a way of confirming divine appointment to a leadership position.

Nissinen also recorded that music was an essential part to these trance-ceremonies in the Ancient Near-East and so it can be reconstructed it could have been found in Yahwism. Instruments such as the tambourine, harps, lyres, and flutes may have been utilized, as those were common instruments in Ancient Israel. Along with music, incense may have also been used, either as an offering, or to be used as an entheogen, or possibly as both.

Exorcisms were also common. They can be reconstructed from both Medieval Jewish texts and texts from neighboring ancient cultures that practiced exorcisms. Exorcists acting almost like shamans would do rituals to exorcise one of a &quot;demon&quot; or evil spirit. According to Gina Konstantopoulos, a figure named an &quot;Āshipu&quot; acted as an exorcist in Mesopotamia and were trained in many fields of occultism, priesthood and herbalism. As amulets (called teraphim) were also used in Yahwism to ward off evil spirits, it may also be reconstructed that there were people in Ancient Israel who acted as exorcists or shamans who would do specific rituals to ward off evil spirits. As mentioned previously, these may have included music, incense, prayers, and trance-rituals. According to Reimund Leicht, formulae was used ward off the evil, along with ritualistic sacrifices.

===Buddhism===
According to the Indian medical literature and Tantric Buddhist scriptures, most of the &quot;seizers&quot;, or those that threaten the lives of young children, appear in animal form: cow, lion, fox, monkey, horse, dog, pig, cat, crow, pheasant, owl, and snake. Apart from these &quot;nightmare shapes&quot;, the impersonation or incarnation of animals can in some circumstances also be highly beneficial, according to Michel Strickmann.

Ch&#x27;i Chung-fu, a Chinese gynecologist writing early in the 13th century, wrote that in addition to five sorts of falling frenzy classified according to their causative factors, there were also four types of other frenzies distinguished by the sounds and movements given off by the victim during his seizure: cow, horse, pig, and dog frenzies.

In Buddhism, a &quot;māra&quot;, sometimes translated as &quot;demon&quot;, can either be a being suffering in the hell realm or a delusion. Before Siddhartha became Gautama Buddha, He was challenged by Mara, the embodiment of temptation, and overcame it. In traditional Buddhism, four forms of &quot;māra&quot; are enumerated:
* &quot;Kleśa-māra&quot;, or &quot; māra&quot; as the embodiment of all unskillful emotions, such as greed, hate, and delusion.
* &quot;Mṛtyu-māra&quot;, or &quot;māra&quot; as death.
* &quot;Skandha-māra&quot;, or &quot;māra&quot; as metaphor for the entirety of conditioned existence. 
* &quot;Devaputra-māra&quot;, the deva of the sensuous realm, who tried to prevent Gautama Buddha from attaining liberation from the cycle of rebirth on the night of the Buddha&#x27;s enlightenment.

It is believed that a &quot;māra&quot; will depart to a different realm once it is appeased.

===East Asia===

Certain sects of Taoism, Korean shamanism, Shinto, some Japanese new religious movements, and other East Asian religions feature the idea of spirit possession. Some sects feature shamans who supposedly become possessed; mediums who allegedly channel beings&#x27; supernatural power; or enchanters are said to imbue or foster spirits within objects, like samurai swords. The Hong Kong film &quot;Super Normal II&quot; (&quot;大迷信&quot;, 1993) shows the true famous story of a young lady in Taiwan who possesses the dead body of a married woman to live her pre-determined remaining life. She is still serving in the Zhen Tian Temple in Yunlin County.

====China====
===== Background =====
China is a country where 73.56% of the population is defined as Chinese folk religion/unaffiliated (nonreligion). Therefore, the Chinese population&#x27;s knowledge of spirit possession is not majorly obtained from religion. Instead, the concept is spread through fairy tales/folk tales and literary works of its traditional culture. In essence, the concept of soul possession has penetrated into all aspects of Chinese life, from people&#x27;s superstitions, folk taboos, and funeral rituals, to various ghost-themed literary works, and has continued to spread to people&#x27;s lives today.

===== Development =====
Spirit possession in China was prominent until the Communist takeover in the 1950s and most of the data gathered on this topic will be from the late 18th century. Some Chinese believe that illnesses to man is due to the possession of an evil yin spirit (kuei). These evil spirits become such when the deceased are not worshiped by the family, they have died unexpectedly, or did not follow Confucius&#x27;s ideals of filial piety and ancestral reverence accordingly. These evil spirits cause unexplainable disasters, agricultural shocks and possessions. Disease is the cause of the supernatural where they do not have control over. Usually in the writings about this, the healers are the ones being described with detail, not so much the patient. Magical practices are sometimes what spirit possession is referred to as. It is very hard to distinguish between the religion, magic and local traditions. This is because many times, all three are fused together, so sometimes trying to distinguish between them is hard.

===== Shaman =====
Another type of spirit possession works through a shaman, a prophet, healer and religious figure with the power to partially control spirits and communicate for them. Messages, remedies and even oracles are delivered through the shaman. This is sometimes used by people who would like to become important figures. Usually, shamans give guidance that reflects the customer&#x27;s existing values.

===== Yin-yang theory =====
The yin-yang theory is one of the most important bases and components of Chinese traditional culture. The yin-yang theory has penetrated into various traditional Chinese cultural things including calendar, astronomy, meteorology, Chinese medicine, martial arts, calligraphy, architecture, religion, feng shui, divination, etc. The yin-yang theory also applies to spirit possession. In general, one is considered to be &quot;weak&quot;, when the yin and yang in the body are imbalanced, especially when the yin is on the dominant side. The spirits, which are categorized as the yin side, will then take control of these individuals with the imbalanced and yin-dominant situation more easily.
* Shi (Chinese ancestor veneration)
* Shamanism of the Solon People (Inner Mongolia)
* Tangki

====Japan====
* Misaki

===India===
====Ayurveda====
&quot;Bhūtavidyā&quot;, the exorcism of possessing spirits, is traditionally one of the eight limbs of Ayurveda.

====Rajasthan====
The concept of spirit possession exists in the culture of modern Rajasthan. Some of the spirits allegedly possessing Rajasthanis are seen as good and beneficial, while others are seen as malevolent. The good spirits are said to include murdered royalty, the underworld god Bhaironji, and Muslim saints and fakirs. Bad spirits are believed to include perpetual debtors who die in debt, stillborn infants, deceased widows, and foreign tourists. The supposedly possessed individual is referred to as a &quot;ghorala&quot;, or &quot;mount&quot;. Possession, even if by a benign spirit, is regarded as undesirable, as it is seen to entail loss of self-control, and violent emotional outbursts.

====Tamil Nadu====

Tamil women in India are said to experience possession by &quot;peye&quot; spirits. According to tradition, these spirits overwhelmingly possess new brides, are usually identified as the ghosts of young men who died while romantically or sexually frustrated, and are ritually exorcised. 


====Sri Lanka====
The Coast Veddas, a social group within the minority group of Sri Lankan Tamil people in Eastern Province, Sri Lanka, enter trances during religious festivals in which they are regarded as being possessed by a spirit. Although they speak a dialect of Tamil, during trances they will sometimes use a mixed language that contains words from the Vedda language.
===Southeast Asia===

====Indonesia====
In Bali, the animist traditions of the island include a practice called &quot;sanghyang&quot;, induction of voluntary possession trance states for specific purposes. Roughly similar to voluntary possession in Vaudon (Voodoo), &quot;sanghyang&quot; is considered a sacred state in which hyangs (deities) or helpful spirits temporarily inhabit the bodies of participants. The purpose of sanghyang is believed to be to cleanse people and places of evil influences and restore spiritual balance. Thus, it is often referred to as an exorcism ceremony. In Sulawesi, the women of the Bonerate people of Sulawesi practice a possession-trance ritual in which they smother glowing embers with their bare feet at the climax. The fact that they are not burned in the process is considered proof of the authenticity of the possession.

Influenced by the religion of Islam, among the several spirits in Indonesian belief are demons (&quot;setan&quot;), composed of fire, prone to anger and passion. They envy humans for their physical body, and try to gain control of it. When they assault a human, they would intrude their mind, trying to displace the human spirit. The human&#x27;s mind would adapt to the passions of anger, violence, irrationality and greed, the intruding demon is composed of. The demon is believed to alter the person, giving him supernatural attributes, like strength of many men, ability to appear in more than one place, or assume the form of an animal, such as a tiger or a pig, or to kill without touching. Others become lunatics, resembling epilepsy. In extreme cases, the presence of the demon may alter the condition of the body, matching its own spiritual qualities, turning into a &quot;raksasha&quot;.

====Malaysia====
Female workers in Malaysian factories have allegedly become possessed by spirits, and factory owners generally regard it as mass hysteria and an intrusion of irrational and archaic beliefs into a modern setting.
Anthropologist Aihwa Ong noted that spirit possession beliefs in Malaysia were typically held by older, married women, whereas the female factory workers are typically young and unmarried. She connects this to the rapid industrialization and modernization of Malaysia. Ong argued that spirit possession is a traditional way of rebelling against authority without punishment, and suggests that it is a means of protesting the untenable working conditions and sexual harassment that the women were compelled to endure.

==The Americas and Caribbean==

===Indo-Caribbean Shaktism===
In Indo-Caribbean Madrasi Religion, a state of trance-possession known as &quot;Sami Aduthal&quot; in Tamil and as a &quot;manifestation&quot; in English occurs whence a devotee enters a trance state after praying. It is an essential part to Indo-Caribbean Shakti ceremonies, being accompanied by Tappu drumming, the singing of devotional songs, and the drumming of Udukai drums.

Ceremonies called Pujas often include the drumming of three to five tappu to invoke the deity to the space. Then, the head pujari receives the God or Goddess into their body, acting as a medium. A mixture of water, turmeric powder, and neem leaves are poured onto the medium, as it is believed that the God&#x27;s energy heats up the body while the water and turmeric with the neem leaves cools it down again. Puja services are often held once a week.

==Oceanic traditions==

===Melanesia===
The Urapmin people of the New Guinea Highlands practice a form of group possession known as the &quot;spirit disco&quot; (). Men and women gather in church buildings, dancing in circles and jumping up and down while women sing Christian songs; this is called &quot;pulling the [Holy] spirit&quot; (, Urap: ). The songs&#x27; melodies are borrowed from traditional women&#x27;s songs sung at drum dances (Urap: ), and the lyrics are typically in Telefol or other Mountain Ok languages. If successful, some dancers will &quot;get the spirit&quot; (), flailing wildly and careening about the dance floor. After an hour or more, those possessed will collapse, the singing will end, and the spirit disco will end with a prayer and, if there is time, a Bible reading and sermon. The body is believed to normally be &quot;heavy&quot; () with sin, and possession is the process of the Holy Spirit throwing the sins from one&#x27;s body, making the person &quot;light&quot; () again. This is a completely new ritual for the Urapmin, who have no indigenous tradition of spirit-possession.

===Micronesia===
The concept of spirit possession appears in Chuuk State, one of the four states of Federated States of Micronesia. Although Chuuk is an overwhelmingly Christian society, traditional beliefs in spirit possession by the dead still exist, usually held by women, and &quot;events&quot; are usually brought on by family conflicts. The supposed spirits, speaking through the women, typically admonish family members to treat each other better.

== European traditions ==

=== Ancient Greece ===
=== Italian folk magic ===
In traditional Italian folk magic spirit possessions are not uncommon. It is known in this culture that a person may be possessed by multiple entities at once. The way to be rid of the spirit(s) would be to call for a &quot;curatore, guaritore&quot; or &quot;pratico&quot; which all translate to healer or knowledgeable one from Italian. These healers would perform sacred rituals to be rid of the spirits; the rituals are passed down through generations and vary based on the region in Italy. It is said that for many Italian rituals specifically those to be rid of negative spirits, that the information may only be shared on Christmas Eve (specifically for &quot;il malocchio&quot;). If the family is religious they may even call in a priest to perform a traditional catholic exorcism on the spirit(s).

==Shamanic traditions==

Shamanism is a religious practice that involves a practitioner who is believed to interact with a spirit world through altered states of consciousness, such as trance. The goal of this is usually to direct these spirits or spiritual energies into the physical world, for healing or another purpose.

==New religious movements==

===Wicca===
Wiccans believe in voluntary possession by the Goddess, connected with the sacred ceremony of Drawing Down the Moon. The high priestess solicits the Goddess to possess her and speak through her.

==Scientific views==

===Cultural anthropology===
The works of Jean Rouch, Germaine Dieterlen, and Marcel Griaule have been extensively cited in research studies on possession in Western Africa that extended to Brazil and North America due to the slave trade.

The anthropologist I.M. Lewis noted that women are more likely to be involved in spirit possession cults than men are, and postulated that such cults act as a means of compensation for their exclusion from other spheres within their respective cultures.

===Physical anthropology===
Anthropologists Alice B. Kehoe and Dody H. Giletti argued that the reason that women are more commonly seen in Afro-Eurasian spirit possession cults is because of deficiencies in thiamine, tryptophan-niacin, calcium, and vitamin D. They argued that a combination of poverty and diet cause this problem, and that it is exacerbated by the strains of pregnancy and lactation. They postulated that the involuntary symptoms of these deficiencies affecting their nervous systems have been institutionalized as spirit possession.

===Medicine and psychology===

Spirit possession of any kind, including demonic, is just one psychiatric or medical diagnosis recognized by the DSM-5 or the ICD-10: &quot;F44.3 Trance and possession disorders&quot;. In clinical psychiatry, trance and possession disorders are defined as &quot;states involving a temporary loss of the sense of personal identity and full awareness of the surroundings&quot; and generally classed as a type of dissociative disorder.

People alleged to be possessed by spirits sometimes exhibit symptoms similar to those associated with mental illnesses such as derealization, hallucinogen abuse, psychosis, catatonia, mania, Tourette&#x27;s syndrome, epilepsy, schizophrenia, or dissociative identity disorder, including involuntary, uncensored behavior, and an extra-human, extra-social aspect to the individual&#x27;s actions. It is not uncommon to ascribe the experience of sleep paralysis to demonic possession, although it&#x27;s not a physical or mental illness. Studies have found that alleged demonic possessions can be related to trauma.

In entry article on dissociative identity disorder, the DSM-5 states, &quot;possession-form identities in dissociative identity disorder typically manifest as behaviors that appear as if a &#x27;spirit,&#x27; supernatural being, or outside person has taken control such that the individual begins speaking or acting in a distinctly different manner&quot;. The symptoms vary across cultures. The DSM-5 indicates that personality states of dissociative identity disorder may be interpreted as possession in some cultures, and instances of spirit possession are often related to traumatic experiences—suggesting that possession experiences may be caused by mental distress. In cases of dissociative identity disorder in which the alter personality is questioned as to its identity, 29 percent are reported to identify themselves as demons. A 19th century term for a mental disorder in which the patient believes that they are possessed by demons or evil spirits is demonomania or cacodemonomanis.

Some have expressed concern that belief in demonic possession can limit access to health care for the mentally ill.

==Notable examples==

===Purported demonic possessions===
In chronological order:
==See also==

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 


* 

* 
* 


* 

* 
* 
* 
* 

* 


* 
* 

* 
* 
* 

* 

* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1782082" start="0" end="17" title="Spirit possession" label="Spirit possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q852859" start="38" end="68" title="altered state of consciousness" label="altered state of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="175" end="181" title="Supernatural#Spirit" label="spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="184" end="189" title="ghost" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="192" end="197" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="200" end="205" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="211" end="214" title="Deity" label="god"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="299" end="307" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="309" end="321" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q302729" start="323" end="336" title="Haitian Vodou" label="Haitian Vodou"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810132" start="338" end="352" title="Dominican Vudú" label="Dominican Vudú"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="354" end="362" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="364" end="369" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="371" end="378" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="380" end="385" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="391" end="405" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="408" end="414" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="421" end="436" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967405" start="803" end="838" title="National Institute of Mental Health" label="National Institute of Mental Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1048" end="1064" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1073" end="1078" title="Indigenous peoples of north america" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479328" start="1083" end="1096" title="Indigenous peoples of South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="1101" end="1112" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425524" start="1117" end="1128" title="Charismatic Christianity" label="Charismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="1129" end="1147" title="Christian church (denomination)" label="Christian churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="1343" end="1351" title="Exorcism" label="exorcise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1423" end="1435" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="1490" end="1495" title="Devil" label="Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="1502" end="1507" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="1553" end="1559" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782082" start="1633" end="1651" title="demonic possession" label="demonic possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="1688" end="1700" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="1752" end="1758" title="Prayer" label="Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q626510" start="1776" end="1784" title="blessing" label="blessing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="1830" end="1840" title="sacraments" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="1846" end="1855" title="exorcisms" label="exorcisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="1905" end="1916" title="Theology" label="theologians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076857" start="1926" end="1948" title="Ángel Manuel Rodríguez" label="Ángel Manuel Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="1959" end="1966" title="Mediumship" label="mediums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584577" start="1995" end="2007" title="Leviticus 20" label="Leviticus 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="2089" end="2102" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993310" start="2116" end="2129" title="false prophet" label="false prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q235901" start="2141" end="2145" title="Ahab" label="Ahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006096" start="2178" end="2191" title="Ramoth-Gilead" label="Ramoth-Gilead"/>
<link wikidata="Q12470163" start="2195" end="2205" title="1 Kings 22" label="1 Kings 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="2273" end="2286" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2322" end="2357" title="Miracles of Jesus#Exorcisms" label="Jesus drove out demons from persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="2599" end="2613" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas Iscariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165882" start="2617" end="2624" title="John 13" label="John 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2713" end="2718" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="2757" end="2770" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961394" start="2961" end="2994" title="exorcism of the Gerasene demoniac" label="exorcism of the Gerasene demoniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="3125" end="3139" title="Mary Magdelene" label="Mary Magdelene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367940" start="3193" end="3216" title="Roman Catholic doctrine" label="Roman Catholic doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="3229" end="3234" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048977" start="3240" end="3253" title="Non-physical entity" label="non-corporeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q364340" start="3294" end="3298" title="Will (philosophy)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q581450" start="3300" end="3312" title="Fallen angel" label="Fallen angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="3318" end="3323" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28730" start="3594" end="3598" title="Saul" label="Saul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3646" end="3654" title="Books of Samuel#1 Samuel" label="1 Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="3700" end="3706" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="3984" end="3989" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q944412" start="3999" end="4003" title="Kinnor" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671614" start="4665" end="4682" title="obsessive thought" label="obsessive thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q944142" start="4708" end="4725" title="suicidal ideation" label="suicidal ideation"/>
<link wikidata="Q252000" start="4729" end="4739" title="Oppression" label="Oppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577" start="4831" end="4842" title="Book of Job" label="Book of Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q179962" start="4852" end="4855" title="Job (biblical figure)" label="Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184819" start="5167" end="5179" title="Roman Ritual" label="Roman Ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5249" end="5260" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386945" start="5328" end="5347" title="superhuman strength" label="superhuman strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q61070" start="5351" end="5370" title="Speaking in tongues" label="Speaking in tongues"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="5415" end="5425" title="Revelation" label="Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="5429" end="5438" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="5490" end="5501" title="Blasphemy" label="Blasphemous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075402" start="5508" end="5529" title="Obscene gesture" label="obscene hand gestures"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="5537" end="5546" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="5578" end="5583" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116113" start="5607" end="5632" title="New Catholic Encyclopedia" label="New Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526886" start="5653" end="5679" title="Ecclesiastical polity" label="Ecclesiastical authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="5903" end="5911" title="exorcism" label="exorcism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6225" end="6233" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="6307" end="6321" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="6473" end="6479" title="Bishop (Catholic Church)" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="6554" end="6561" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="6669" end="6679" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="6701" end="6711" title="King James VI and I" label="King James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011799" start="6788" end="6800" title="Daemonologie" label="Daemonologie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577" start="7026" end="7037" title="Book of Job" label="Book of Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q218198" start="7457" end="7467" title="Holy Water" label="Holy Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q20460" start="7481" end="7486" title="Crucifix" label="Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="7508" end="7516" title="exorcism" label="exorcism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049377" start="7572" end="7600" title="Catholic particular churches and liturgical rites" label="Rites of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="8005" end="8013" title="Prophet" label="Prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8050" end="8058" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="8059" end="8072" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q218198" start="8201" end="8211" title="holy water" label="holy water"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="8267" end="8274" title="Witchcraft" label="witches"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="8275" end="8281" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030319" start="8492" end="8497" title="church porch" label="porch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="8503" end="8509" title="leprosy" label="lepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="8645" end="8651" title="sermon" label="sermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="8789" end="8798" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="8870" end="8887" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q30188468" start="9068" end="9098" title="Baptist Union of Great Britain" label="Baptist Union of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="9102" end="9124" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q961271" start="9511" end="9529" title="Richland, Missouri" label="Richland, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="9579" end="9585" title="Autism spectrum" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450985" start="9752" end="9779" title="neurodevelopmental disorder" label="neurodevelopmental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="10197" end="10209" title="Board of education" label="school board"/>
<link wikidata="Q324640" start="10265" end="10276" title="Charismatic movement" label="charismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="10281" end="10292" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254061" start="10388" end="10410" title="Deliverance ministry" label="deliverance ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q209733" start="10489" end="10513" title="chronic fatigue syndrome" label="chronic fatigue syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="10515" end="10528" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="10543" end="10554" title="pornography" label="pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="10560" end="10570" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="10957" end="10968" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465" start="11078" end="11082" title="jinn" label="jinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959257" start="11096" end="11104" title="Shaitan" label="shayatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q936678" start="11118" end="11125" title="Ifrit" label="ʻafarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="11146" end="11151" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12818349" start="11253" end="11269" title="Islamic theology" label="Islamic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="11417" end="11422" title="ghost" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465" start="11651" end="11655" title="Jinn" label="Jinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341349" start="11741" end="11754" title="Subtle body" label="subtle bodies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12156" end="12165" title="Predestination in Islam#Qadar and free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q235258" start="12978" end="12983" title="aqida" label="aqida"/>
<link wikidata="Q539918" start="13034" end="13040" title="Ashari" label="Ashari"/>
<link wikidata="Q638043" start="13050" end="13057" title="Atharism" label="Atharis"/>
<link wikidata="Q491558" start="13067" end="13079" title="ibn Taimiyya" label="ibn Taimiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q119679" start="13084" end="13094" title="ibn Qayyim" label="ibn Qayyim"/>
<link wikidata="Q492501" start="13102" end="13113" title="Maturidites" label="Maturidites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13228" end="13242" title="al-Rustughfanī" label="al-Rustughfanī"/>
<link wikidata="Q668460" start="13248" end="13262" title="Mu&amp;#x27;tazila" label="Mu&amp;#x27;tazila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959257" start="13426" end="13434" title="Shaitan" label="shayatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q273101" start="13463" end="13468" title="Iblis" label="Iblis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963451" start="13728" end="13732" title="nafs" label="nafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="13740" end="13746" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926344" start="13830" end="13835" title="Qalb" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206606" start="14070" end="14073" title="Div (mythology)" label="div"/>
<link wikidata="Q43347" start="14413" end="14417" title="Rumi" label="Rumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q194091" start="14422" end="14439" title="Attar of Nishapur" label="Attar of Nishapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963451" start="14970" end="14974" title="nafs" label="nafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942579" start="15063" end="15066" title="rūḥ" label="rūḥ"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="15163" end="15175" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911414" start="15216" end="15236" title="Second Temple Period" label="Second Temple Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190073" start="15353" end="15374" title="Jewish magical papyri" label="Jewish magical papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="15396" end="15403" title="amulets" label="amulets"/>
<link wikidata="Q834459" start="15405" end="15412" title="ostraca" label="ostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q392743" start="15417" end="15434" title="incantation bowls" label="incantation bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882854" start="15505" end="15519" title="unclean spirit" label="unclean spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q131737" start="15623" end="15637" title="Book of Tobit" label="Book of Tobias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017" start="15647" end="15659" title="16th century" label="16th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q339509" start="15661" end="15672" title="Isaac Luria" label="Isaac Luria"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="15683" end="15689" title="Mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="15707" end="15730" title="Transmigration of a soul" label="transmigration of souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748613" start="16033" end="16048" title="Jewish folklore" label="Jewish folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373576" start="16170" end="16179" title="Baal Shem" label="Baal Shem"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="16229" end="16237" title="exorcism" label="exorcism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001867" start="16262" end="16270" title="adorcism" label="adorcism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503028" start="16358" end="16361" title="zār" label="zār"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068269" start="17793" end="17799" title="Zebola" label="Zebola"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="17891" end="17923" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="18026" end="18039" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q927706" start="18066" end="18078" title="Mongo people" label="Mongo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838" start="18132" end="18140" title="Kinshasa" label="Kinshasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q844307" start="18192" end="18205" title="Gurage people" label="Gurage people"/>
<link wikidata="Q312321" start="19666" end="19672" title="ensete" label="ensete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192069" start="20479" end="20492" title="Sidama people" label="Sidama people"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="20506" end="20514" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="20516" end="20530" title="Anthropologist" label="Anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859263" start="21127" end="21133" title="orator" label="orator"/>
<link wikidata="Q692836" start="21303" end="21314" title="Digo people" label="Digo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="21318" end="21323" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763989" start="21842" end="21856" title="Giriama people" label="Giriama people"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="21917" end="21924" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029" start="22191" end="22201" title="Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q657661" start="22256" end="22276" title="Mozambican Civil War" label="Mozambican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="22509" end="22515" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q455244" start="22531" end="22541" title="Alice Auma" label="Alice Auma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474755" start="22732" end="22745" title="Sukuma people" label="Sukuma people"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="22749" end="22757" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637872" start="22845" end="22851" title="Hadimu" label="Hadimu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="22861" end="22869" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937082" start="23127" end="23133" title="Xesibe" label="Xesibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="23137" end="23142" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q466551" start="23164" end="23172" title="Transkei" label="Transkei"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="23174" end="23186" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="23609" end="23621" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q893589" start="23648" end="23661" title="Hausa animism" label="Hausa animism"/>
<link wikidata="Q388202" start="23763" end="23789" title="African diaspora religions" label="African diaspora religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q302729" start="24156" end="24169" title="Haitian Vodou" label="Haitian Vodou"/>
<link wikidata="Q752920" start="24324" end="24327" title="Loa" label="Loa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431297" start="24954" end="24961" title="Umbanda" label="Umbanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q388315" start="24966" end="24980" title="Afro-Brazilians" label="Afro-Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068640" start="24981" end="24994" title="folk religion" label="folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190168" start="25015" end="25028" title="Yoruba people" label="Yoruba people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227241" start="25494" end="25504" title="Pomba Gira" label="Pomba Gira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367665" start="25533" end="25536" title="Exú" label="Exu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546302" start="25838" end="25844" title="Hoodoo (spirituality)" label="Hoodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="26057" end="26087" title="Ancestor worship" label="reverence to ancestral spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920065" start="26106" end="26118" title="Quilting" label="quilt making"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="26120" end="26134" title="Herbal medicine" label="herbal healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648023" start="26136" end="26143" title="Kongo religion" label="Bakongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723030" start="26148" end="26169" title="Odinala" label="Igbo burial practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="26171" end="26181" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892889" start="26192" end="26205" title="Mary Jenkins Community Praise House" label="praise houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249489" start="26207" end="26222" title="Snake worship" label="snake reverence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922295" start="26224" end="26249" title="Black church" label="African-American churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460155" start="26275" end="26290" title="Nkisi" label="Nkisi practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578117" start="26292" end="26316" title="Spiritual church movement" label="Black Spiritual churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943023" start="26318" end="26332" title="Black theology" label="Black theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334818" start="26338" end="26348" title="ring shout" label="ring shout"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102881" start="26354" end="26369" title="Kongo cosmogram" label="Kongo cosmogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484100" start="26371" end="26376" title="Simbi" label="Simbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q829697" start="26402" end="26411" title="Evocation" label="conjuring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26417" end="26434" title="crossroads spirit" label="crossroads spirit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26443" end="26455" title="conjure cane" label="conjure cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333686" start="26497" end="26505" title="libation" label="libation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26508" end="26523" title="Bible conjuring" label="Bible conjuring"/>
<link wikidata="Q177764" start="26674" end="26692" title="West African Vodun" label="West African Vodun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640052" start="26968" end="26978" title="Shout (Black gospel music)" label="Holy Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607516" start="27382" end="27398" title="List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources" label="biblical figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="27584" end="27616" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="William Edward Burghardt Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102881" start="28770" end="28785" title="Kongo cosmogram" label="Kongo cosmogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q640090" start="28809" end="28820" title="Kongo people" label="Bantu-Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="29215" end="29237" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290332" start="29312" end="29330" title="Mardi Gras Indians" label="Mardi Gras Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="29355" end="29372" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309418" start="29471" end="29491" title="Traditional African masks" label="West African masking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121415" start="29508" end="29531" title="List of Caribbean carnivals around the world" label="Afro-Caribbean carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732803" start="29775" end="29790" title="Allison Montana" label="Allison Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571322" start="30374" end="30381" title="Yahwism" label="Yahwism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473986" start="30396" end="30411" title="Martti Nissinen" label="Martti Nissinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914567" start="30502" end="30518" title="Canaanite Religion" label="Yahwist Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q275051" start="30595" end="30613" title="Sumerian Mythology" label="Sumerian Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="30703" end="30720" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="31148" end="31160" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190874" start="31267" end="31285" title="Prophets in Judaism" label="prophetic messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q310491" start="31834" end="31843" title="entheogen" label="entheogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="31867" end="31876" title="Exorcisms" label="Exorcisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="32811" end="32827" title="Vajrayana" label="Tantric Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="33555" end="33563" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352021" start="33573" end="33577" title="Mara (demon)" label="māra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243384" start="33667" end="33677" title="Naraka" label="hell realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="33718" end="33732" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352021" start="33755" end="33759" title="Mara (demon)" label="Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q19969527" start="33952" end="33971" title="Kleshas (Buddhism)" label="unskillful emotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869294" start="34057" end="34062" title="Mrtyu" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="34115" end="34123" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089509" start="34202" end="34206" title="Deva (Buddhism)" label="deva"/>
<link wikidata="Q173324" start="34301" end="34317" title="Samsara" label="cycle of rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="34496" end="34502" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q699747" start="34504" end="34520" title="Korean shamanism" label="Korean shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="34522" end="34528" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263926" start="34535" end="34567" title="Japanese new religions" label="Japanese new religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="34658" end="34665" title="Shamanism" label="shamans"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="34699" end="34706" title="Mediumship" label="mediums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999796" start="34765" end="34775" title="Enchanter (paranormal)" label="enchanters"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="34833" end="34847" title="samurai swords" label="samurai swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="34967" end="34973" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q153221" start="35112" end="35125" title="Yunlin County" label="Yunlin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="35229" end="35250" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="36869" end="36875" title="shaman" label="shaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495886" start="37937" end="37940" title="Shi (personator)" label="Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752556" start="37942" end="37969" title="Chinese ancestor veneration" label="Chinese ancestor veneration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37973" end="38002" title="Solon people#Shamanism" label="Shamanism of the Solon People"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="38004" end="38018" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821093" start="38022" end="38028" title="Tangki" label="Tangki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38046" end="38052" title="Misaki#Spirit possession" label="Misaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38171" end="38194" title="Ayurveda#Eight components" label="eight limbs of Ayurveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="38280" end="38289" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900818" start="38488" end="38497" title="Bhaironji" label="Bhaironji"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="38503" end="38509" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q173491" start="38925" end="38930" title="Tamil people" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138217" start="39237" end="39249" title="Coast Veddas" label="Coast Veddas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815623" start="39295" end="39318" title="Sri Lankan Tamil people" label="Sri Lankan Tamil people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046126" start="39322" end="39349" title="Eastern Province, Sri Lanka" label="Eastern Province, Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586046" start="39484" end="39489" title="Sri Lankan Tamil dialect" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567934" start="39576" end="39590" title="Vedda language" label="Vedda language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528262" start="39710" end="39719" title="sanghyang" label="sanghyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q177764" start="39841" end="39847" title="Vaudon" label="Vaudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216336" start="39918" end="39923" title="hyang" label="hyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q31174463" start="40209" end="40224" title="Bonerate people" label="Bonerate people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="40228" end="40236" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959257" start="40557" end="40562" title="Shaitan" label="setan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049467" start="41337" end="41345" title="raksasha" label="raksasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="41389" end="41397" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532199" start="41495" end="41508" title="mass hysteria" label="mass hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827909" start="41598" end="41607" title="Aihwa Ong" label="Aihwa Ong"/>
<link wikidata="Q122238446" start="42166" end="42197" title="Caribbean Shaktism" label="Indo-Caribbean Madrasi Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3534333" start="42529" end="42535" title="Udukai" label="Udukai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710699" start="42612" end="42617" title="Parai" label="tappu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="42759" end="42767" title="turmeric" label="turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q170461" start="42780" end="42784" title="Azadirachta indica" label="neem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899771" start="43041" end="43055" title="Urapmin people" label="Urapmin people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961771" start="43063" end="43083" title="New Guinea Highlands" label="New Guinea Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11732691" start="43337" end="43341" title="Urapmin language" label="Urap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081687" start="43499" end="43520" title="Mountain Ok languages" label="Mountain Ok languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q221684" start="44178" end="44189" title="Chuuk State" label="Chuuk State"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="44217" end="44247" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q852859" start="45601" end="45632" title="Altered state of consciousness" label="altered states of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q466475" start="45642" end="45648" title="trance" label="trance"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="45823" end="45828" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="45870" end="45877" title="Goddess" label="Goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256004" start="45917" end="45938" title="Drawing Down the Moon (ritual)" label="Drawing Down the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166405" start="46082" end="46092" title="Jean Rouch" label="Jean Rouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106713" start="46094" end="46112" title="Germaine Dieterlen" label="Germaine Dieterlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q723701" start="46118" end="46132" title="Marcel Griaule" label="Marcel Griaule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="46198" end="46212" title="Western Africa" label="Western Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="46230" end="46236" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="46266" end="46277" title="History of slavery" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725748" start="46579" end="46593" title="Alice Beck Kehoe" label="Alice B. Kehoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27527" start="46674" end="46686" title="Afro-Eurasia" label="Afro-Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83187" start="46742" end="46750" title="thiamine" label="thiamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="46752" end="46762" title="tryptophan" label="tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134658" start="46763" end="46769" title="Niacin (substance)" label="niacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="46771" end="46778" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="46784" end="46793" title="vitamin D" label="vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="47180" end="47191" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="47231" end="47236" title="DSM-5" label="DSM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q45127" start="47244" end="47250" title="ICD-10" label="ICD-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="47654" end="47668" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199997" start="47679" end="47692" title="derealization" label="derealization"/>
<link wikidata="Q194270" start="47694" end="47706" title="hallucinogen" label="hallucinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="47714" end="47723" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q501571" start="47725" end="47734" title="catatonia" label="catatonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="47736" end="47741" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q191779" start="47743" end="47767" title="Tourette&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Tourette&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="47769" end="47777" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="47779" end="47792" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657" start="47797" end="47827" title="dissociative identity disorder" label="dissociative identity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q486851" start="47995" end="48010" title="sleep paralysis" label="sleep paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657" start="48186" end="48216" title="dissociative identity disorder" label="dissociative identity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="48222" end="48227" title="DSM-5" label="DSM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q201662" start="48893" end="48898" title="Alter ego" label="alter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45938" wikidata="Q282640" url="?curid=45938" title="General equilibrium theory">
<text>In economics, general equilibrium theory attempts to explain the behavior of supply, demand, and prices in a whole economy with several or many interacting markets, by seeking to prove that the interaction of demand and supply will result in an overall general equilibrium. General equilibrium theory contrasts with the theory of &quot;partial&quot; equilibrium, which analyzes a specific part of an economy while its other factors are held constant.

General equilibrium theory both studies economies using the model of equilibrium pricing and seeks to determine in which circumstances the assumptions of general equilibrium will hold. The theory dates to the 1870s, particularly the work of French economist Léon Walras in his pioneering 1874 work &quot;Elements of Pure Economics&quot;. The theory reached its modern form with the work of Lionel W. McKenzie (Walrasian theory), Kenneth Arrow and Gérard Debreu (Hicksian theory) in the 1950s.

==Overview==
Broadly speaking, general equilibrium tries to give an understanding of the whole economy using a &quot;bottom-up&quot; approach, starting with individual markets and agents. Therefore, general equilibrium theory has traditionally been classified as part of microeconomics. The difference is not as clear as it used to be, since much of modern macroeconomics has emphasized microeconomic foundations, and has constructed general equilibrium models of macroeconomic fluctuations. General equilibrium macroeconomic models usually have a simplified structure that only incorporates a few markets, like a &quot;goods market&quot; and a &quot;financial market&quot;. In contrast, general equilibrium models in the microeconomic tradition typically involve a multitude of different goods markets. They are usually complex and require computers to calculate numerical solutions.

In a market system the prices and production of all goods, including the price of money and interest, are interrelated. A change in the price of one good, say bread, may affect another price, such as bakers&#x27; wages. If bakers don&#x27;t differ in tastes from others, the demand for bread might be affected by a change in bakers&#x27; wages, with a consequent effect on the price of bread. Calculating the equilibrium price of just one good, in theory, requires an analysis that accounts for all of the millions of different goods that are available. It is often assumed that agents are price takers, and under that assumption two common notions of equilibrium exist: Walrasian, or competitive equilibrium, and its generalization: a price equilibrium with transfers.

===Walrasian equilibrium===
The first attempt in neoclassical economics to model prices for a whole economy was made by Léon Walras. Walras&#x27; &quot;Elements of Pure Economics&quot; provides a succession of models, each taking into account more aspects of a real economy (two commodities, many commodities, production, growth, money). Some think Walras was unsuccessful and that the later models in this series are inconsistent.

In particular, Walras&#x27;s model was a long-run model in which prices of capital goods are the same whether they appear as inputs or outputs and in which the same rate of profits is earned in all lines of industry. This is inconsistent with the quantities of capital goods being taken as data. But when Walras introduced capital goods in his later models, he took their quantities as given, in arbitrary ratios. (In contrast, Kenneth Arrow and Gérard Debreu continued to take the initial quantities of capital goods as given, but adopted a short run model in which the prices of capital goods vary with time and the own rate of interest varies across capital goods.)

Walras was the first to lay down a research program widely followed by 20th-century economists. In particular, the Walrasian agenda included the investigation of when equilibria are unique and stable— Walras&#x27; Lesson 7 shows neither uniqueness, nor stability, nor even existence of an equilibrium is guaranteed. Walras also proposed a dynamic process by which general equilibrium might be reached, that of the tâtonnement or groping process.

The tâtonnement process is a model for investigating stability of equilibria. Prices are announced (perhaps by an &quot;auctioneer&quot;), and agents state how much of each good they would like to offer (supply) or purchase (demand). No transactions and no production take place at disequilibrium prices. Instead, prices are lowered for goods with positive prices and excess supply. Prices are raised for goods with excess demand. The question for the mathematician is under what conditions such a process will terminate in equilibrium where demand equates to supply for goods with positive prices and demand does not exceed supply for goods with a price of zero. Walras was not able to provide a definitive answer to this question (see Unresolved Problems in General Equilibrium below).

===Marshall and Sraffa===
In partial equilibrium analysis, the determination of the price of a good is simplified by just looking at the price of one good, and assuming that the prices of all other goods remain constant. The Marshallian theory of supply and demand is an example of partial equilibrium analysis. Partial equilibrium analysis is adequate when the first-order effects of a shift in the demand curve do not shift the supply curve. Anglo-American economists became more interested in general equilibrium in the late 1920s and 1930s after Piero Sraffa&#x27;s demonstration that Marshallian economists cannot account for the forces thought to account for the upward-slope of the supply curve for a consumer good.

If an industry uses little of a factor of production, a small increase in the output of that industry will not bid the price of that factor up. To a first-order approximation, firms in the industry will experience constant costs, and the industry supply curves will not slope up. If an industry uses an appreciable amount of that factor of production, an increase in the output of that industry will exhibit increasing costs. But such a factor is likely to be used in substitutes for the industry&#x27;s product, and an increased price of that factor will have effects on the supply of those substitutes. Consequently, Sraffa argued, the first-order effects of a shift in the demand curve of the original industry under these assumptions includes a shift in the supply curve of substitutes for that industry&#x27;s product, and consequent shifts in the original industry&#x27;s supply curve. General equilibrium is designed to investigate such interactions between markets.

Continental European economists made important advances in the 1930s. Walras&#x27; arguments for the existence of general equilibrium often were based on the counting of equations and variables. Such arguments are inadequate for non-linear systems of equations and do not imply that equilibrium prices and quantities cannot be negative, a meaningless solution for his models. The replacement of certain equations by inequalities and the use of more rigorous mathematics improved general equilibrium modeling.

==Modern concept of general equilibrium in economics==

The modern conception of general equilibrium is provided by the Arrow–Debreu–McKenzie model, developed jointly by Kenneth Arrow, Gérard Debreu, and Lionel W. McKenzie in the 1950s. Debreu presents this model in &quot;Theory of Value&quot; (1959) as an axiomatic model, following the style of mathematics promoted by Nicolas Bourbaki. In such an approach, the interpretation of the terms in the theory (e.g., goods, prices) are not fixed by the axioms.

Three important interpretations of the terms of the theory have been often cited. First, suppose commodities are distinguished by the location where they are delivered. Then the Arrow-Debreu model is a spatial model of, for example, international trade.

Second, suppose commodities are distinguished by when they are delivered. That is, suppose all markets equilibrate at some initial instant of time. Agents in the model purchase and sell contracts, where a contract specifies, for example, a good to be delivered and the date at which it is to be delivered. The Arrow–Debreu model of intertemporal equilibrium contains forward markets for all goods at all dates. No markets exist at any future dates.

Third, suppose contracts specify states of nature which affect whether a commodity is to be delivered: &quot;A contract for the transfer of a commodity now specifies, in addition to its physical properties, its location and its date, an event on the occurrence of which the transfer is conditional. This new definition of a commodity allows one to obtain a theory of [risk] free from any probability concept...&quot;

These interpretations can be combined. So the complete Arrow–Debreu model can be said to apply when goods are identified by when they are to be delivered, where they are to be delivered and under what circumstances they are to be delivered, as well as their intrinsic nature. So there would be a complete set of prices for contracts such as &quot;1 ton of Winter red wheat, delivered on 3rd of January in Minneapolis, if there is a hurricane in Florida during December&quot;. A general equilibrium model with complete markets of this sort seems to be a long way from describing the workings of real economies, however, its proponents argue that it is still useful as a simplified guide as to how real economies function.

Some of the recent work in general equilibrium has in fact explored the implications of incomplete markets, which is to say an intertemporal economy with uncertainty, where there do not exist sufficiently detailed contracts that would allow agents to fully allocate their consumption and resources through time. While it has been shown that such economies will generally still have an equilibrium, the outcome may no longer be Pareto optimal. The basic intuition for this result is that if consumers lack adequate means to transfer their wealth from one time period to another and the future is risky, there is nothing to necessarily tie any price ratio down to the relevant marginal rate of substitution, which is the standard requirement for Pareto optimality. Under some conditions the economy may still be constrained Pareto optimal, meaning that a central authority limited to the same type and number of contracts as the individual agents may not be able to improve upon the outcome, what is needed is the introduction of a full set of possible contracts. Hence, one implication of the theory of incomplete markets is that inefficiency may be a result of underdeveloped financial institutions or credit constraints faced by some members of the public. Research still continues in this area.

==Properties and characterization of general equilibrium==
Basic questions in general equilibrium analysis are concerned with the conditions under which an equilibrium will be efficient, which efficient equilibria can be achieved, when an equilibrium is guaranteed to exist and when the equilibrium will be unique and stable.

===First Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics===
The First Fundamental Welfare Theorem asserts that market equilibria are Pareto efficient. In other words, the allocation of goods in the equilibria is such that there is no reallocation which would leave a consumer better off without leaving another consumer worse off. In a pure exchange economy, a sufficient condition for the first welfare theorem to hold is that preferences be locally nonsatiated. The first welfare theorem also holds for economies with production regardless of the properties of the production function. Implicitly, the theorem assumes complete markets and perfect information. In an economy with externalities, for example, it is possible for equilibria to arise that are not efficient.

The first welfare theorem is informative in the sense that it points to the sources of inefficiency in markets. Under the assumptions above, any market equilibrium is tautologically efficient. Therefore, when equilibria arise that are not efficient, the market system itself is not to blame, but rather some sort of market failure.

===Second Fundamental Theorem of Welfare Economics===
Even if every equilibrium is efficient, it may not be that every efficient allocation of resources can be part of an equilibrium. However, the second theorem states that every Pareto efficient allocation can be supported as an equilibrium by some set of prices. In other words, all that is required to reach a particular Pareto efficient outcome is a redistribution of initial endowments of the agents after which the market can be left alone to do its work. This suggests that the issues of efficiency and equity can be separated and need not involve a trade-off. The conditions for the second theorem are stronger than those for the first, as consumers&#x27; preferences and production sets now need to be convex (convexity roughly corresponds to the idea of diminishing marginal rates of substitution i.e. &quot;the average of two equally good bundles is better than either of the two bundles&quot;).

===Existence===
Even though every equilibrium is efficient, neither of the above two theorems say anything about the equilibrium existing in the first place. To guarantee that an equilibrium exists, it suffices that consumer preferences be strictly convex. With enough consumers, the convexity assumption can be relaxed both for existence and the second welfare theorem. Similarly, but less plausibly, convex feasible production sets suffice for existence; convexity excludes economies of scale.

Proofs of the existence of equilibrium traditionally rely on fixed-point theorems such as Brouwer fixed-point theorem for functions (or, more generally, the Kakutani fixed-point theorem for set-valued functions). See Competitive equilibrium#Existence of a competitive equilibrium. The proof was first due to Lionel McKenzie, and Kenneth Arrow and Gérard Debreu. In fact, the converse also holds, according to Uzawa&#x27;s derivation of Brouwer&#x27;s fixed point theorem from Walras&#x27;s law. Following Uzawa&#x27;s theorem, many mathematical economists consider proving existence a deeper result than proving the two Fundamental Theorems.

Another method of proof of existence, global analysis, uses Sard&#x27;s lemma and the Baire category theorem; this method was pioneered by Gérard Debreu and Stephen Smale.

====Nonconvexities in large economies====

Starr (1969) applied the Shapley–Folkman–Starr theorem to prove that even without convex preferences there exists an approximate equilibrium. The Shapley–Folkman–Starr results bound the distance from an &quot;approximate&quot; economic equilibrium to an equilibrium of a &quot;convexified&quot; economy, when the number of agents exceeds the dimension of the goods. Following Starr&#x27;s paper, the Shapley–Folkman–Starr results were &quot;much exploited in the theoretical literature&quot;, according to Guesnerie, who wrote the following:

some key results obtained under the convexity assumption remain (approximately) relevant in circumstances where convexity fails. For example, in economies with a large consumption side, nonconvexities in preferences do not destroy the standard results of, say Debreu&#x27;s theory of value. In the same way, if indivisibilities in the production sector are small with respect to the size of the economy, [ . . . ] then standard results are affected in only a minor way.

To this text, Guesnerie appended the following footnote:

The derivation of these results in general form has been one of the major achievements of postwar economic theory.

In particular, the Shapley-Folkman-Starr results were incorporated in the theory of general economic equilibria and in the theory of market failures and of public economics.

===Uniqueness===

Although generally (assuming convexity) an equilibrium will exist and will be efficient, the conditions under which it will be unique are much stronger. The Sonnenschein–Mantel–Debreu theorem, proven in the 1970s, states that the aggregate excess demand function inherits only certain properties of individual&#x27;s demand functions, and that these (continuity, homogeneity of degree zero, Walras&#x27; law and boundary behavior when prices are near zero) are the only real restriction one can expect from an aggregate excess demand function. Any such function can represent the excess demand of an economy populated with rational utility-maximizing individuals.

There has been much research on conditions when the equilibrium will be unique, or which at least will limit the number of equilibria. One result states that under mild assumptions the number of equilibria will be finite (see regular economy) and odd (see index theorem). Furthermore, if an economy as a whole, as characterized by an aggregate excess demand function, has the revealed preference property (which is a much stronger condition than revealed preferences for a single individual) or the gross substitute property then likewise the equilibrium will be unique. All methods of establishing uniqueness can be thought of as establishing that each equilibrium has the same positive local index, in which case by the index theorem there can be but one such equilibrium.

===Determinacy===
Given that equilibria may not be unique, it is of some interest to ask whether any particular equilibrium is at least locally unique. If so, then comparative statics can be applied as long as the shocks to the system are not too large. As stated above, in a regular economy equilibria will be finite, hence locally unique. One reassuring result, due to Debreu, is that &quot;most&quot; economies are regular.

Work by Michael Mandler (1999) has challenged this claim. The Arrow–Debreu–McKenzie model is neutral between models of production functions as continuously differentiable and as formed from (linear combinations of) fixed coefficient processes. Mandler accepts that, under either model of production, the initial endowments will not be consistent with a continuum of equilibria, except for a set of Lebesgue measure zero. However, endowments change with time in the model and this evolution of endowments is determined by the decisions of agents (e.g., firms) in the model. Agents in the model have an interest in equilibria being indeterminate:
Indeterminacy, moreover, is not just a technical nuisance; it undermines the price-taking assumption of competitive models. Since arbitrary small manipulations of factor supplies can dramatically increase a factor&#x27;s price, factor owners will not take prices to be parametric.
When technology is modeled by (linear combinations) of fixed coefficient processes, optimizing agents will drive endowments to be such that a continuum of equilibria exist:
The endowments where indeterminacy occurs systematically arise through time and therefore cannot be dismissed; the Arrow-Debreu-McKenzie model is thus fully subject to the dilemmas of factor price theory.
Some have questioned the practical applicability of the general equilibrium approach based on the possibility of non-uniqueness of equilibria.

===Stability===
In a typical general equilibrium model the prices that prevail &quot;when the dust settles&quot; are simply those that coordinate the demands of various consumers for various goods. But this raises the question of how these prices and allocations have been arrived at, and whether any (temporary) shock to the economy will cause it to converge back to the same outcome that prevailed before the shock. This is the question of stability of the equilibrium, and it can be readily seen that it is related to the question of uniqueness. If there are multiple equilibria, then some of them will be unstable. Then, if an equilibrium is unstable and there is a shock, the economy will wind up at a different set of allocations and prices once the convergence process terminates. However, stability depends not only on the number of equilibria but also on the type of the process that guides price changes (for a specific type of price adjustment process see Walrasian auction). Consequently, some researchers have focused on plausible adjustment processes that guarantee system stability, i.e., that guarantee convergence of prices and allocations to some equilibrium. When more than one stable equilibrium exists, where one ends up will depend on where one begins. The theorems that have been mostly conclusive when related to the stability of a typical general equilibrium model are closed related to that of the most local stability.

==Unresolved problems in general equilibrium==
Research building on the Arrow–Debreu–McKenzie model has revealed some problems with the model. The Sonnenschein–Mantel–Debreu results show that, essentially, any restrictions on the shape of excess demand functions are stringent. Some think this implies that the Arrow–Debreu model lacks empirical content. Therefore, an unsolved problem is 

* Is Arrow–Debreu–McKenzie equilibria stable and unique?

A model organized around the tâtonnement process has been said to be a model of a centrally planned economy, not a decentralized market economy. Some research has tried to develop general equilibrium models with other processes. In particular, some economists have developed models in which agents can trade at out-of-equilibrium prices and such trades can affect the equilibria to which the economy tends. Particularly noteworthy are the Hahn process, the Edgeworth process and the Fisher process.

The data determining Arrow-Debreu equilibria include initial endowments of capital goods. If production and trade occur out of equilibrium, these endowments will be changed further complicating the picture.
In a real economy, however, trading, as well as production and consumption, goes on out of equilibrium. It follows that, in the course of convergence to equilibrium (assuming that occurs), endowments change. In turn this changes the set of equilibria. Put more succinctly, the set of equilibria is path dependent... [This path dependence] makes the calculation of equilibria corresponding to the initial state of the system essentially irrelevant. What matters is the equilibrium that the economy will reach from given initial endowments, not the equilibrium that it would have been in, given initial endowments, had prices happened to be just right. – (Franklin Fisher).

The Arrow–Debreu model in which all trade occurs in futures contracts at time zero requires a very large number of markets to exist. It is equivalent under complete markets to a sequential equilibrium concept in which spot markets for goods and assets open at each date-state event (they are not equivalent under incomplete markets); market clearing then requires that the entire sequence of prices clears all markets at all times. A generalization of the sequential market arrangement is the temporary equilibrium structure, where market clearing at a point in time is conditional on expectations of future prices which need not be market clearing ones.

Although the Arrow–Debreu–McKenzie model is set out in terms of some arbitrary numéraire, the model does not encompass money. Frank Hahn, for example, has investigated whether general equilibrium models can be developed in which money enters in some essential way. One of the essential questions he introduces, often referred to as the Hahn&#x27;s problem is: &quot;Can one construct an equilibrium where money has value?&quot; The goal is to find models in which existence of money can alter the equilibrium solutions, perhaps because the initial position of agents depends on monetary prices.

Some critics of general equilibrium modeling contend that much research in these models constitutes exercises in pure mathematics with no connection to actual economies. In a 1979 article, Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen complains: &quot;There are endeavors that now pass for the most desirable kind of economic contributions although they are just plain mathematical exercises, not only without any economic substance but also without any mathematical value.&quot; He cites as an example a paper that assumes more traders in existence than there are points in the set of real numbers.

Although modern models in general equilibrium theory demonstrate that under certain circumstances prices will indeed converge to equilibria, critics hold that the assumptions necessary for these results are extremely strong. As well as stringent restrictions on excess demand functions, the necessary assumptions include perfect rationality of individuals; complete information about all prices both now and in the future; and the conditions necessary for perfect competition. However, some results from experimental economics suggest that even in circumstances where there are few, imperfectly informed agents, the resulting prices and allocations may wind up resembling those of a perfectly competitive market (although certainly not a stable general equilibrium in all markets).

Frank Hahn defends general equilibrium modeling on the grounds that it provides a negative function. General equilibrium models show what the economy would have to be like for an unregulated economy to be Pareto efficient.

==Computing general equilibrium==
Until the 1970s general equilibrium analysis remained theoretical. With advances in computing power and the development of input–output tables, it became possible to model national economies, or even the world economy, and attempts were made to solve for general equilibrium prices and quantities empirically.

Applied general equilibrium (AGE) models were pioneered by Herbert Scarf in 1967, and offered a method for solving the Arrow–Debreu General Equilibrium system in a numerical fashion. This was first implemented by John Shoven and John Whalley (students of Scarf at Yale) in 1972 and 1973, and were a popular method up through the 1970s. In the 1980s however, AGE models faded from popularity due to their inability to provide a precise solution and its high cost of computation.

Computable general equilibrium (CGE) models surpassed and replaced AGE models in the mid-1980s, as the CGE model was able to provide relatively quick and large computable models for a whole economy, and was the preferred method of governments and the World Bank. CGE models are heavily used today, and while &#x27;AGE&#x27; and &#x27;CGE&#x27; is used inter-changeably in the literature, Scarf-type AGE models have not been constructed since the mid-1980s, and the CGE literature at current is &quot;not&quot; based on Arrow-Debreu and General Equilibrium Theory as discussed in this article. CGE models, and what is today referred to as AGE models, are based on static, simultaneously solved, macro balancing equations (from the standard Keynesian macro model), giving a precise and explicitly computable result.

==Other schools==
General equilibrium theory is a central point of contention and influence between the neoclassical school and other schools of economic thought, and different schools have varied views on general equilibrium theory. Some, such as the Keynesian and Post-Keynesian schools, strongly reject general equilibrium theory as &quot;misleading&quot; and &quot;useless&quot;. Disequilibrium macroeconomics and different non-equilibrium approaches were developed as alternatives. Other schools, such as new classical macroeconomics, developed from general equilibrium theory.

===Keynesian and Post-Keynesian===
Keynesian and Post-Keynesian economists, and their underconsumptionist predecessors criticize general equilibrium theory specifically, and as part of criticisms of neoclassical economics generally. Specifically, they argue that general equilibrium theory is neither accurate nor useful, that economies are not in equilibrium, that equilibrium may be slow and painful to achieve, and that modeling by equilibrium is &quot;misleading&quot;, and that the resulting theory is not a useful guide, particularly for understanding of economic crises.


Robert Clower and others have argued for a reformulation of theory toward disequilibrium analysis to incorporate how monetary exchange fundamentally alters the representation of an economy as though a barter system.

===New classical macroeconomics===
While general equilibrium theory and neoclassical economics generally were originally microeconomic theories, new classical macroeconomics builds a macroeconomic theory on these bases. In new classical models, the macroeconomy is assumed to be at its unique equilibrium, with full employment and potential output, and that this equilibrium is assumed to always have been achieved via price and wage adjustment (market clearing). The best-known such model is real business-cycle theory, in which business cycles are considered to be largely due to changes in the real economy, unemployment is not due to the failure of the market to achieve potential output, but due to equilibrium potential output having fallen and equilibrium unemployment having risen.

===Socialist economics===
Within socialist economics, a sustained critique of general equilibrium theory (and neoclassical economics generally) is given in &quot;Anti-Equilibrium&quot;, based on the experiences of János Kornai with the failures of Communist central planning, although Michael Albert and Robin Hahnel later based their Parecon model on the same theory.

===New structural economics===
The structural equilibrium model is a matrix-form computable general equilibrium model in new structural economics. 

This model is an extension of the John von Neumann&#x27;s general equilibrium model (see Computable general equilibrium for details). Its computation can be performed using the R package GE. 
The structural equilibrium model can be used for intertemporal equilibrium analysis, where time is treated as a label that differentiates between types of commodities and firms, meaning commodities are distinguished by when they are delivered and firms are distinguished by when they produce. The model can include factors such as taxes, money, endogenous production functions, and endogenous institutions, etc. The structural equilibrium model can include excess tax burdens, meaning that the equilibrium in the model may not be Pareto optimal. When production functions and/or economic institutions are treated as endogenous variables, the general equilibrium is referred to as structural equilibrium.

==See also==
*General equilibrium theorists (category)
*Cobweb model
*Decision theory
*Game theory
*Mechanism design

==Notes==
==Further reading==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="3" end="12" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q282640" start="14" end="40" title="General equilibrium theory" label="general equilibrium theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="253" end="272" title="List of types of equilibrium#Economics" label="general equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052487" start="330" end="361" title="partial equilibrium" label="&amp;quot;partial&amp;quot; equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13509" start="710" end="721" title="Léon Walras" label="Léon Walras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275767" start="842" end="860" title="Lionel W. McKenzie" label="Lionel W. McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q192592" start="881" end="894" title="Kenneth Arrow" label="Kenneth Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q210960" start="899" end="912" title="Gérard Debreu" label="Gérard Debreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072" start="1217" end="1231" title="microeconomics" label="microeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876068" start="1333" end="1358" title="microfoundations" label="microeconomic foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962064" start="1380" end="1436" title="Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium" label="general equilibrium models of macroeconomic fluctuations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="1810" end="1829" title="Numerical analysis" label="numerical solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="1924" end="1932" title="interest" label="interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415187" start="2411" end="2417" title="Agent (economics)" label="agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274157" start="2422" end="2434" title="Market power" label="price takers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156353" start="2517" end="2540" title="competitive equilibrium" label="competitive equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="2652" end="2674" title="neoclassical economics" label="neoclassical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13509" start="2723" end="2734" title="Léon Walras" label="Léon Walras"/>
<link wikidata="Q192592" start="3464" end="3477" title="Kenneth Arrow" label="Kenneth Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q210960" start="3482" end="3495" title="Gérard Debreu" label="Gérard Debreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423059" start="4120" end="4131" title="Walrasian auction" label="tâtonnement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419538" start="4521" end="4534" title="excess supply" label="excess supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052487" start="4971" end="4990" title="partial equilibrium" label="partial equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13529" start="5167" end="5178" title="Alfred Marshall" label="Marshallian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="5189" end="5206" title="supply and demand" label="supply and demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q370468" start="5492" end="5504" title="Piero Sraffa" label="Piero Sraffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="6870" end="6888" title="Nonlinear system" label="non-linear systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q702933" start="7271" end="7284" title="Arrow–Debreu model" label="Arrow–Debreu–"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275767" start="7284" end="7292" title="Lionel W. McKenzie" label="McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q192592" start="7321" end="7334" title="Kenneth Arrow" label="Kenneth Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q210960" start="7336" end="7349" title="Gérard Debreu" label="Gérard Debreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275767" start="7355" end="7373" title="Lionel W. McKenzie" label="Lionel W. McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q190529" start="7523" end="7539" title="Nicolas Bourbaki" label="Nicolas Bourbaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q702933" start="8225" end="8243" title="Arrow–Debreu model" label="Arrow–Debreu model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057197" start="8247" end="8272" title="intertemporal equilibrium" label="intertemporal equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298435" start="8282" end="8297" title="future market" label="forward markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015174" start="9593" end="9611" title="incomplete markets" label="incomplete markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q36829" start="9932" end="9946" title="Pareto optimal" label="Pareto optimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q283380" start="10180" end="10209" title="marginal rate of substitution" label="marginal rate of substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q36829" start="10315" end="10341" title="constrained Pareto optimal" label="constrained Pareto optimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015174" start="10607" end="10625" title="incomplete markets" label="incomplete markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q36829" start="11256" end="11272" title="Pareto efficient" label="Pareto efficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664464" start="11566" end="11585" title="locally nonsatiated" label="locally nonsatiated"/>
<link wikidata="Q275372" start="11804" end="11817" title="externalities" label="externalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q622657" start="12212" end="12226" title="market failure" label="market failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129100" start="13404" end="13443" title="convex preferences" label="consumer preferences be strictly convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="13664" end="13682" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144897" start="13775" end="13802" title="Brouwer fixed-point theorem" label="Brouwer fixed-point theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q518524" start="13842" end="13870" title="Kakutani fixed-point theorem" label="Kakutani fixed-point theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q115988076" start="13875" end="13895" title="Set-valued function" label="set-valued functions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13902" end="13964" title="Competitive equilibrium#Existence of a competitive equilibrium" label="Competitive equilibrium#Existence of a competitive equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275767" start="13993" end="14008" title="Lionel McKenzie" label="Lionel McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q192592" start="14014" end="14027" title="Kenneth Arrow" label="Kenneth Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q210960" start="14032" end="14045" title="Gérard Debreu" label="Gérard Debreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620234" start="14094" end="14099" title="Hirofumi Uzawa" label="Uzawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017346" start="14366" end="14381" title="global analysis" label="global analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q583147" start="14388" end="14405" title="Sard&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Sard&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052678" start="14414" end="14436" title="Baire category theorem" label="Baire category theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q210960" start="14467" end="14480" title="Gérard Debreu" label="Gérard Debreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q315394" start="14485" end="14498" title="Stephen Smale" label="Stephen Smale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788045" start="14569" end="14598" title="Shapley–Folkman lemma" label="Shapley–Folkman–Starr theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129100" start="14626" end="14644" title="convex preferences" label="convex preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q836133" start="14771" end="14791" title="economic equilibrium" label="economic equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072" start="15855" end="15861" title="microeconomics" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q622657" start="15865" end="15879" title="market failure" label="market failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248246" start="15888" end="15904" title="public economics" label="public economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q925224" start="16082" end="16116" title="Sonnenschein–Mantel–Debreu theorem" label="Sonnenschein–Mantel–Debreu theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303685" start="16165" end="16187" title="excess demand function" label="excess demand function"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="16276" end="16286" title="Continuous function" label="continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132952" start="16288" end="16314" title="Homogeneous function" label="homogeneity of degree zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089697" start="16316" end="16332" title="Walras&amp;#x27; law" label="Walras&amp;#x27; law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309596" start="16816" end="16831" title="regular economy" label="regular economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305766" start="16846" end="16859" title="Poincaré–Hopf theorem" label="index theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323737" start="17036" end="17055" title="revealed preference" label="revealed preference"/>
<link wikidata="Q312588" start="17089" end="17114" title="substitute good" label="gross substitute property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416996" start="17530" end="17549" title="comparative statics" label="comparative statics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309596" start="17642" end="17657" title="regular economy" label="regular economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="18192" end="18208" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423059" start="20209" end="20226" title="Walrasian auction" label="Walrasian auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q702933" start="20761" end="20788" title="Arrow–Debreu–McKenzie model" label="Arrow–Debreu–McKenzie model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934245" start="21118" end="21124" title="stable distribution" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="21230" end="21245" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093521" start="22143" end="22157" title="path dependence" label="path dependent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445221" start="22499" end="22514" title="Franklin Fisher" label="Franklin Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713661" start="22852" end="22867" title="market clearing" label="market clearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698981" start="23011" end="23032" title="temporary equilibrium method" label="temporary equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q645415" start="23253" end="23262" title="numéraire" label="numéraire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368238" start="23300" end="23310" title="Frank Hahn" label="Frank Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638876" start="23510" end="23529" title="Hahn&amp;#x27;s problem" label="Hahn&amp;#x27;s problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351160" start="23959" end="23984" title="Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen" label="Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="24680" end="24691" title="rationality" label="rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q574010" start="24708" end="24728" title="complete information" label="complete information"/>
<link wikidata="Q183384" start="24807" end="24826" title="perfect competition" label="perfect competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q47627" start="24855" end="24877" title="experimental economics" label="experimental economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368238" start="25134" end="25144" title="Frank Hahn" label="Frank Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q36829" start="25339" end="25355" title="Pareto efficient" label="Pareto efficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140255" start="25515" end="25527" title="input–output model" label="input–output"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781599" start="25703" end="25730" title="Applied general equilibrium" label="Applied general equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360655" start="25762" end="25775" title="Herbert Scarf" label="Herbert Scarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589458" start="26182" end="26212" title="Computable general equilibrium" label="Computable general equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="26433" end="26443" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048444" start="27131" end="27158" title="schools of economic thought" label="schools of economic thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282161" start="27381" end="27410" title="Disequilibrium macroeconomics" label="Disequilibrium macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048904" start="27425" end="27451" title="non-equilibrium economics" label="non-equilibrium approaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q60238" start="27507" end="27535" title="new classical macroeconomics" label="new classical macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="27616" end="27625" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60224" start="27630" end="27644" title="Post-Keynesian economics" label="Post-Keynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q975137" start="27667" end="27683" title="underconsumption" label="underconsumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q114380" start="28142" end="28157" title="economic crises" label="economic crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519590" start="28161" end="28174" title="Robert Clower" label="Robert Clower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282161" start="28235" end="28258" title="Disequilibrium macroeconomics" label="disequilibrium analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q484830" start="28362" end="28368" title="barter" label="barter"/>
<link wikidata="Q60238" start="28523" end="28551" title="new classical macroeconomics" label="new classical macroeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331704" start="28871" end="28897" title="real business-cycle theory" label="real business-cycle theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192311" start="28908" end="28922" title="business cycle" label="business cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578779" start="29202" end="29221" title="socialist economics" label="socialist economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179735" start="29383" end="29395" title="János Kornai" label="János Kornai"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="29427" end="29443" title="central planning" label="central planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q742079" start="29454" end="29468" title="Michael Albert" label="Michael Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352276" start="29473" end="29485" title="Robin Hahnel" label="Robin Hahnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q650953" start="29504" end="29511" title="Parecon" label="Parecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="29722" end="29738" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3589458" start="29777" end="29807" title="Computable general equilibrium" label="Computable general equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30599" end="30628" title=":Category:General equilibrium theorists" label="General equilibrium theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q593544" start="30641" end="30653" title="Cobweb model" label="Cobweb model"/>
<link wikidata="Q177571" start="30655" end="30670" title="Decision theory" label="Decision theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="30672" end="30683" title="Game theory" label="Game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q26090" start="30685" end="30701" title="Mechanism design" label="Mechanism design"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45939" wikidata="Q166902" url="?curid=45939" title="Primary color">
<text>A set of primary colors consists of colorants or colored lights that can be mixed in varying amounts to produce a gamut of colors. This is the essential method used to create the perception of a broad range of colors in, e.g., electronic displays, color printing, and paintings. Perceptions associated with a given combination of primary colors can be predicted by an appropriate mixing model (e.g., additive, subtractive) that reflects the physics of how light interacts with physical media, and ultimately the retina. The most common color mixing models are the additive primary colors (red, green, blue) and the subtractive primary colors (cyan, magenta, yellow). Red, yellow and blue are also commonly taught as primary colors (usually in the context of subtractive color mixing as opposed to additive color mixing), despite some criticism due to its lack of scientific basis.

Primary colors can also be conceptual (not necessarily real), either as additive mathematical elements of a color space or as irreducible phenomenological categories in domains such as psychology and philosophy. Color space primaries are precisely defined and empirically rooted in psychophysical colorimetry experiments which are foundational for understanding color vision. Primaries of some color spaces are &quot;complete&quot; (that is, all visible colors are described in terms of their primaries weighted by nonnegative primary intensity coefficients) but necessarily &quot;imaginary&quot; (that is, there is no plausible way that those primary colors could be represented physically, or perceived). Phenomenological accounts of primary colors, such as the psychological primaries, have been used as the conceptual basis for practical color applications even though they are not a quantitative description in and of themselves.

Sets of color space primaries are generally &quot;arbitrary&quot;, in the sense that there is no one set of primaries that can be considered the canonical set. Primary pigments or light sources are selected for a given application on the basis of subjective preferences as well as practical factors such as cost, stability, availability etc.

The concept of primary colors has a long, complex history. The choice of primary colors has changed over time in different domains that study color. Descriptions of primary colors come from areas including philosophy, art history, color order systems, and scientific work involving the physics of light and perception of color.

Art education materials commonly use red, yellow, and blue as primary colors, sometimes suggesting that they can mix all colors. No set of real colorants or lights can mix all possible colors, however. In other domains, the three primary colors are typically red, green and blue, which are more closely aligned to the sensitivities of the photoreceptor pigments in the cone cells.

== Color model primaries ==

A color model is an abstract model intended to describe the ways that colors behave, especially in color mixing. Most color models are defined by the interaction of multiple primary colors. Since most humans are trichromatic, color models that want to reproduce a meaningful portion of a human&#x27;s perceptual gamut must use at least &quot;three&quot; primaries. More than three primaries are allowed, for example, to increase the size of the gamut of the color space, but the entire human perceptual gamut can be reproduced with just three primaries (albeit imaginary ones as in the CIE XYZ color space).

Some humans (and most mammals) are dichromats, corresponding to specific forms of color blindness in which color vision is mediated by only two of the types of color receptors. Dichromats require only two primaries to reproduce their entire gamut and their participation in color matching experiments was essential in the determination of cone fundamentals leading to all modern color spaces. Despite most vertebrates being tetrachromatic, and therefore requiring four primaries to reproduce their entire gamut, there is only one scholarly report of a functional human tetrachromat, for which trichromatic color models are insufficient.

=== Additive models ===


The perception elicited by multiple light sources co-stimulating the same area of the retina is additive, i.e., predicted via summing the spectral power distributions (the intensity of each wavelength) of the individual light sources assuming a color matching context. For example, a purple spotlight on a dark background could be matched with coincident blue and red spotlights that are both dimmer than the purple spotlight. If the intensity of the purple spotlight was doubled it could be matched by doubling the intensities of both the red and blue spotlights that matched the original purple. The principles of additive color mixing are embodied in Grassmann&#x27;s laws. Additive mixing is sometimes described as &quot;additive color matching&quot; to emphasize the fact the predictions based on additivity only apply assuming the color matching context. Additivity relies on assumptions of the color matching context such as the match being in the foveal field of view, under appropriate luminance, etc.

Additive mixing of coincident spot lights was applied in the experiments used to derive the CIE 1931 colorspace (see color space primaries section). The original &quot;monochromatic&quot; primaries of the wavelengths of 435.8 nm (violet), 546.1 nm (green), and 700 nm (red) were used in this application due to the convenience they afforded to the experimental work.

Small red, green, and blue elements (with controllable brightness) in electronic displays mix additively from an appropriate viewing distance to synthesize compelling colored images. This specific type of additive mixing is described as &quot;partitive mixing&quot;. Red, green, and blue light are popular primaries for partitive mixing since primary lights with those hues provide a large color triangle (gamut).

The exact colors chosen for additive primaries are a compromise between the available technology (including considerations such as cost and power usage) and the need for large chromaticity gamut. For example, in 1953 the NTSC specified primaries that were representative of the phosphors available in that era for color CRTs. Over decades, market pressures for brighter colors resulted in CRTs using primaries that deviated significantly from the original standard. Currently, ITU-R BT.709-5 primaries are typical for high-definition television.
=== Subtractive models ===


The subtractive color mixing model predicts the resultant spectral power distribution of light filtered through overlaid partially absorbing materials, usually in the context of an underlying reflective surface such as white paper. Each layer partially absorbs some wavelengths of light from the illumination while letting others pass through, resulting in a colored appearance. The resultant spectral power distribution is predicted by the wavelength-by-wavelength product of the spectral reflectance of the illumination and the product of the spectral reflectances of all of the layers. Overlapping layers of ink in printing mix subtractively over reflecting white paper, while the reflected light mixes in a partitive way to generate color images. Importantly, unlike additive mixture, the color of the mixture is not well predicted by the colors of the individual dyes or inks. The typical number of inks in such a printing process is 3 (CMY) or 4 (CMYK), but can commonly range to 6 (e.g., Pantone hexachrome). In general, using fewer inks as primaries results in more economical printing but using more may result in better color reproduction.

Cyan (C), magenta (M), and yellow (Y) are good chromatic subtractive primaries in that filters with those colors can be overlaid to yield a surprisingly large chromaticity gamut. A black (K) ink (from the older &quot;key plate&quot;) is also used in CMYK systems to augment C, M and Y inks or dyes: this is more efficient in terms of time and expense and less likely to introduce visible defects. Before the color names &quot;cyan&quot; and &quot;magenta&quot; were in common use, these primaries were often known as blue and red, respectively, and their exact color has changed over time with access to new pigments and technologies. Organizations such as Fogra, European Color Initiative and SWOP publish colorimetric CMYK standards for the printing industry.
== Traditional red, yellow, and blue primary colors as a subtractive system ==

Color theorists since the seventeenth century, and many artists and designers since that time, have taken red, yellow, and blue to be the primary colors (see history below). This RYB system, in &quot;traditional color theory&quot;, is often used to order and compare colors, and sometimes proposed as a system of mixing pigments to get a wide range of, or &quot;all&quot;, colors.
O&#x27;Connor describes the role of RYB primaries in traditional color theory:
Traditional color theory is based on experience with pigments, more than on the science of light. In 1920, Snow and Froehlich explained:
The widespread adoption of teaching of RYB as primary colors in post-secondary art schools in the twentieth century has been attributed to the influence of the Bauhaus, where Johannes Itten developed his ideas on color during his time there in the 1920s, and of his book on color published in 1961.

In discussing color design for the web, Jason Beaird writes:
As with any system of real primaries, not all colors can be mixed from RYB primaries. 
For example, if the blue pigment is a deep Prussian blue, then a muddy desaturated green may be the best that can be had by mixing with yellow. To achieve a larger gamut of colors via mixing, the blue and red pigments used in illustrative materials such as the &quot;Color Mixing Guide&quot; in the image are often closer to peacock blue (a blue-green or cyan) and carmine (or crimson or magenta) respectively. 
Printers traditionally used inks of such colors, known as &quot;process blue&quot; and &quot;process red&quot;, before modern color science and the printing industry converged on the process colors (and names) cyan and magenta RYB is not the same as CMY, nor exactly subtractive, but that there is a range of ways to conceptualize traditional RYB as a subtractive system in the framework of modern color science.

Faber-Castell identifies the following three colors: &quot;Cadmium yellow&quot; (number 107) for yellow, &quot;Phthalo blue&quot; (number 110) for blue and &quot;Deep scarlet red&quot; (number 219) for red, as the closest to primary colors for its Art &amp; Graphic color pencils range. &quot;Cadmium yellow&quot; (number 107) for yellow, &quot;Phthalo blue&quot; (number 110) for blue and &quot;Pale geranium lake&quot; (number 121) for red, are provided as primary colors in its basic 5 color &quot;Albrecht Dürer&quot; watercolor marker set.

=== Mixing pigments in limited palettes ===

The first known use of red, yellow, and blue as &quot;simple&quot; or &quot;primary&quot; colors, by Chalcidius, ca. AD 300, was possibly based on the art of paint mixing.

Mixing pigments for the purpose of creating realistic paintings with diverse color gamuts is known to have been practiced at least since Ancient Greece (see history section). The identity of a/the set of minimal pigments to mix diverse gamuts has long been the subject of speculation by theorists whose claims have changed over time, for example, Pliny&#x27;s white, black, one or another red, and &quot;sil&quot;, which might have been yellow or blue; Robert Boyle&#x27;s white, black, red, yellow, and blue; and variations with more or fewer &quot;primary&quot; color or pigments. Some writers and artists have found these schemes difficult to reconcile with the actual practice of painting. Nonetheless, it has long been known that limited palettes consisting of a small set of pigments are sufficient to mix a diverse gamut of colors.

The set of pigments available to mix diverse gamuts of color (in various media such as oil, watercolor, acrylic, gouache, and pastel) is large and has changed throughout history. There is no consensus on a specific set of pigments that are considered primary colors the choice of pigments depends entirely on the artist&#x27;s subjective preference of subject and style of art, as well as material considerations like lightfastness and mixing behavior. A variety of limited palettes have been employed by artists for their work.

The color of light (i.e., the spectral power distribution) reflected from illuminated surfaces coated in paint mixes is not well approximated by a subtractive or additive mixing model. Color predictions that incorporate light scattering effects of pigment particles and paint layer thickness require approaches based on the Kubelka–Munk equations, but even such approaches are not expected to predict the color of paint mixtures precisely due to inherent limitations. Artists typically rely on mixing experience and &quot;recipes&quot; to mix desired colors from a small initial set of primaries and do not use mathematical modeling.

MacEvoy explains why artists often chose a palette closer to RYB than to CMY: 

== Color space primaries ==

A color space is a subset of a color model, where the primaries have been defined, either directly as photometric spectra, or indirectly as a function of other color spaces. For example, sRGB and Adobe RGB are both color spaces based on the RGB color model. However, the green primary of Adobe RGB is more saturated than the equivalent in sRGB, and therefore yields a larger gamut. Otherwise, choice of color space is largely arbitrary and depends on the utility to a specific application.

=== Imaginary primaries ===
Color space primaries are derived from canonical colorimetric experiments that represent a standardized model of an observer (i.e., a set of &quot;color matching functions&quot;) adopted by Commission Internationale de l&#x27;Eclairage (CIE) standards. The abbreviated account of color space primaries in this section is based on descriptions in &quot;Colorimetry - Understanding The CIE System&quot;.

The CIE 1931 standard observer is derived from experiments in which participants observe a foveal secondary bipartite field with a dark surround. Half of the field is illuminated with a monochromatic &quot;test stimulus&quot; (ranging from 380 nm to 780 nm) and the other half is the &quot;matching stimulus&quot; illuminated with three coincident monochromatic primary lights: 700 nm for red (R), 546.1 nm for green (G), and 435.8 nm for blue (B). These primaries correspond to CIE RGB color space. The intensities of the primary lights could be adjusted by the participant observer until the matching stimulus matched the test stimulus, as predicted by Grassman&#x27;s laws of additive mixing. Different standard observers from other color matching experiments have been derived since 1931. The variations in experiments include choices of primary lights, field of view, number of participants etc. but the presentation below is representative of those results.

Matching was performed across many participants in incremental steps along the range of test stimulus wavelengths (380 nm to 780 nm) to ultimately yield the color matching functions: formula_1, formula_2 and formula_3 that represent the relative intensities of red, green, and blue light to match each wavelength (formula_4). These functions imply that formula_5 units of the test stimulus with &quot;any&quot; spectral power distribution, formula_6, can be matched by , , and units of each primary where:

^{780\text{ nm}} \overline{r}(\lambda) P(\lambda)\,d\lambda \cdot [R] +
\int_{380\text{ nm}}^{780\text{ nm}} \overline{g}(\lambda) P(\lambda)\,d\lambda \cdot [G] +
\int_{380\text{ nm}}^{780\text{ nm}} \overline{b}(\lambda) P(\lambda)\,d\lambda \cdot [B].
&lt;/math&gt;|}}

Each integral term in the above equation is known as a &quot;tristimulus value&quot; and measures amounts in the adopted units. No set of real primary lights can match another monochromatic light under additive mixing so at least one of the color matching functions is negative for each wavelength. A negative tristimulus value corresponds to that primary being added to the test stimulus instead of the matching stimulus to achieve a match.

The negative tristimulus values made certain types of calculations difficult, so the CIE put forth new color matching functions formula_7, formula_8, and formula_9 defined by the following linear transformation:

These new color matching functions correspond to &quot;imaginary&quot; primary lights X, Y, and Z (CIE XYZ color space). All colors can be matched by finding the amounts , , and analogously to , , and as defined in . The functions formula_7, formula_8, and formula_9 based on the specifications that they should be nonnegative for all wavelengths, formula_8 be equal to photometric luminance, and that formula_14 for an equienergy (i.e., a uniform spectral power distribution) test stimulus.

Derivations use the color matching functions, along with data from other experiments, to ultimately yield the &quot;cone fundamentals&quot;: formula_15, formula_16 and formula_17. These functions correspond to the response curves for the three types of color photoreceptors found in the human retina: long-wavelength (L), medium-wavelength (M), and short-wavelength (S) cones. The three cone fundamentals are related to the original color matching functions by the following linear transformation (specific to a 10° field):


LMS color space comprises three primary lights (L, M, and S) that stimulate only the L-, M-, and S-cones respectively. A real primary that stimulates only the M-cone is impossible, and therefore these primaries are imaginary. The LMS color space has significant physiological relevance as these three photoreceptors mediate trichromatic color vision in humans.

Both XYZ and LMS color spaces are &quot;complete&quot; since all colors in the gamut of the standard observer are contained within their color spaces. Complete color spaces must have imaginary primaries, but color spaces with imaginary primaries are not necessarily complete (e.g. ProPhoto RGB color space).

=== Real primaries ===
Color spaces used in color reproduction must use real primaries that can be reproduced by practical sources, either lights in additive models, or pigments in subtractive models. Most RGB color spaces have real primaries, though some maintain imaginary primaries. For example, all the sRGB primaries fall within the gamut of human perception, and so can be easily represented by practical light sources, including CRT and LED displays, hence why sRGB is still the color space of choice for digital displays.

A color in a color space is defined as a combination of its primaries, where each primary must give a non-negative contribution. Any color space based on a finite number of real primaries is &quot;incomplete&quot; in that it cannot reproduce every color within the gamut of the standard observer.

Practical color spaces such as sRGB and scRGB are typically (at least partially) defined in terms of linear transformations from CIE XYZ, and color management often uses CIE XYZ as a middle point for transformations between two other color spaces.

Most color spaces in the color-matching context (those defined by their relationship to CIE XYZ) inherit its three-dimensionality. However, more complex color appearance models like CIECAM02 require extra dimensions to describe colors appear under different viewing conditions.

== Psychological primaries ==

The opponent process was proposed by Ewald Hering in which he described the four unique hues (later called psychological primaries in some contexts): red, green, yellow and blue. To Hering, the unique hues appeared as pure colors, while all others were &quot;psychological mixes&quot; of two of them. Furthermore, these colors were organized in &quot;opponent&quot; pairs, red vs. green and yellow vs. blue so that mixing could occur across pairs (e.g., a yellowish green or a yellowish red) but not within a pair (i.e., reddish green cannot be imagined). An achromatic opponent process along black and white is also part of Hering&#x27;s explanation of color perception. Hering asserted that we did not know why these color relationships were true but knew that they were. Although there is a great deal of evidence for the opponent process in the form of neural mechanisms, there is currently no clear mapping of the psychological primaries to neural correlates.

The psychological primaries were applied by Richard S. Hunter as the primaries for Hunter L,a,b colorspace that led to the creation of CIELAB. The Natural Color System is also directly inspired by the psychological primaries.

== History ==

=== Philosophy ===

Philosophical writing from ancient Greece has described notions of primary colors, but they can be difficult to interpret in terms of modern color science. Theophrastus (c. 371–287 BCE) described Democritus&#x27; position that the primary colors were white, black, red, and green. In Classical Greece, Empedocles identified white, black, red, and, (depending on the interpretation) either yellow or green as primary colors. Aristotle described a notion in which white and black could be mixed in different ratios to yield chromatic colors; this idea had considerable influence in Western thinking about color. François d&#x27;Aguilon&#x27;s notion of the five primary colors (white, yellow, red, blue, black) was influenced by Aristotle&#x27;s idea of the chromatic colors being made of black and white.The 20th century philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein explored color-related ideas using red, green, blue, and yellow as primary colors.
=== Light and color vision ===

Isaac Newton used the term &quot;primary color&quot; to describe the colored spectral components of sunlight. A number of color theorists did not agree with Newton&#x27;s work. David Brewster advocated that red, yellow, and blue light could be combined into any spectral hue late into the 1840s. Thomas Young proposed red, green, and violet as the three primary colors, while James Clerk Maxwell favored changing violet to blue. Hermann von Helmholtz proposed &quot;a slightly purplish red, a vegetation-green, slightly yellowish, and an ultramarine-blue&quot; as a trio. Newton, Young, Maxwell, and Helmholtz were all prominent contributors to &quot;modern color science&quot; that ultimately described the perception of color in terms of the three types of retinal photoreceptors.

=== Colorants ===

John Gage&#x27;s &quot;The Fortunes Of Apelles&quot; provides a summary of the history of primary colors as pigments in painting and describes the evolution of the idea as complex. Gage begins by describing Pliny the Elder&#x27;s account of notable Greek painters who used four primaries. Pliny distinguished the pigments (i.e., substances) from their apparent colors: white from Milos (&quot;ex albis&quot;), red from Sinope (&quot;ex rubris&quot;), Attic yellow (&quot;sil&quot;) and atramentum (&quot;ex nigris&quot;). Sil was historically confused as a blue pigment between the 16th and 17th centuries, leading to claims about white, black, red, and blue being the fewest colors required for painting. Thomas Bardwell, an 18th century Norwich portrait painter, was skeptical of the practical relevance of Pliny&#x27;s account.

Robert Boyle, the Irish chemist, introduced the term &quot;primary color&quot; in English in 1664 and claimed that there were five primary colors (white, black, red, yellow, and blue). The German painter Joachim von Sandrart eventually proposed removing white and black from the primaries and that one only needed red, yellow, blue, and green to paint &quot;the whole creation&quot;.

Red, yellow, and blue as primaries became a popular notion in the 18th and 19th centuries. Jacob Christoph Le Blon, an engraver, was the first to use separate plates for each color in mezzotint printmaking: yellow, red, and blue, plus black to add shades and contrast. Le Blon used &quot;primitive&quot; in 1725 to describe red, yellow, and blue in a very similar sense as Boyle used &quot;primary&quot;. Moses Harris, an entomologist and engraver, also describes red, yellow, and blue as &quot;primitive&quot; colors in 1766. Léonor Mérimée described red, yellow, and blue in his book on painting (originally published in French in 1830) as the three simple/primitive colors that can make a &quot;great variety&quot; of tones and colors found in nature. George Field, a chemist, used the word &quot;primary&quot; to describe red, yellow, and blue in 1835. Michel Eugène Chevreul, also a chemist, discussed red, yellow, and blue as &quot;primary&quot; colors in 1839.

=== Color order systems ===

Historical perspectives on color order systems (&quot;catalogs&quot; of color) that were proposed in the 18th and 19th centuries describe them as using red, yellow, and blue pigments as chromatic primaries. Tobias Mayer (a German mathematician, physicist, and astronomer) described a triangular bipyramid with red, yellow and blue at the 3 vertices in the same plane, white at the top vertex, and black and the bottom vertex in a public lecture in 1758. There are 11 planes of colors between the white and black vertices inside the triangular bipyramid. Mayer did not seem to distinguish between colored light and colorant though he used vermilion, orpiment (King’s yellow), and Bergblau (azurite) in partially complete colorings of planes in his solid. Johann Heinrich Lambert (a Swiss mathematician, physicist, and astronomer) proposed a triangular pyramid with gamboge, carmine, and Prussian blue as primaries and only white at the top vertex (since Lambert could produce a mixture that was sufficiently black with those pigments). Lambert&#x27;s work on this system was published in 1772. Philipp Otto Runge (the Romantic German painter) firmly believed in the theory of red, yellow and blue as the primary colors (again without distinguishing light color and colorant). His color sphere was ultimately described in an essay titled &quot;Farben-Kugel&quot; (color ball) published by Goethe in 1810. His spherical model of colors equally spaced red, yellow, and blue longitudinally with orange, green, and violet between them, and white and black at opposite poles.

=== Red, yellow, and blue as primary colors ===
Numerous authors have taught that red, yellow, and blue (RYB) are the primary colors in art education materials since at least the 19th century, following the ideas tabulated above from earlier centuries.

A wide variety of contemporary educational sources also describe the RYB primaries. These sources range from children&#x27;s books and art material manufacturers to painting and color guides. Art education materials often suggest that RYB primaries can be mixed to create &quot;all&quot; other colors.

====Criticism====

Albert Munsell, an American painter (and creator of the Munsell color system), referred to the notion of RYB primaries as &quot;mischief&quot;, &quot;a widely accepted error&quot;, and underspecified in his book &quot;A Color Notation&quot;, first published in 1905.

Itten&#x27;s ideas about RYB primaries have been criticized as ignoring modern color science with demonstrations that some of Itten&#x27;s claims about mixing RYB primaries are impossible.

== See also ==
* Color vision
* RGB color model
* RYB color model
* Unique hues

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="2" end="5" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q166902" start="9" end="23" title="Primary color" label="primary colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q911922" start="36" end="44" title="colorant" label="colorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="57" end="62" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q375857" start="114" end="119" title="gamut" label="gamut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="123" end="129" title="colors" label="colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q353267" start="400" end="408" title="additive mixing" label="additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q374081" start="410" end="421" title="subtractive mixing" label="subtractive"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="512" end="518" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="697" end="730" title="#Red, yellow, and blue as primary colors" label="commonly taught as primary colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q166863" start="990" end="1001" title="color space" label="color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186257" start="1082" end="1092" title="Philosophy of color" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q500096" start="1164" end="1178" title="psychophysics" label="psychophysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q374535" start="1179" end="1190" title="colorimetry" label="colorimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q374259" start="1244" end="1256" title="color vision" label="color vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187882" start="2829" end="2851" title="photopigment" label="photoreceptor pigments"/>
<link wikidata="Q147298" start="2859" end="2868" title="cone cell" label="cone cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294018" start="2903" end="2914" title="color model" label="color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396404" start="3000" end="3012" title="color mixing" label="color mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317719" start="3113" end="3125" title="trichromacy" label="trichromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396418" start="3153" end="3162" title="color reproduction" label="reproduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q375857" start="3213" end="3218" title="gamut" label="gamut"/>
<link wikidata="Q374617" start="3487" end="3506" title="CIE XYZ color space" label="CIE XYZ color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q67951467" start="3545" end="3555" title="dichromacy" label="dichromats"/>
<link wikidata="Q133696" start="3592" end="3607" title="color blindness" label="color blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q94556" start="3934" end="3948" title="tetrachromacy" label="tetrachromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q94556" start="4079" end="4091" title="tetrachromacy" label="tetrachromat"/>
<link wikidata="Q353267" start="4270" end="4278" title="additive color" label="additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967557" start="4312" end="4339" title="spectral power distribution" label="spectral power distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257809" start="4458" end="4464" title="purple" label="purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088" start="4529" end="4533" title="blue" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="4538" end="4541" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544178" start="4828" end="4849" title="Grassmann&amp;#x27;s law (optics)" label="Grassmann&amp;#x27;s laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q865103" start="5129" end="5135" title="Fovea centralis" label="foveal"/>
<link wikidata="Q374617" start="5278" end="5286" title="CIE 1931" label="CIE 1931"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5303" end="5332" title="#Color space primaries" label="color space primaries section"/>
<link wikidata="Q910519" start="5354" end="5367" title="monochromatic radiation" label="monochromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q428124" start="5416" end="5422" title="violet (color)" label="violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133" start="5435" end="5440" title="green" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148657" start="5944" end="5958" title="color triangle" label="color triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q375857" start="5960" end="5965" title="gamut" label="gamut"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="6190" end="6194" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="6247" end="6255" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="6289" end="6292" title="Cathode-ray tube" label="CRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q375976" start="6446" end="6460" title="Rec. 709" label="ITU-R BT.709-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="6487" end="6513" title="high-definition television" label="high-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q374081" start="6548" end="6565" title="subtractive color" label="subtractive color"/>
<link wikidata="Q166432" start="7497" end="7501" title="CMYK" label="CMYK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616651" start="7539" end="7557" title="hexachrome" label="Pantone hexachrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q180778" start="7695" end="7699" title="Cyan" label="Cyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276756" start="7705" end="7712" title="magenta" label="magenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q943" start="7722" end="7728" title="yellow" label="yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398176" start="7912" end="7921" title="key plate" label="key plate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8352" end="8357" title="Fogra" label="Fogra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376448" start="8359" end="8384" title="European Color Initiative" label="European Color Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575014" start="8389" end="8393" title="Specifications for Web Offset Publications" label="SWOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q374535" start="8402" end="8414" title="colorimetry" label="colorimetric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8695" end="8702" title="#Red,_yellow,_and_blue_as_primary_colors" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q124354" start="9294" end="9301" title="Bauhaus" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123138" start="9309" end="9323" title="Johannes Itten" label="Johannes Itten"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="9625" end="9638" title="Prussian blue" label="Prussian blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7915816" start="9907" end="9919" title="peacock blue" label="peacock blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q646964" start="9923" end="9933" title="blue-green" label="blue-green"/>
<link wikidata="Q180778" start="9937" end="9941" title="cyan" label="cyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10296772" start="9947" end="9954" title="carmine (color)" label="carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q303826" start="9959" end="9966" title="crimson" label="crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276756" start="9970" end="9977" title="magenta" label="magenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q729244" start="11100" end="11110" title="Chalcidius" label="Chalcidius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="11309" end="11323" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11329" end="11344" title="#History" label="history section"/>
<link wikidata="Q296955" start="12099" end="12102" title="oil paint" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="12104" end="12114" title="watercolor painting" label="watercolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207849" start="12116" end="12123" title="acrylic paint" label="acrylic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204330" start="12125" end="12132" title="gouache" label="gouache"/>
<link wikidata="Q189085" start="12138" end="12144" title="pastel" label="pastel"/>
<link wikidata="Q909369" start="12430" end="12443" title="lightfastness" label="lightfastness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548194" start="12866" end="12888" title="Kubelka–Munk theory" label="Kubelka–Munk equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q166863" start="13288" end="13299" title="color space" label="color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294018" start="13317" end="13328" title="color model" label="color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q284140" start="13473" end="13477" title="sRGB" label="sRGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q359973" start="13482" end="13491" title="Adobe RGB" label="Adobe RGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q166194" start="13527" end="13542" title="RGB color model" label="RGB color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q375857" start="13661" end="13666" title="gamut" label="gamut"/>
<link wikidata="Q374677" start="13995" end="14040" title="International Commission on Illumination" label="Commission Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Eclairage"/>
<link wikidata="Q374617" start="14212" end="14220" title="CIE 1931" label="CIE 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076893" start="14326" end="14331" title="field of view" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q374617" start="14687" end="14706" title="CIE RGB" label="CIE RGB color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="16585" end="16606" title="linear map" label="linear transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q374617" start="16708" end="16727" title="CIE XYZ" label="CIE XYZ color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q899219" start="16979" end="17000" title="luminous efficiency function" label="photometric luminance"/>
<link wikidata="Q748049" start="17361" end="17375" title="photoreceptor cell" label="photoreceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q147298" start="17472" end="17477" title="cone cell" label="cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q702483" start="17628" end="17643" title="LMS color space" label="LMS color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q702483" start="17858" end="17873" title="LMS color space" label="LMS color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047393" start="18271" end="18295" title="ProPhoto RGB color space" label="ProPhoto RGB color space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396418" start="18343" end="18361" title="color reproduction" label="color reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q375677" start="18505" end="18521" title="RGB color spaces" label="RGB color spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q284140" start="18606" end="18610" title="sRGB" label="sRGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q284140" start="19159" end="19163" title="sRGB" label="sRGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429553" start="19168" end="19173" title="scRGB" label="scRGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q166760" start="19270" end="19286" title="color management" label="color management"/>
<link wikidata="Q19799740" start="19530" end="19552" title="color appearance model" label="color appearance model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023714" start="19559" end="19567" title="CIECAM02" label="CIECAM02"/>
<link wikidata="Q303997" start="19691" end="19707" title="opponent process" label="opponent process"/>
<link wikidata="Q64556" start="19724" end="19736" title="Ewald Hering" label="Ewald Hering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886951" start="19768" end="19779" title="unique hues" label="unique hues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998796" start="20208" end="20221" title="reddish green" label="reddish green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460873" start="20633" end="20649" title="neural correlate" label="neural correlate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012622" start="20697" end="20714" title="Richard S. Hunter" label="Richard S. Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q105672664" start="20736" end="20748" title="Hunter Lab" label="Hunter L,a,b"/>
<link wikidata="Q375414" start="20788" end="20794" title="CIELAB color space" label="CIELAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503197" start="20800" end="20820" title="Natural Color System" label="Natural Color System"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="21071" end="21083" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="21111" end="21121" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="21199" end="21215" title="Classical Greece" label="Classical Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q83375" start="21217" end="21227" title="Empedocles" label="Empedocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="21339" end="21348" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003681" start="21525" end="21548" title="François d&amp;#x27;Aguilon" label="François d&amp;#x27;Aguilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="21747" end="21766" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="21882" end="21894" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q168468" start="22059" end="22073" title="David Brewster" label="David Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q25820" start="22178" end="22190" title="Thomas Young (scientist)" label="Thomas Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="22258" end="22277" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="James Clerk Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q60024" start="22311" end="22332" title="Hermann von Helmholtz" label="Hermann von Helmholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239586" start="22685" end="22694" title="John Gage (art historian)" label="John Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="22892" end="22907" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581435" start="23171" end="23181" title="atramentum" label="atramentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787380" start="23391" end="23406" title="Thomas Bardwell" label="Thomas Bardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="23517" end="23529" title="Robert Boyle" label="Robert Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q551624" start="23721" end="23741" title="Joachim von Sandrart" label="Joachim von Sandrart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678961" start="23993" end="24016" title="Jacob Christoph Le Blon" label="Jacob Christoph Le Blon"/>
<link wikidata="Q731980" start="24086" end="24095" title="mezzotint" label="mezzotint"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="24096" end="24107" title="printmaking" label="printmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q720166" start="24307" end="24319" title="Moses Harris" label="Moses Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271730" start="24429" end="24443" title="Léonor Mérimée" label="Léonor Mérimée"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539262" start="24657" end="24669" title="George Field (chemist)" label="George Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q271651" start="24759" end="24781" title="Michel Eugène Chevreul" label="Michel Eugène Chevreul"/>
<link wikidata="Q60406" start="25107" end="25119" title="Tobias Mayer" label="Tobias Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155939" start="25184" end="25204" title="triangular bipyramid" label="triangular bipyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419183" start="25549" end="25557" title="orpiment" label="orpiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q108212" start="25589" end="25596" title="azurite" label="azurite"/>
<link wikidata="Q122999" start="25654" end="25677" title="Johann Heinrich Lambert" label="Johann Heinrich Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q909115" start="25764" end="25771" title="gamboge" label="gamboge"/>
<link wikidata="Q320617" start="25773" end="25780" title="carmine" label="carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="25786" end="25799" title="Prussian blue" label="Prussian blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q166585" start="25993" end="26011" title="Philipp Otto Runge" label="Philipp Otto Runge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="26287" end="26293" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334171" start="27046" end="27060" title="Albert Henry Munsell" label="Albert Munsell"/>
<link wikidata="Q768549" start="27102" end="27122" title="Munsell color system" label="Munsell color system"/>
<link wikidata="Q374259" start="27521" end="27533" title="Color vision" label="Color vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q166194" start="27536" end="27551" title="RGB color model" label="RGB color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q374319" start="27554" end="27569" title="RYB color model" label="RYB color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886951" start="27572" end="27583" title="Unique hues" label="Unique hues"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45943" wikidata="Q45513" url="?curid=45943" title="Swastika">
<text>The swastika (卐 or 卍) is a symbol used in various Eurasian religions and cultures, as well as a few African and American cultures. In the Western world, it is widely recognized as a symbol of the German Nazi Party who appropriated it for their party insignia starting in the early 20th century. The appropriation continues with its use by neo-Nazis around the world. The swastika was and continues to be used as a symbol of divinity and spirituality in Indian religions, including Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism. It generally takes the form of a cross, the arms of which are of equal length and perpendicular to the adjacent arms, each bent midway at a right angle.

The word &quot;swastika&quot; comes from , meaning &#x27;conducive to well-being&#x27;. In Hinduism, the right-facing symbol (clockwise) () is called , symbolizing (&#x27;sun&#x27;), prosperity and good luck, while the left-facing symbol (counter-clockwise) () is called , symbolising night or tantric aspects of Kali. In Jain symbolism, it is the part of the Jain flag. It represents Suparshvanathathe seventh of 24 Tirthankaras (spiritual teachers and saviours), while in Buddhist symbolism it represents the auspicious footprints of the Buddha. In the different Indo-European traditions, the swastika symbolises fire, lightning bolts, and the sun. The symbol is found in the archaeological remains of the Indus Valley civilisation and Samarra, as well as in early Byzantine and Christian artwork.

Although used for the first time as a symbol of international antisemitism by far-right Romanian politician A. C. Cuza prior to World War I, it was a symbol of auspiciousness and good luck for most of the Western world until the 1930s, when the German Nazi Party adopted the swastika as an emblem of the Aryan race. As a result of World War II and the Holocaust, in the West it continues to be strongly associated with Nazism, antisemitism, white supremacism, or simply evil. As a consequence, its use in some countries, including Germany, is prohibited by law. However, the swastika remains a symbol of good luck and prosperity in Hindu, Buddhist and Jain countries such as Nepal, India, Thailand, Mongolia, Sri Lanka, China and Japan, and carries various other meanings for peoples around the world, such as the Akan, Hopi, Navajo, and Tlingit peoples. It is also commonly used in Hindu marriage ceremonies and Dipavali celebrations.

==Etymology and nomenclature==

The word &quot;swastika&quot; is derived from the Sanskrit root , which is composed of &#x27;good, well&#x27; and &#x27;is; it is; there is&#x27;. The word occurs frequently in the Vedas as well as in classical literature, meaning &#x27;health, luck, success, prosperity&#x27;, and it was commonly used as a greeting. The final is a common suffix that could have multiple meanings.

According to Monier-Williams, a majority of scholars consider the swastika to originally be a solar symbol. The sign implies well-being, something fortunate, lucky, or auspicious. It is alternatively spelled in contemporary texts as &quot;svastika&quot;, and other spellings were occasionally used in the 19th and early 20th century, such as &quot;suastika&quot;. It was derived from the Sanskrit term (Devanagari ), which transliterates to &quot;&quot; under the commonly used IAST transliteration system, but is pronounced closer to &quot;swastika&quot; when letters are used with their English values.

The earliest known use of the word swastika is in Pāṇini&#x27;s Aṣṭādhyāyī, which uses it to explain one of the Sanskrit grammar rules, in the context of a type of identifying mark on a cow&#x27;s ear. Most scholarship suggests that Pāṇini lived in or before the 4th century BCE, possibly in 6th or 5th century BCE.

An important early use of the word &quot;swastika&quot; in a European text was in 1871 with the publications of Heinrich Schliemann, who discovered more than 1,800 ancient samples of swastika symbols and variants thereof while digging the Hisarlik mound near the Aegean Sea coast for the history of Troy. Schliemann linked his findings to the Sanskrit .

By the 19th century, the term &quot;swastika&quot; was adopted into the English lexicon, replacing the previous &quot;gammadion&quot; from Greek . In 1878, Irish scholar Charles Graves used &quot;swastika&quot; as the common English name for the symbol, after defining it as equivalent to the French term a cross with arms shaped like the Greek letter gamma (Γ). Shortly thereafter, British antiquarians Edward Thomas and Robert Sewell separately published their studies about the symbol, using &quot;swastika&quot; as the common English term.

The concept of a &quot;reversed&quot; swastika was probably first made among European scholars by Eugène Burnouf in 1852 and taken up by Schliemann in &quot;Ilios&quot; (1880), based on a letter from Max Müller that quotes Burnouf. The term is used in the sense of &#x27;backward swastika&#x27; by Eugène Goblet d&#x27;Alviella (1894): &quot;In India it [the &quot;gammadion&quot;] bears the name of , when its arms are bent towards the right, and when they are turned in the other direction.&quot;

Other names for the symbol include:
* (Greek: ) or &quot;cross gammadion&quot; (; French: ), as each arm resembles the Greek letter Γ ()
* &quot;hooked cross&quot; (German: ), &quot;angled cross&quot; (), or &quot;crooked cross&quot; ()
* &quot;cross cramponned&quot;, &quot;cramponnée&quot;, or &quot;cramponny&quot; in heraldry, as each arm resembles a crampon or angle-iron ()
* &quot;fylfot&quot;, chiefly in heraldry and architecture
* (Greek: ), literally meaning &#x27;four-legged&#x27;, especially when composed of four conjoined legs (compare triskelion/triskele [Greek: ])
* (Latvian for &#x27;fire cross, cross of fire&quot;; other names (&#x27;cross of thunder&#x27;, &#x27;thunder cross&#x27;), cross of Perun or of Perkūnas), cross of branches, cross of Laima)
* &quot;whirling logs&quot; (Navajo): can denote abundance, prosperity, healing, and luck

In various European languages, it is known as the &quot;fylfot&quot;, , , or (a term in Anglo-Norman heraldry); German: ; French: ; Italian: ; Latvian: . In Mongolian it is called () and mainly used in seals. In Chinese it is called 卍字 (), pronounced in Japanese, (만자) in Korean and or in Vietnamese. In Balti/Tibetan language it is called .

==Appearance==
All swastikas are bent crosses based on a chiral symmetry, but they appear with different geometric details: as compact crosses with short legs, as crosses with large arms and as motifs in a pattern of unbroken lines. Chirality describes an absence of reflective symmetry, with the existence of two versions that are mirror images of each other. The mirror-image forms are typically described as left-facing or left-hand (卍) and right-facing or right-hand (卐).

The compact swastika can be seen as a chiral irregular icosagon (20-sided polygon) with fourfold (90°) rotational symmetry. Such a swastika proportioned on a 5×5 square grid and with the broken portions of its legs shortened by one unit can tile the plane by translation alone. The main Nazi flag swastika used a 5×5 diagonal grid, but with the legs unshortened.

===Written characters===

The swastika was adopted as a standard character in Chinese, &quot;&quot; () and as such entered various other East Asian languages, including Chinese script. In Japanese the symbol is called or .

The swastika is included in the Unicode character sets of two languages. In the Chinese block it is U+534D 卍 (left-facing) and U+5350 for the swastika 卐 (right-facing); The latter has a mapping in the original Big5 character set, but the former does not (although it is in Big5+). In Unicode 5.2, two swastika symbols and two swastikas were added to the Tibetan block: swastika , , and swastikas , .

==Origin==

European uses of swastikas are often treated in conjunction with cross symbols in general, such as the sun cross of Bronze Age religion. Beyond its certain presence in the &quot;proto-writing&quot; symbol systems, such as the Vinča script, which appeared during the Neolithic.

===North pole===

According to René Guénon, the swastika represents the north pole, and the rotational movement around a centre or immutable axis (), and only secondly it represents the Sun as a reflected function of the north pole. As such it is a symbol of life, of the vivifying role of the supreme principle of the universe, the absolute God, in relation to the cosmic order. It represents the activity (the Hellenic , the Hindu , the Chinese , &#x27;Great One&#x27;) of the principle of the universe in the formation of the world. According to Guénon, the swastika in its polar value has the same meaning of the yin and yang symbol of the Chinese tradition, and of other traditional symbols of the working of the universe, including the letters Γ (gamma) and G, symbolising the Great Architect of the Universe of Masonic thought.

According to the scholar Reza Assasi, the swastika represents the north ecliptic north pole centred in ζ Draconis, with the constellation Draco as one of its beams. He argues that this symbol was later attested as the four-horse chariot of Mithra in ancient Iranian culture. They believed the cosmos was pulled by four heavenly horses who revolved around a fixed centre in a clockwise direction. He suggests that this notion later flourished in Roman Mithraism, as the symbol appears in Mithraic iconography and astronomical representations.

According to the Russian archaeologist Gennady Zdanovich, who studied some of the oldest examples of the symbol in Sintashta culture, the swastika symbolises the universe, representing the spinning constellations of the celestial north pole centred in α Ursae Minoris, specifically the Little and Big Dipper (or Chariots), or Ursa Minor and Ursa Major. Likewise, according to René Guénon-the swastika is drawn by visualising the Big Dipper/Great Bear in the four phases of revolution around the pole star.

===Comet===
In their 1985 book &quot;Comet&quot;, Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan argue that the appearance of a rotating comet with a four-pronged tail as early as 2,000 years BCE could explain why the swastika is found in the cultures of both the Old World and the . The Han dynasty &quot;Book of Silk&quot; (2nd century BCE) depicts such a comet with a swastika-like symbol.

Bob Kobres, in a 1992 paper, contends that the swastika-like comet on the Han-dynasty manuscript was labelled a &quot;long tailed pheasant star&quot; (&quot;dixing&quot;) because of its resemblance to a bird&#x27;s foot or footprint. Similar comparisons had been made by J.F. Hewitt in 1907, as well as a 1908 article in &quot;Good Housekeeping&quot;. Kobres goes on to suggest an association of mythological birds and comets also outside of China.

===Four winds===

In Native American culture, particularly among the Pima people of Arizona, the swastika is a symbol of the four winds. Anthropologist Frank Hamilton Cushing noted that among the Pima the symbol of the four winds is made from a cross with the four curved arms (similar to a broken sun cross) and concludes &quot;the right-angle swastika is primarily a representation of the circle of the four wind gods standing at the head of their trails, or directions.&quot;

==Historical uses==

===Prehistory===
The earliest known swastikas are from 10,000 BCEpart of &quot;an intricate meander pattern of joined-up swastikas&quot; found on a late paleolithic figurine of a bird, carved from mammoth ivory, found in Mezine, Ukraine. However, the age of 10,000 BCE is a conservative estimate, and the true age may be as old as 17,000 BCE. It has been suggested that this swastika may be a stylised picture of a stork in flight. As the carving was found near phallic objects, this may also support the idea that the pattern was a fertility symbol.

In the mountains of Iran, there are swastikas or spinning wheels inscribed on stone walls, which are estimated to be more than 7,000 years old. One instance is in Khorashad, Birjand, on the holy wall Lakh Mazar.

Mirror-image swastikas (clockwise and counter-clockwise) have been found on ceramic pottery in the Devetashka cave, Bulgaria, dated to 6,000 BCE.

In Asia, swastika symbols first appear in the archaeological record around 3000 BCE in the Indus Valley Civilisation. It also appears in the Bronze and Iron Age cultures around the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea. In all these cultures, swastika symbols do not appear to occupy any marked position or significance, appearing as just one form of a series of similar symbols of varying complexity. In the Zoroastrian religion of Persia, the swastika was a symbol of the revolving sun, infinity, or continuing creation. It is one of the most common symbols on Mesopotamian coins.
Some researchers put forth the hypothesis that the swastika moved westward from the Indian subcontinent to Finland, Scandinavia, the Scottish Highlands and other parts of Europe. In England, neolithic or Bronze Age stone carvings of the symbol have been found on Ilkley Moor, such as the Swastika Stone.

Swastikas have also been found on pottery in archaeological digs in Africa, in the area of Kush and on pottery at the Jebel Barkal temples, in Iron Age designs of the northern Caucasus (Koban culture), and in Neolithic China in the Majiayao culture.

Swastikas are also seen in Egypt during the Coptic period. Textile number T.231-1923 held at the V&amp;A Museum in London includes small swastikas in its design. This piece was found at Qau-el-Kebir, near Asyut, and is dated between 300 and 600 CE.

The &quot;Tierwirbel&quot; (the German for &quot;animal whorl&quot; or &quot;whirl of animals&quot;) is a characteristic motif in Bronze Age Central Asia, the Eurasian Steppe, and later also in Iron Age Scythian and European (Baltic and Germanic) culture, showing rotational symmetric arrangement of an animal motif, often four birds&#x27; heads. Even wider diffusion of this &quot;Asiatic&quot; theme has been proposed to the Pacific and even North America (especially Moundville).

====Caucasus====
In Armenia the swastika is called the &quot;arevakhach&quot; and &quot;kerkhach&quot; () and is the ancient symbol of eternity and eternal light (i.e. God). Swastikas in Armenia were found on petroglyphs from the copper age, predating the Bronze Age. During the Bronze Age it was depicted on cauldrons, belts, medallions and other items.

Swastikas can also be seen on early Medieval churches and fortresses, including the principal tower in Armenia&#x27;s historical capital city of Ani. The same symbol can be found on Armenian carpets, cross-stones (&quot;khachkar&quot;) and in medieval manuscripts, as well as on modern monuments as a symbol of eternity.

Old petroglyphs of four-beam and other swastikas were recorded in Dagestan, in particular, among the Avars. According to Vakhushti of Kartli, the tribal banner of the Avar khans depicted a wolf with a standard with a double-spiral swastika.

Petroglyphs with swastikas were depicted on medieval Vainakh tower architecture (see sketches by scholar Bruno Plaetschke from the 1920s). Thus, a rectangular swastika was made in engraved form on the entrance of a residential tower in the settlement Khimoy, Chechnya.

====Europe====
Iron Age attestations of swastikas can be associated with Indo-European cultures such as the Illyrians, Indo-Iranians, Celts, Greeks, Germanic peoples and Slavs. In Sintashta culture&#x27;s &quot;Country of Towns&quot;, ancient Indo-European settlements in southern Russia, it has been found a great concentration of some of the oldest swastika patterns.

Swastika shapes have been found on numerous artefacts from Iron Age Europe.

The swastika shape appears on various Germanic Migration Period and Viking Age artifacts, such as the 3rd-century Værløse Fibula from Zealand, Denmark, the Gothic spearhead from Brest-Litovsk, today in Belarus, the 9th-century Snoldelev Stone from Ramsø, Denmark, and numerous Migration Period bracteates drawn left-facing or right-facing.

The pagan Anglo-Saxon ship burial at Sutton Hoo, England, contained numerous items bearing swastikas, now housed in the collection of the Cambridge Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology. A swastika is clearly marked on a hilt and sword belt found at Bifrons in Kent, in a grave of about the 6th century.

Hilda Ellis Davidson hypothesised that the swastika symbol was associated with Thor, possibly representing his Mjolnirsymbolic of thunderand possibly being connected to the Bronze Age sun cross. Davidson cites &quot;many examples&quot; of swastika symbols from Anglo-Saxon graves of the pagan period, with particular prominence on cremation urns from the cemeteries of East Anglia. Some of the swastikas on the items, on display at the Cambridge Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, are depicted with such care and art that, according to Davidson, it must have possessed special significance as a funerary symbol. The runic inscription on the 8th-century Sæbø sword has been taken as evidence of the swastika as a symbol of Thor in Norse paganism.

The bronze frontispiece of a ritual pre-Christian () shield found in the River Thames near Battersea Bridge (hence &quot;Battersea Shield&quot;) is embossed with 27 swastikas in bronze and red enamel. An Ogham stone found in Aglish, County Kerry, Ireland (CIIC 141) was modified into an early Christian gravestone, and was decorated with a cross pattée and two swastikas. The Book of Kells () contains swastika-shaped ornamentation. At the Northern edge of Ilkley Moor in West Yorkshire, there is a swastika-shaped pattern engraved in a stone known as the Swastika Stone. A number of swastikas have been found embossed in Galician metal pieces and carved in stones, mostly from the Castro culture period, although there also are contemporary examples (imitating old patterns for decorative purposes).
The ancient Baltic thunder cross symbol (&quot;pērkona krusts&quot; (cross of Perkons); also fire cross, &quot;ugunskrusts&quot;) is a swastika symbol used to decorate objects, traditional clothing and in archaeological excavations.

According to painter Stanisław Jakubowski, the &quot;little sun&quot; (Polish: &quot;słoneczko&quot;) is an Early Slavic pagan symbol of the Sun; he claimed it was engraved on wooden monuments built near the final resting places of fallen Slavs to represent eternal life. The symbol was first seen in his collection of Early Slavic symbols and architectural features, which he named &quot;Prasłowiańskie motywy architektoniczne&quot; (Polish: &quot;Early Slavic Architectural Motifs&quot;). His work was published in 1923.

The Boreyko coat of arms with a red swastika was used by several noble families in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

According to Boris Kuftin, the Russians often used swastikas as a decorative element and as the basis of the ornament on traditional weaving products. Many can be seen on a women&#x27;s folk costume from the Meshchera Lowlands.

According to some authors, Russian names popularly associated with the swastika include &quot;veterok&quot; (&quot;breeze&quot;), &quot;ognevtsi&quot; (&quot;little flames&quot;), &quot;geese&quot;, &quot;hares&quot; (a towel with a swastika was called a towel with &quot;hares&quot;), or &quot;little horses&quot;. The similar word &quot;koleso&quot; (&quot;wheel&quot;) was used for rosette-shaped amulets, such as a hexafoil-thunder wheel ) in folklore, particularly in the Russian North.

An object very much like a hammer or a double axe is depicted among the magical symbols on the drums of Sami &quot;noaidi&quot;, used in their religious ceremonies before Christianity was established. The name of the Sami thunder god was Horagalles, thought to derive from &quot;Old Man Thor&quot; (&quot;Þórr karl&quot;). Sometimes on the drums, a male figure with a hammer-like object in either hand is shown, and sometimes it is more like a cross with crooked ends, or a swastika.

===Southern and eastern Asia===

The icon has been of spiritual significance to Indian religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism. The swastika is a sacred symbol in the Bön religion, native to Tibet.

====Hinduism====
The swastika is an important Hindu symbol. The swastika symbol is commonly used before entrances or on doorways of homes or temples, to mark the starting page of financial statements, and mandalas constructed for rituals such as weddings or welcoming a newborn.

The swastika has a particular association with Diwali, being drawn in &quot;rangoli&quot; (coloured sand) or formed with deepak lights on the floor outside Hindu houses and on wall hangings and other decorations.

In the diverse traditions within Hinduism, both the clockwise and counterclockwise swastika are found, with different meanings. The clockwise or right hand icon is called &quot;swastika&quot;, while the counterclockwise or left hand icon is called &quot;sauwastika&quot; or &quot;sauvastika&quot;. The clockwise swastika is a solar symbol (Surya), suggesting the motion of the Sun in India (the northern hemisphere), where it appears to enter from the east, then ascend to the south at midday, exiting to the west. The counterclockwise &quot;sauwastika&quot; is less used; it connotes the night, and in tantric traditions it is an icon for the goddess Kali, the terrifying form of Devi Durga. The symbol also represents activity, karma, motion, wheel, and in some contexts the lotus. According to Norman McClelland its symbolism for motion and the Sun may be from shared prehistoric cultural roots.

====Buddhism====
In Buddhism, the swastika is considered to symbolise the auspicious footprints of the Buddha. The left-facing sauwastika is often imprinted on the chest, feet or palms of Buddha images. It is an aniconic symbol for the Buddha in many parts of Asia and homologous with the &quot;dharma wheel&quot;. The shape symbolises eternal cycling, a theme found in the &quot;samsara&quot; doctrine of Buddhism.

The swastika symbol is common in esoteric tantric traditions of Buddhism, along with Hinduism, where it is found with chakra theories and other meditative aids. The clockwise symbol is more common, and contrasts with the counterclockwise version common in the Tibetan Bon tradition and locally called &quot;yungdrung&quot;.

In East Asia, the swastika is prevalent in Buddhist monasteries and communities. It is commonly found in Buddhist temples, religious artifacts, texts related to Buddhism and schools founded by Buddhist religious groups. It also appears as a design or motif (singularly or woven into a pattern) on textiles, architecture and various decorative objects as a symbol of luck and good fortune. The icon is also found as a sacred symbol in the Bon tradition, but in the left-facing orientation.

====Jainism====
In Jainism, it is a symbol of the seventh &quot;tīrthaṅkara&quot;, Suparśvanātha. In the Śvētāmbara tradition, it is also one of the &quot;aṣṭamaṅgala&quot; or eight auspicious symbols. All Jain temples and holy books must contain the swastika and ceremonies typically begin and end with creating a swastika mark several times with rice around the altar. Jains use rice to make a swastika in front of statues and then put an offering on it, usually a ripe or dried fruit, a sweet ( ), or a coin or currency note. The four arms of the swastika symbolise the four places where a soul could be reborn in &quot;samsara&quot;, the cycle of birth and death&quot;svarga&quot; &quot;heaven&quot;, &quot;naraka&quot; &quot;hell&quot;, &quot;manushya&quot; &quot;humanity&quot; or &quot;tiryancha&quot; &quot;as flora or fauna&quot;before the soul attains &quot;moksha&quot; &quot;salvation&quot; as a &quot;siddha&quot;, having ended the cycle of birth and death and become omniscient.

====Prevalence in southern Asia====

In Bhutan, India, Nepal and Sri Lanka, the swastika is common. Temples, businesses and other organisations, such as the Buddhist libraries, Ahmedabad Stock Exchange and the Nepal Chamber of Commerce, use the swastika in reliefs or logos. Swastikas are ubiquitous in Indian and Nepalese communities, located on shops, buildings, transport vehicles, and clothing. The swastika remains prominent in Hindu ceremonies such as weddings. The left facing &quot;sauwastika&quot; symbol is found in tantric rituals.

Musaeus College in Colombo, Sri Lanka, a Buddhist girls&#x27; school, has a left facing swastika in their school logo.

In India, &quot;Swastik&quot; and &quot;Swastika&quot;, with their spelling variants, are first names for males and females respectively, for instance with Swastika Mukherjee. The Emblem of Bihar contains two swastikas.

In Bhutan, swastika motifs are found in architecture, fabrics and religious ceremonies.

Among the predominantly Hindu population of Bali, in Indonesia, swastikas are common in temples, homes and public spaces. Similarly, the swastika is a common icon associated with Buddha&#x27;s footprints in Theravada Buddhist communities of Myanmar, Thailand and Cambodia.

The Tantra-based new religious movement Ananda Marga (Devanagari: आनन्द मार्ग, meaning &#x27;Path of Bliss&#x27;) uses a motif similar to the Raëlians, but in their case the apparent star of David is defined as intersecting triangles with no specific reference to Jewish culture.

====Spread to eastern Asia====

The swastika is an auspicious symbol in China where it was introduced from India with Buddhism. In 693, during the Tang dynasty, it was declared as &quot;the source of all good fortune&quot; and was called by Wu Zetian becoming a Chinese word. The Chinese character for () is similar to a swastika in shape and has two different variations:《卐》and 《卍》. As the Chinese character ( or ) is homonym for the Chinese word of &quot;ten thousand&quot; () and &quot;infinity&quot;, as such the Chinese character is itself a symbol of immortality and infinity. It was also a representation of longevity.

The Chinese character could be used as a stand-alone《》or《》or as be used as pairs《 》in Chinese visual arts, decorative arts, and clothing due to its auspicious connotation.

Adding the character ( or ) to other auspicious Chinese symbols or patterns can multiply that wish by 10,000 times. It can be combined with other Chinese characters, such as the Chinese character 《壽》for longevity where it is sometimes even integrated into the Chinese character to augment the meaning of longevity.

The paired swastika symbols ( and ) are included, at least since the Liao Dynasty (907–1125 CE), as part of the Chinese writing system and are variant characters for 《萬》 or 《万》 (&quot;wàn&quot; in Mandarin, 《만》(&quot;man&quot;) in Korean, Cantonese, and Japanese, &quot;vạn&quot; in Vietnamese) meaning &quot;myriad&quot;.

The character can also be stylized in the form of the , Chinese auspicious clouds.
When the Chinese writing system was introduced to Japan in the 8th century, the swastika was adopted into the Japanese language and culture. It is commonly referred as the &quot;manji&quot; (lit. &quot;10,000-character&quot;). Since the Middle Ages, it has been used as a &quot;mon&quot; by various Japanese families such as Tsugaru clan, Hachisuka clan or around 60 clans that belong to Tokugawa clan.
The city of Hirosaki in Aomori Prefecture designates this symbol as its official flag, which stemmed from its use in the emblem of the Tsugaru clan, the lords of Hirosaki Domain during the Edo period.

In Japan, the swastika is also used as a map symbol and is designated by the Survey Act and related Japanese governmental rules to denote a Buddhist temple. Japan has considered changing this due to occasional controversy and misunderstanding by foreigners. The symbol is sometimes censored in international versions of Japanese works, such as anime. Censorship of this symbol in Japan and in Japanese media abroad has been subject to occasional controversy related to freedom of speech, with critics of the censorship arguing it does not respect history nor freedom of speech.
In Chinese and Japanese art, swastikas are often found as part of a repeating pattern. One common pattern, called &quot;sayagata&quot; in Japanese, comprises left- and right-facing swastikas joined by lines. As the negative space between the lines has a distinctive shape, the sayagata pattern is sometimes called the &quot;key fret&quot; motif in English.

Many Chinese religions make use of swastika symbols, including Guiyidao and Shanrendao. The Red Swastika Society, formed in China in 1922 as the philanthropic branch of Guiyidao, became the largest supplier of emergency relief in China during World War II, in the same manner as the Red Cross in the rest of the world. The Red Swastika Society abandoned mainland China in 1954, settling first in Hong Kong then in Taiwan. They continue to use the red swastika as their symbol.

The Falun Gong qigong movement, founded in China in the early 1990s, uses a symbol that features a large swastika surrounded by four smaller (and rounded) ones, interspersed with yin-and-yang symbols.

===Classical Europe===
Ancient Greek architectural, clothing and coin designs are replete with single or interlinking swastika motifs. There are also gold plate fibulae from the 8th century BCE decorated with an engraved swastika. Related symbols in classical Western architecture include the cross, the three-legged triskele or triskelion and the rounded lauburu. The swastika symbol is also known in these contexts by a number of names, especially &quot;gammadion&quot;, or rather the tetra-gammadion. The name &quot;gammadion&quot; comes from its being seen as being made up of four Greek gamma (Γ) letters. Ancient Greek architectural designs are replete with the interlinking symbol.

In Greco-Roman art and architecture, and in Romanesque and Gothic art in the West, isolated swastikas are relatively rare, and the swastika is more commonly found as a repeated element in a border or tessellation. Swastikas often represented perpetual motion, reflecting the design of a rotating windmill or watermill. A meander of connected swastikas makes up the large band that surrounds the Augustan Ara Pacis.

A design of interlocking swastikas is one of several tessellations on the floor of the cathedral of Amiens, France. A border of linked swastikas was a common Roman architectural motif, and can be seen in more recent buildings as a neoclassical element. A swastika border is one form of meander, and the individual swastikas in such a border are sometimes called &quot;Greek keys&quot;. There have also been swastikas found on the floors of Pompeii.

Swastikas were widespread among the Illyrians, symbolising the Sun and the fire. The Sun cult was the main Illyrian cult; a swastika in clockwise motion is interpreted in particular as a representation of the movement of the Sun.

The swastika has been preserved by the Albanians since Illyrian times as a pagan symbol commonly found in a variety of contexts of Albanian folk art, including traditional tattooing, grave art, jewellery, clothes, and house carvings. The swastika ( or , &quot;hooked cross&quot;) and other crosses in Albanian tradition represent the Sun (Dielli) and the fire (zjarri, evidently called with the theonym Enji). In Albanian paganism fire is regarded as the offspring of the Sun and fire calendar rituals are practiced in order to give strength to the Sun and to ward off evil.

===Medieval and early modern Europe===

====Middle Ages====

In Christianity, the swastika is used as a hooked version of the Christian Cross, the symbol of Christ&#x27;s victory over death. Some Christian churches built in the Romanesque and Gothic eras are decorated with swastikas, carrying over earlier Roman designs. Swastikas are prominently displayed in a mosaic in the Saint Sophia Cathedral, Kyiv, dating from the 12th century. They also appear as a repeating ornamental motif on the so-called Sarcophagus of Stilicho in the Basilica of Sant&#x27;Ambrogio in Milan.

A ceiling painted in 1910 in the Grenoble Archaeological Museum (the former church of St Laurent) has many swastikas. A proposed direct link between it and a swastika floor mosaic in the Amiens Cathedral, which was built on top of a pagan site at Amiens, France in the 13th century, is considered unlikely. The stole worn by a priest in the 1445 painting of the Seven Sacraments by Rogier van der Weyden presents the swastika form simply as one way of depicting the cross.

In the 15th century, Thomas Froxmere designed stained glass memorial window for himself and his wife Catherine Cornwallis in the parish church of Droitwich Spa in Worcestershire. The window no longer exists, but Froxmere&#x27;s sketch of it is preserved in the Lansdowne manuscripts in the British Library. The design has figures of him and his wife with annotations. The wife is depicted above a breaking wheel, and the husband, wearing an heraldic tabard, kneels above an ermine swastika. Froxmere&#x27;s notes describe the symbol as a &#x27;. His instructions to the glazier are: &#x27;. According to Henry Bradley in 1897:
According to John Goodall in 1978, the swastika may evoke four set squares, relating Thomas to Thomas the Apostle, who was considered to have been a builder, while the wheel relates Catherine to her own namesake Catherine of Alexandria. According to Clive Cheesman in 2019, &quot;In Froxmere&#x27;s sketch, the swastika is not on a shield but is free-standing like a badge, and indeed there is no indication that it is meant to be hereditary, or heraldic, at all.&quot;

Swastikas also appear in art and architecture during the Renaissance and Baroque era. The fresco &quot;The School of Athens&quot; shows an ornament made out of swastikas, and the symbol can also be found on the facade of the &quot;Santa Maria della Salute&quot;, a Roman Catholic church and minor basilica located at Punta della Dogana in the Dorsoduro sestiere of the city of Venice.

In the Polish First Republic swastika symbols were also popular with the nobility. Several noble houses, e.g. Boreyko, Borzym, and Radziechowski from Ruthenia, also had swastikas as their coat of arms. The family reached its greatness in the 14th and 15th centuries and its crest can be seen in many heraldry books produced at that time.

The swastika was also a heraldic symbol, for example on the Boreyko coat of arms, used by noblemen in Poland and Ukraine. In the 19th century a swastika was one of the Russian Empire&#x27;s symbols and was used on coinage as a backdrop to the Russian eagle.

====Rediscovery by Heinrich Schliemann====

At Troy near the Dardanelles, Heinrich Schliemann&#x27;s 1871–1875 archaeological excavations discovered objects decorated with swastikas. Hearing of this, the director of the French School at Athens, Émile-Louis Burnouf, wrote to Schliemann in 1872, stating &quot;the Swastika should be regarded as a sign of the Aryan race&quot;. Burnouf told Schliemann that &quot;It should also be noted that the Jews have completely rejected it&quot;. Accordingly, Schliemann believed the Trojans to have been Aryans: &quot;The primitive Trojans, therefore, belonged to the Aryan race, which is further sufficiently proved by the symbols on the round terra-cottas&quot;. Schliemann accepted Burnouf&#x27;s interpretation. 
Schliemann believed that use of swastikas spread widely across Eurasia.

Schliemann established a link between the swastika and Germany. He connected objects he excavated at Troy to objects bearing swastikas found in Germany near Königswalde on the Oder.

Sarah Boxer, in an article in 2000 in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, described this as a &quot;fateful link&quot;. According to Steven Heller, &quot;Schliemann presumed that the swastika was a religious symbol of his German ancestors which linked ancient Teutons, Homeric Greeks and Vedic India&quot;. According to Bernard Mees, &quot;Of all of the pre-runic symbols, the swastika has always been the most popular among scholars&quot; and &quot;The origin of swastika studies must be traced to the excitement generated by the archaeological finds of Heinrich Schliemann at Troy&quot;.

After his excavations at Troy, Schliemann began digging at Mycenae. According to Cathy Gere, &quot;Having burdened the swastika symbol with such cultural, religious and racial significance in &quot;Troy and Its Remains&quot;, it was incumbent on Schliemann to find the symbol repeated at Mycenae, but its occurrence turned out to be disappointingly infrequent&quot;. Gere writes that &quot;He did his best with what he had&quot;:

Gere points out that although Schliemann wrote that the motif &quot;may often be seen&quot;, his 1878 book &quot;Mycenæ&quot; did not have illustrations of any examples. Schliemann described &quot;a small and thick terra-cotta disk&quot; on which &quot;are engraved a number of 卍&#x27;s, the sign which occurs so frequently in the ruins of Troy&quot;, but as Gere notes, he did not publish an illustration.

Among the gold grave goods at Grave Circles A and B was a &quot;repoussé&quot; roundel in grave III of Grave Circle A, the ornamentation of which Schliemann thought was &quot;derived&quot; from the swastika:
According to Gere, this motif is &quot;completely dissimilar&quot; to the swastika, and that Schliemann was &quot;straining desperately after the same connection&quot;. Nevertheless, the Mycenaean Greeks and the Trojan people both came to be identified as representatives of the Aryan race: &quot;Despite the difficulties with linking the symbolism of Troy and Mycenae, the common Aryan roots of the two peoples became something of a truism&quot;.

The house Schliemann had had built in Panepistimiou Street in Athens by 1880, Iliou Melathron, is decorated with swastika symbols and motifs in numerous places, including the ironwork railing and gates, the window bars, the ceiling fresco of the entrance hall, and the entire floor of one room.

Following Schliemann, academic studies on the swastika were published by , Michał Żmigrodzki, Eugène Goblet d&#x27;Alviella, Thomas Wilson, Oscar Montelius and Joseph Déchelette.

==== German occultism and pan-German nationalism ====
On 24 June 1875, Guido von List commemorated the 1500th anniversary of the German victory over the Roman Empire at the Battle of Carnuntum by burying a swastika of eight wine bottles beneath the () in the ruins of Carnuntum. In 1891, List began to claim that heraldry&#x27;s division of the field was derived from the shapes of runes. He claimed that the medieval German was a survival of the pre-Christian Armanist priest-kings and that the cryptic letters &quot;SSGG&quot; inscribed on vehmic knives represented a double sig rune followed by two swastikas.

In 1897, Max Ferdinand Sebaldt von Werth published and , which according to Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke in &quot;The Occult Roots of Nazism&quot;, &quot;described the sexual-religion of the Aryans, a sacred practice of eugenics designed to maintain the purity of the race&quot;. Both works were &quot;illustrated with the magical curved-armed armed swastika&quot;. Influenced by Sebaldt, List published in &quot; an article (&quot;) which claimed the swastika was a sacred symbol of the Aryans representing the &quot;fire-whisk&quot; () with which the creator deity had begun the world. In September 1903, List published an article discussing the creation of the universe, the &quot;old-Aryan sexual religion&quot;, reincarnation, karma, &quot;Wotanism&quot;, and &quot;Armanism&quot; from his theosophical viewpoint, which was illustrated by triskelions and various swastikas in the Viennese occult journal . According to Goodrick-Clarke, &quot;This article marked the first stage in List&#x27;s articulation of a Germanic occult religion, the principal concern of which was racial purity&quot;.

Between 1905 and 1907, List published articles in the arguing that the swastika, the triskelion, and the sun-wheel were all &quot;Armanist&quot; occult symbols (Armanen runes) concealed in German heraldry, and in 1908 his () argued that the swastika or Armanen rune &quot;Gibor&quot; was represented in blazons including different heraldic crosses and kinked versions of the ordinaries pale, bend, and fess. List argued that the swastika, triskelion, and other Armanen runes had been concealed in 15th-century rose windows and curvilinear tracery in late Gothic architecture.

List&#x27;s 1908 book () had chapter headings with triskelions, swastikas, and other symbols attached. The work laid out his belief in an ancient priestly of Wotanist initiates and identified the &quot;Ario-Germans&quot; as a &quot;race&quot; identical with Helena Blavatsky&#x27;s theosophical fifth &quot;root race&quot;. List&#x27;s 1910 () discussed Yuga cycles and the Kali Yuga, proposing a mathematical relationship with the of the . His () of the same year connected Blavatsky&#x27;s Hindu-inspired cosmic cycles (kalpas) with the realms of Muspelheim (), Asgard, Vanaheimr (), and Midgard, each with a corresponding symbol. Blavatsky&#x27;s first Astral and second Hyperborean races List connected with the descendants of Ymir and Orgelmir, her third Lemurian race was his race of Thrudgelmir, her fourth Atlantean race his descendants of Bergelmir, and Blavatsky&#x27;s fifth root race List identified as the &quot;Ario-Germans&quot;. According to Goodrick-Clarke, List again argued that the clockwise swastika was a holy symbol of the &quot;Ario-Germans&quot;:

List&#x27;s 1914 () adopted the geological ideas of theosophist William Scott-Elliot and claimed that fragments of Atlantis remained part of Europe, pointing to rocking stones in Lower Austria and European megaliths as evidence. From Jörg Lanz von Liebenfels, List took on occult ideas about the Aryan homeland Arktogäa (a lost polar continent), and struggle the Ario-German master races and the non-Aryan slave races, and the Knights Templar. List believed that the Templars had been adepts of &quot;Armanism&quot; during the Middle Ages&#x27; Christian ascendancy, and that they had been suppressed for worshipping the Maltese cross that List believed to be derived from a superimposed clockwise and anti-clockwise swastika and which he identified with Baphomet. Members of the inner circle of the Guido von List Society, the (HAO), expressed their membership of the occult priesthood with swastikas. Heinrich Winter, Friedrich Oskar Wannieck, and Georg Hauerstein senior&#x27;s first wife all had their graves decorated with swastikas.Lanz, a former Cistercian, established the Order of the New Templars or ONT ( ) in imitation of the Knights Templar whose monastic rule had been written by the Cistercian Bernard of Clairvaux and whom Lanz believed had aimed to establish &quot;a Greater Germanic order-state, which would encompass the entire Mediterranean area and extend its sphere of influence deep into the Middle East&quot; whose eventual suppression had been a triumph of racial inferiority over the &quot;Ario-Christian&quot; eugenics practised by the Templars. As the headquarters of his revived Templar Order and as a museum of Aryan anthropology, Lanz bought on the Danube, where on Christmas Day 1907, he hoisted his heraldic banner (&quot;gules&quot;, an eagle&#x27;s wing &quot;argent&quot;) and the flag of the ONT: a swastika &quot;gules&quot; surrounded by four fleurs-de-lis &quot;azure&quot; on a field &quot;or&quot;.

====Post-Schliemann popularity====
The swastika symbol became a popular symbol in the Western world in the early 20th century, and was often used for ornamentation. It symbolised many things to the Europeans, with the most common symbolism being of good luck and auspiciousness.

The Benedictine choir school at Lambach Abbey, Upper Austria, which Hitler attended for several months as a boy, had a swastika chiseled into the monastery portal and also the wall above the spring grotto in the courtyard by 1868. Their origin was the personal coat of arms of Theoderich Hagn, abbot of the monastery in Lambach, which bore a golden swastika with slanted points on a blue field.

The British author and poet Rudyard Kipling used the symbol on the cover art of a number of his works, including &quot;The Five Nations&quot;, 1903, which has it twinned with an elephant. Once Adolf Hitler and the Nazis came to power, Kipling ordered that swastikas should no longer adorn his books. In 1927, a red swastika defaced by a Union Jack was proposed as a flag for the Union of South Africa.

The logo of H/f. Eimskipafjelag Íslands was a swastika, called &quot;Thor&#x27;s hammer&quot;, from its founding in 1914 until the Second World War when it was discontinued and changed to read only the letters Eimskip.

The swastika was also used by the women&#x27;s paramilitary organisation Lotta Svärd, which was banned in 1944 in accordance with the Moscow Armistice between Finland and the allied Soviet Union and Britain.

Also, the insignias of the Cross of Liberty, designed by Gallen-Kallela in 1918, have swastikas. The 3rd class Cross of Liberty is depicted in the upper left corner of the standard of the President of Finland, who is the grand master of the order, too.

Latvia adopted the swastika, for its Air Force in 1918/1919 and continued its use until the Soviet occupation in 1940. The cross itself was maroon on a white background, mirroring the colours of the Latvian flag. Earlier versions pointed counter-clockwise, while later versions pointed clock-wise and eliminated the white background. Various other Latvian Army units and the Latvian War College (the predecessor of the National Defence Academy) also had adopted the symbol in their battle flags and insignia during the Latvian War of Independence. A stylised fire cross is the base of the Order of Lāčplēsis, the highest military decoration of Latvia for participants of the War of Independence. The Pērkonkrusts, an ultra-nationalist political organisation active in the 1930s, also used the fire cross as one of its symbols.

The swastika symbol (Lithuanian: &quot;sūkurėlis&quot;) is a traditional Baltic ornament, found on relics dating from at least the 13th century. The &quot;sūkurėlis&quot; for Lithuanians represents the history and memory of their Lithuanian ancestors as well as the Baltic people at large. There are monuments in Lithuania such as the Freedom Monument in Rokiškis where swastikas can be found.

Starting in 1917, Mikal Sylten&#x27;s staunchly antisemitic periodical, &quot;Nationalt Tidsskrift&quot; took up the swastika as a symbol, three years before Adolf Hitler chose to do so.

The left-handed swastika was a favourite sign of the last Russian Empress Alexandra Feodorovna. She wore a talisman in the form of a swastika, put it everywhere for happiness, including on her suicide letters from Tobolsk, later drew with a pencil on the wall and in the window opening of the room in the Ipatiev House, which served as the place of the last imprisonment of the royal family and on the wallpaper above the bed.

The Russian Provisional Government of 1917 printed a number of new bank notes with right-facing, diagonally rotated swastikas in their centres. The banknote design was initially intended for the Mongolian national bank but was re-purposed for Russian rubles after the February revolution. Swastikas were depicted and on some Soviet credit cards (sovznaks) printed with clichés that were in circulation in 1918–1922.

During the Russian Civil War, swastikas were present in the symbolism of the uniform of some units of the White Army Asiatic Cavalry Division of Baron Ungern in Siberia and Bogd Khanate of Mongolia, which is explained by the significant number of Buddhists within it. The Red Army&#x27;s ethnic Kalmyk units wore distinct armbands featuring a swastika with &quot;РСФСР&quot; (Roman: &quot;RSFSR&quot;) inscriptions on them.

====New religious movements====
Besides its use as a religious symbol in Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism, which can be traced back to pre-modern traditions, the swastika was also incorporated into a large number of new religious movements which were established in the West in the modern period.

In the 1880s, the U.S.-origined Theosophical Society adopted a swastika as part of its seal, along with an Om, a hexagram or star of David, an Ankh, and an Ouroboros. Unlike the much more recent Raëlian movement, the Theosophical Society symbol has been free from controversy, and the seal is still used. The current seal also includes the text &quot;There is no religion higher than truth.&quot;

The Raëlian Movement, whose adherents believe extraterrestrials created all life on earth, use a symbol that is often the source of considerable controversy: an interlaced star of David and a swastika. The Raëlians say the Star of David represents infinity in space whereas the swastika represents infinity in timeno beginning and no end in time, and everything being cyclic. In 1991, the symbol was changed to remove the swastika, out of respect to the victims of the Holocaust, but as of 2007 it has been restored to its original form.

The swastika is a holy symbol in neopagan Germanic Heathenry, along with the hammer of Thor and runes. This traditionwhich is found in Scandinavia, Germany, and elsewhereconsiders the swastika to be derived from a Norse symbol for the sun. Their use of the symbol has led people to accuse them of being a neo-Nazi group.

===Nazism===


Before the Nazis, the swastika was already in use as a symbol of German nationalist movements ().
In post-World War I Germany, the newly established Nazi Party formally adopted the swastika in 1920. The Nazi Party emblem was a black swastika rotated 45 degrees on a white circle on a red background. This insignia was used on the party&#x27;s flag, badge, and armband. Hitler also designed his personal standard using a black swastika sitting flat on one arm, not rotated. 

In his 1925 work , Adolf Hitler writes: &quot;I myself, meanwhile, after innumerable attempts, had laid down a final form; a flag with a red background, a white disk, and a black hooked cross in the middle. After long trials I also found a definite proportion between the size of the flag and the size of the white disk, as well as the shape and thickness of the hooked cross.&quot;

When Hitler created a flag for the Nazi Party, he sought to incorporate both the swastika and &quot;those revered colours expressive of our homage to the glorious past and which once brought so much honour to the German nation&quot;. (Red, white, and black were the colours of the flag of the old German Empire.) He also stated: &quot;As National Socialists, we see our program in our flag. In red, we see the social idea of the movement; in white, the nationalistic idea; in the hooked cross, the mission of the struggle for the victory of the Aryan man, and, by the same token, the victory of the idea of creative work.&quot;

The swastika was also understood as &quot;the symbol of the creating, effecting life&quot; () and as &quot;race emblem of Germanism&quot; ().

The concepts of racial hygiene and scientific racism were central to Nazism. High-ranking Nazi theorist Alfred Rosenberg noted that the Indo-Aryan peoples were both a model to be imitated and a warning of the dangers of the spiritual and racial &quot;confusion&quot; that, he believed, arose from the proximity of races. The Nazis co-opted the swastika as a symbol of the Aryan master race.

On 14 March 1933, shortly after Hitler&#x27;s appointment as Chancellor of Germany, the NSDAP flag was hoisted alongside Germany&#x27;s national colours. As part of the Nuremberg Laws, the NSDAP flagwith the swastika slightly offset from centrewas adopted as the sole national flag of Germany on 15 September 1935.

During World War II it was also common for Allied pilots to use small swastikas to mark air-to-air victories on the sides of their aircraft, and at least one British fighter pilot inscribed a swastika in his logbook for each German plane he shot down.

===Americas===
The swastika has been used in the art and iconography of multiple indigenous peoples of North America, including the Hopi, Navajo, and Tlingit. Swastikas were founds on pottery from the Mississippi valley and on copper objects in the Hopewell Mounds in Ross County, Ohio, and on objects associated with the Southeastern Ceremonial Complex (S.E.C.C.). To the Hopi it represents the wandering Hopi clan. The Navajo symbol, called &quot;tsin náálwołí&quot; (&quot;whirling log&quot;), represents humanity and life, and is used in healing rituals.
A brightly coloured First Nations saddle featuring swastika designs is on display at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum in Canada.

Before the 1930s, the symbol for the 45th Infantry Division of the United States Army was a red diamond with a yellow swastika, a tribute to the large Native American population in the southwestern United States. It was later replaced with a thunderbird symbol.

In the 20th century, traders encouraged Native American artists to use the symbol in their crafts, and it was used by the US Army 45th Infantry Division, an all-Native American division. The symbol lost popularity in the 1930s due to its associations with Nazi Germany. In 1940, partially due to government encouragement, community leaders from several different Native American tribes made a statement promising to no longer use the symbol. However, the symbol has continued to be used by Native American groups, both in reference to the original symbol and as a memorial to the 45th Division, despite external objections to its use. The symbol was used on state road signs in Arizona from the 1920s until the 1940s.

The town of Swastika, Ontario, Canada, and the hamlet of Swastika, New York were named after the symbol.

From 1909 to 1916, the K-R-I-T automobile, manufactured in Detroit, Michigan, used a right-facing swastika as their trademark.

The flag of the Guna people (also &quot;Kuna Yala&quot; or &quot;Guna Yala&quot;) of Panama. This flag, adopted in 1925, has a swastika symbol that they call &quot;Naa Ukuryaa&quot;. According to one explanation, this ancestral symbol symbolises the octopus that created the world, its tentacles pointing to the four cardinal points.
In 1942, a ring was added to the centre of the flag to differentiate it from the symbol of the Nazi Party (this version subsequently fell into disuse).

===Africa===

Swastikas can be seen in various African cultures. In Ethiopia a swastika is carved in the window of the famous 12th-century Biete Maryam, one of the Rock-Hewn Churches, Lalibela. In Ghana, the adinkra symbol &quot;nkontim&quot;, used by the Akan people to represent loyalty, takes the form of a swastika. &quot;Nkontim&quot; symbols could be found on Ashanti gold weights and clothing.
===Modern adoptions===

A &quot;ugunskrusts&quot; (&#x27;fire cross&#x27;) is used by the Baltic neopaganism movements Dievturība in Latvia and Romuva in Lithuania.

In the early 1990s, the former dissident and one of the founders of Russian neo-paganism Alexey Dobrovolsky first gave the name &quot;kolovrat&quot; (, literally &#x27;spinning wheel&#x27;) to a four-beam swastika, identical to the Nazi symbol, and later transferred this name to an eight-beam rectangular swastika. According to the historian and religious scholar Roman Shizhensky, Dobrovolsky took the idea of the swastika from the work &quot;The Chronicle of Oera Linda&quot; by the Nazi ideologist Herman Wirth, the first head of the Ahnenerbe.
Dobrovolsky introduced the eight-beam &quot;kolovrat&quot; as a symbol of &quot;resurgent paganism.&quot; He considered this version of the Kolovrat a pagan sign of the sun and, in 1996, declared it a symbol of the uncompromising &quot;national liberation struggle&quot; against the &quot;Zhyd yoke&quot;. According to Dobrovolsky, the meaning of the &quot;kolovrat&quot; completely coincides with the meaning of the Nazi swastika.
The &quot;kolovrat&quot; is the most commonly used religious symbol within neopagan Slavic Native Faith (a.k.a. Rodnovery).

In 2005, authorities in Tajikistan called for the widespread adoption of the swastika as a national symbol. President Emomali Rahmonov declared the swastika an Aryan symbol, and 2006 &quot;the year of Aryan culture&quot;, which would be a time to &quot;study and popularise Aryan contributions to the history of the world civilisation, raise a new generation (of Tajiks) with the spirit of national self-determination, and develop deeper ties with other ethnicities and cultures&quot;.

==Modern controversy==

===Post- World War II stigmatisation===

Because of its use by Nazi Germany, the swastika since the 1930s has been largely associated with Nazism. In the aftermath of World War II, it has been considered a symbol of hate in the West, and of white supremacy in many Western countries.

As a result, all use of it, or its use as a Nazi or hate symbol, is prohibited in some countries, including Germany. In some countries, such as the United States (in the 2003 case &quot;Virginia v. Black&quot;), the highest courts have ruled that the local governments can prohibit the use of swastika along with other symbols such as cross burning, if the intent of the use is to intimidate others.

====Germany====
The German and Austrian postwar criminal code makes the public showing of the swastika, the sig rune, the Celtic cross (specifically the variations used by white power activists), the , the odal rune and the skull illegal, except for certain enumerated exemptions. It is also censored from the reprints of 1930s railway timetables published by the . The swastikas on Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain temples are exempt, as religious symbols cannot be banned in Germany.

A controversy was stirred by the decision of several police departments to begin inquiries against anti-fascists. In late 2005 police raided the offices of the punk rock label and mail order store &quot;Nix Gut Records&quot; and confiscated merchandise depicting crossed-out swastikas and fists smashing swastikas. In 2006 the police department started an inquiry against anti-fascist youths using a placard depicting a person dumping a swastika into a trashcan. The placard was displayed in opposition to the campaign of right-wing nationalist parties for local elections.

On Friday, 17 March 2006, a member of the , Claudia Roth reported herself to the German police for displaying a crossed-out swastika in multiple demonstrations against neo-Nazis, and subsequently got the Bundestag to suspend her immunity from prosecution. She intended to show the absurdity of charging anti-fascists with using fascist symbols: &quot;We don&#x27;t need prosecution of non-violent young people engaging against right-wing extremism.&quot; On 15 March 2007, the Federal Court of Justice of Germany () held that the crossed-out symbols were &quot;clearly directed against a revival of national-socialist endeavours&quot;, thereby settling the dispute for the future.

On 9 August 2018, Germany lifted the ban on the usage of swastikas and other Nazi symbols in video games. &quot;Through the change in the interpretation of the law, games that critically look at current affairs can for the first time be given a USK age rating,&quot; USK managing director Elisabeth Secker told CTV. &quot;This has long been the case for films and with regards to the freedom of the arts, this is now rightly also the case with computer and videogames.&quot;

====Legislation in other European countries====
* Until 2013 in Hungary, it was a criminal misdemeanour to publicly display &quot;totalitarian symbols&quot;, including the swastika, the SS insignia, and the Arrow Cross, punishable by custodial arrest. Display for academic, educational, artistic or journalistic reasons was allowed at the time. The communist symbols of hammer and sickle and the red star were also regarded as totalitarian symbols and had the same restriction by Hungarian criminal law until 2013.
* In Latvia, public display of Nazi and Soviet symbols, including the Nazi swastika, is prohibited in public events since 2013. However, in a court case from 2007 a regional court in Riga held that the swastika can be used as an ethnographic symbol, in which case the ban does not apply.
* In Lithuania, public display of Nazi and Soviet symbols, including the Nazi swastika, is an administrative offence, punishable by a fine from 150 to 300 euros. According to judicial practice, display of a non-Nazi swastika is legal.
* In Poland, public display of Nazi symbols, including the Nazi swastika, is a criminal offence punishable by up to eight years of imprisonment. The use of the swastika as a religious symbol is legal.
* In Geneva, Switzerland, a new constitution article banning the use of hate symbols, emblems, and other hateful images was passed in June 2024, which included banning the use of the swastika.

The European Union&#x27;s Executive Commission proposed a European Union-wide anti-racism law in 2001, but European Union states failed to agree on the balance between prohibiting racism and freedom of expression. An attempt to ban the swastika across the EU in early 2005 failed after objections from the British Government and others. In early 2007, while Germany held the European Union presidency, Berlin proposed that the European Union should follow German Criminal Law and criminalise the denial of the Holocaust and the display of Nazi symbols including the swastika, which is based on the Ban on the Symbols of Unconstitutional Organisations Act. This led to an opposition campaign by Hindu groups across Europe against a ban on the swastika. They pointed out that the swastika has been around for 5,000 years as a symbol of peace. The proposal to ban the swastika was dropped by Berlin from the proposed European Union wide anti-racism laws on 29 January 2007.

====Outside Europe====
The manufacture, distribution or broadcasting of a swastika, with the intent to propagate Nazism, is a crime in Brazil as dictated by article 20, paragraph 1, of federal statute 7.716, passed in 1989. The penalty is a two to five years prison term and a fine.

The public display of Nazi-era German flags (or any other flags) is protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, which guarantees the right to freedom of speech. The Nazi &quot;Reichskriegsflagge&quot; has also been seen on display at white supremacist events within United States borders, side by side with the Confederate battle flag.

In 2010, the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) downgraded the swastika from its status as a Jewish hate symbol, saying &quot;We know that the swastika has, for some, lost its meaning as the primary symbol of Nazism and instead become a more generalised symbol of hate.&quot; The ADL notes on their website that the symbol is often used as &quot;shock graffiti&quot; by juveniles, rather than by individuals who hold white supremacist beliefs, but it is still a predominant symbol among American white supremacists (particularly as a tattoo design) and used with antisemitic intention.

In 2022, Victoria was the first Australian state to ban the display of the Nazi&#x27;s swastika. People who intentionally break this law will face a one-year jail sentence, a fine of 120 penalty units ($23,077.20 AUD as of 2023, equivalent to £12,076.66 or US$15,385.57), or both.

====Media====
In 2010, Microsoft officially spoke out against use of the swastika by players of the first-person shooter &quot;Call of Duty: Black Ops&quot;. In &quot;Black Ops&quot;, players are allowed to customise their name tags to represent whatever they want. The swastika can be created and used, but Stephen Toulouse, director of Xbox Live policy and enforcement, said players with the symbol on their name tag will be banned (if someone reports it as inappropriate) from Xbox Live.

In the &quot;Indiana Jones Stunt Spectacular&quot; at Disney Hollywood Studios in Florida, the swastikas on German trucks, aircraft and actor uniforms in the reenactment of a scene from &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot; were removed in 2004.

===Use by neo-Nazis ===

As with many neo-Nazi groups across the world, the American Nazi Party used the swastika as part of its flag before its first dissolution in 1967. The symbol was chosen by the organisation&#x27;s founder, George Lincoln Rockwell. It was &quot;re-used&quot; by successor organisations in 1983, without the publicity Rockwell&#x27;s organisation enjoyed.

The swastika, in various iconographic forms, is one of the hate symbols identified in use as graffiti in US schools, and is described as such in a 1999 US Department of Education document, &quot;Responding to Hate at School: A Guide for Teachers, Counsellors and Administrators&quot;, edited by Jim Carnes, which provides advice to educators on how to support students targeted by such hate symbols and address hate graffiti. Examples given show that it is often used alongside other white supremacist symbols, such as those of the Ku Klux Klan, and note a &quot;three-bladed&quot; variation used by skinheads, white supremacists, and &quot;some South African extremist groups&quot;.

The neo-Nazi Russian National Unity group&#x27;s branch in Estonia is officially registered under the name &quot;Kolovrat&quot; and published an extremist newspaper in 2001 under the same name. A criminal investigation found the paper included an array of racial epithets. One Narva resident was sentenced to one year in jail for distribution of &quot;Kolovrat&quot;. The Kolovrat has since been used by the Rusich Battalion, a Russian militant group known for its operation during the war in Donbas. In 2014 and 2015, members of the Ukrainian Azov Regiment were seen with swastika tattoos.

===Western misinterpretation of Asian use===

Since the end of the 20th century, and through the early 21st century, confusion and controversy has occurred when personal-use goods bearing the traditional Jain, Buddhist, or Hindu symbols have been exported to the West, notably to North America and Europe, and have been interpreted by purchasers as bearing a Nazi symbol. This has resulted in several such products having been boycotted or pulled from shelves.

When a ten-year-old boy in Lynbrook, New York, bought a set of Pokémon cards imported from Japan in 1999, two of the cards contained the left-facing Buddhist swastika. The boy&#x27;s parents misinterpreted the symbol as the right-facing Nazi swastika and filed a complaint to the manufacturer. Nintendo of America announced that the cards would be discontinued, explaining that what was acceptable in one culture was not necessarily so in another; their action was welcomed by the Anti-Defamation League who recognised that there was no intention to offend, but said that international commerce meant that &quot;Isolating [the swastika] in Asia would just create more problems.&quot;

In 2002, Christmas crackers containing plastic toy red pandas sporting swastikas were pulled from shelves after complaints from customers in Canada. The manufacturer, based in China, said the symbol was presented in a traditional sense and not as a reference to the Nazis, and apologised to the customers for the cross-cultural mix-up.

In 2020, the retailer Shein pulled a necklace featuring a left-facing swastika pendant from its website after receiving backlash on social media. The retailer apologized for the lack of sensitivity but noted that the swastika was a Buddhist symbol.

==== Swastika as distinct from &quot;Hakenkreuz&quot; debate ====

Beginning in the early 2000s, partially as a reaction to the publication of a book titled &quot;The Swastika: Symbol Beyond Redemption?&quot; by Steven Heller, there has been a movement by Hindus, Buddhists, and Native Americans to &quot;reclaim&quot; the swastika as a sacred symbol. These groups argue that the swastika is distinct from the Nazi symbol. However, Hitler said that the Nazi symbol was the same as the Oriental symbol. On 13 August 1920, speaking to his followers in the Hofbräuhaus am Platzl of Munich, Hitler said that the Nazi symbol was shared by various cultures around the world, and could be seen &quot;as far as India and Japan, carved in the temple pillars.&quot;

The main barrier to the effort to &quot;reclaim&quot;, &quot;restore&quot;, or &quot;reassess&quot; the swastika comes from the decades of extremely negative association in the Western world following the Nazi Party&#x27;s adoption of it in the 1920s. As well, white supremacist groups still cling to the symbol as an icon of power and identity. 

Many media organizations in the West also continue to describe neo-Nazi usage of the symbol as a swastika, or sometimes with the &quot;Nazi&quot; adjective written as &quot;Nazi Swastika&quot;. Groups that oppose this media terminology do not wish to censor such usage, but rather to shift coverage of antisemitic and hateful events to describe the symbol in this context as a &quot;&quot; or &quot;hooked cross&quot;.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Z (military symbol) – sometimes called a Zwastika

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
* 
==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==

* History of the Swastika—United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
* The Origins of the Swastika—BBC News
* Latvian signs, swastikas, and mittens</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="4" end="12" title="Swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="14" end="15" title="Swastika" label="卐"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="19" end="20" title="Swastika" label="卍"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="50" end="57" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661387" start="100" end="107" title="Indigenous peoples of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="112" end="120" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="203" end="213" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193258" start="218" end="230" title="Cultural appropriation" label="appropriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="339" end="348" title="Neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="453" end="469" title="Indian religions" label="Indian religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="481" end="489" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="491" end="499" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="505" end="512" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40843" start="547" end="552" title="cross" label="cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="759" end="767" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="939" end="939" title="Swastika" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="962" end="969" title="Tantra" label="tantric"/>
<link wikidata="Q132127" start="981" end="985" title="Kali" label="Kali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184640" start="990" end="1004" title="Jain symbols" label="Jain symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940223" start="1028" end="1037" title="Jain flag" label="Jain flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377741" start="1053" end="1067" title="Suparshvanatha" label="Suparshvanatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077817" start="1085" end="1096" title="Tirthankara" label="Tirthankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862780" start="1099" end="1116" title="spiritual teacher" label="spiritual teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="1122" end="1130" title="Salvation" label="saviours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489780" start="1142" end="1160" title="Buddhist symbols" label="Buddhist symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="1208" end="1214" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="1233" end="1246" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="1283" end="1287" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="1289" end="1298" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1314" end="1317" title="sun" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="1376" end="1401" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Indus Valley civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502858" start="1406" end="1413" title="Samarra culture" label="Samarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1435" end="1444" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q645717" start="1449" end="1462" title="Christian art" label="Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518160" start="1577" end="1587" title="A. C. Cuza" label="A. C. Cuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1597" end="1608" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988550" start="1617" end="1687" title="Western use of the swastika in the early 20th century" label="a symbol of auspiciousness and good luck for most of the Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="1773" end="1783" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan race"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1800" end="1812" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="1817" end="1830" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="1888" end="1894" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="1896" end="1908" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="1910" end="1927" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15292" start="1939" end="1943" title="evil" label="evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q325632" start="1990" end="2007" title="Strafgesetzbuch section 86a" label="including Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234541" start="2012" end="2029" title="Bans on Nazi symbols" label="prohibited by law"/>
<link wikidata="Q415693" start="2283" end="2287" title="Akan people" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q117255" start="2289" end="2293" title="Hopi" label="Hopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="2295" end="2301" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="2307" end="2314" title="Tlingit" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="2382" end="2390" title="Divali" label="Dipavali"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="2619" end="2624" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q713510" start="2834" end="2849" title="Monier-Williams" label="Monier-Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241584" start="2915" end="2927" title="solar symbol" label="solar symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="3209" end="3217" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q38592" start="3224" end="3234" title="Devanagari" label="Devanagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q194486" start="3299" end="3326" title="International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration" label="IAST transliteration system"/>
<link wikidata="Q189725" start="3477" end="3483" title="Pāṇini" label="Pāṇini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868351" start="3491" end="3501" title="Aṣṭādhyāyī" label="Aṣṭādhyāyī"/>
<link wikidata="Q57106" start="3856" end="3875" title="Heinrich Schliemann" label="Heinrich Schliemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="3983" end="3991" title="Hisarlik" label="Hisarlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078380" start="4269" end="4283" title="Charles Graves (bishop)" label="Charles Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q14387" start="4451" end="4456" title="gamma" label="gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17627089" start="4503" end="4516" title="Edward Thomas (antiquarian)" label="Edward Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386288" start="4521" end="4534" title="Robert Sewell (historian)" label="Robert Sewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q700638" start="4742" end="4756" title="Eugène Burnouf" label="Eugène Burnouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q57106" start="4781" end="4791" title="Heinrich Schliemann" label="Schliemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q60074" start="4844" end="4854" title="Max Müller" label="Max Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960559" start="4942" end="4971" title="Eugène Goblet d&amp;#x27;Alviella" label="Eugène Goblet d&amp;#x27;Alviella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753856" start="5499" end="5506" title="Crampon (heraldry)" label="crampon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053175" start="5532" end="5538" title="fylfot" label="fylfot"/>
<link wikidata="Q183534" start="5696" end="5706" title="triskelion" label="triskelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q206561" start="5861" end="5866" title="Perun" label="Perun"/>
<link wikidata="Q616848" start="5873" end="5881" title="Perkūnas" label="Perkūnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543737" start="5912" end="5917" title="Laima" label="Laima"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053175" start="6066" end="6072" title="fylfot" label="fylfot"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="6111" end="6119" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="6153" end="6160" title="Latvian Language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="6167" end="6176" title="Mongolian Language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="6299" end="6309" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q805804" start="6314" end="6319" title="Baltistan" label="Balti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641150" start="6320" end="6327" title="Tibetic languages" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734365" start="6410" end="6416" title="chiral" label="chiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="6458" end="6467" title="Geometry" label="geometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955882" start="6620" end="6639" title="reflective symmetry" label="reflective symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703478" start="6685" end="6697" title="mirror image" label="mirror image"/>
<link wikidata="Q215609" start="6885" end="6893" title="icosagon" label="icosagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="6904" end="6911" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q593950" start="6933" end="6952" title="rotational symmetry" label="rotational symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q214856" start="7071" end="7085" title="Tessellation" label="tile the plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q211459" start="7089" end="7100" title="Translation (geometry)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="7272" end="7279" title="Written Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q99274778" start="7331" end="7351" title="East Asian languages" label="East Asian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="7363" end="7377" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="7450" end="7457" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7525" end="7526" title=":wikt:卍" label="卍"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7569" end="7570" title=":wikt:卐" label="卐"/>
<link wikidata="Q858372" start="7628" end="7632" title="Big5" label="Big5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494102" start="7772" end="7785" title="Tibetan (Unicode block)" label="Tibetan block"/>
<link wikidata="Q40843" start="7896" end="7908" title="cross symbol" label="cross symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756136" start="7934" end="7943" title="sun cross" label="sun cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362894" start="7947" end="7966" title="prehistoric religion" label="Bronze Age religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175774" start="8009" end="8022" title="proto-writing" label="proto-writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20818855" start="8057" end="8069" title="Vinča script" label="Vinča script"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="8097" end="8106" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q496850" start="8140" end="8151" title="René Guénon" label="René Guénon"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="8295" end="8298" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q481201" start="8442" end="8450" title="absolute (philosophy)" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="8726" end="8738" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q14387" start="8862" end="8867" title="gamma (letter)" label="gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890688" start="8892" end="8923" title="Great Architect of the Universe" label="Great Architect of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="8927" end="8934" title="Freemasonry" label="Masonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q392457" start="9017" end="9036" title="ecliptic north pole" label="ecliptic north pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q15713" start="9048" end="9058" title="Zeta Draconis" label="ζ Draconis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8675" start="9083" end="9088" title="Draco (constellation)" label="Draco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="9185" end="9191" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q219903" start="9396" end="9405" title="Mithraism" label="Mithraism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189967" start="9527" end="9544" title="Gennady Zdanovich" label="Gennady Zdanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q656393" start="9603" end="9620" title="Sintashta culture" label="Sintashta culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119" start="9708" end="9728" title="celestial north pole" label="celestial north pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="9740" end="9755" title="Polaris" label="α Ursae Minoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q10478" start="9774" end="9780" title="Little Dipper" label="Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q10460" start="9785" end="9795" title="Big Dipper" label="Big Dipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151579" start="10032" end="10037" title="Comet (book)" label="Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="10045" end="10055" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27167" start="10060" end="10070" title="Ann Druyan" label="Ann Druyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="10111" end="10116" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="10238" end="10247" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="10262" end="10273" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563471" start="10280" end="10292" title="Book of Silk" label="Book of Silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q174941" start="10695" end="10712" title="Good Housekeeping" label="Good Housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17166062" start="10839" end="10862" title="Native American culture" label="Native American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q209148" start="10887" end="10898" title="Pima people" label="Pima people"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="10902" end="10909" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q452950" start="10970" end="10992" title="Frank Hamilton Cushing" label="Frank Hamilton Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756136" start="11116" end="11125" title="sun cross" label="sun cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="11472" end="11483" title="paleolithic" label="paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="11516" end="11523" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288991" start="11540" end="11546" title="Mezine" label="Mezine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28507" start="11734" end="11739" title="stork" label="stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q168552" start="11781" end="11788" title="Phallus" label="phallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="11891" end="11895" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q193806" start="12045" end="12052" title="Birjand" label="Birjand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756370" start="12183" end="12198" title="Devetashka cave" label="Devetashka cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="12372" end="12378" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="12383" end="12391" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="12412" end="12421" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="12430" end="12441" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="12632" end="12643" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28926" start="12656" end="12662" title="Ancient Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="12786" end="12797" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="12922" end="12933" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="12939" end="12957" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q681929" start="13069" end="13080" title="Ilkley Moor" label="Ilkley Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653994" start="13094" end="13108" title="Swastika Stone" label="Swastika Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q241790" start="13202" end="13206" title="Kingdom of Kush" label="Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q499019" start="13229" end="13241" title="Jebel Barkal" label="Jebel Barkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="13254" end="13262" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="13287" end="13295" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q914771" start="13297" end="13310" title="Koban culture" label="Koban culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284498" start="13320" end="13335" title="Neolithic China" label="Neolithic China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310602" start="13343" end="13351" title="Majiayao culture" label="Majiayao"/>
<link wikidata="Q29962" start="13567" end="13572" title="Asyut" label="Asyut"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="13771" end="13786" title="Eurasian Steppe" label="Eurasian Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="13815" end="13823" title="Scythian" label="Scythian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000127" start="13828" end="13836" title="Iron Age Europe" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="13838" end="13844" title="Baltic peoples" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="13849" end="13857" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q576717" start="13915" end="13927" title="Animal style" label="animal motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320821" start="14082" end="14092" title="Moundville Archaeological Site" label="Moundville"/>
<link wikidata="Q36713" start="14157" end="14167" title="arevakhach" label="arevakhach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317634" start="14405" end="14413" title="cauldron" label="cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q131647" start="14423" end="14432" title="medallion" label="medallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q546010" start="14597" end="14600" title="Ani" label="Ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067009" start="14634" end="14649" title="Armenian carpet" label="Armenian carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q654476" start="14672" end="14680" title="khachkar" label="khachkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q36713" start="14753" end="14771" title="Armenian eternity sign" label="symbol of eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="14778" end="14788" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="14840" end="14848" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172717" start="14875" end="14880" title="Avars (Caucasus)" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669115" start="14895" end="14914" title="Vakhushti of Kartli" label="Vakhushti of Kartli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450154" start="14941" end="14951" title="Avar Khanate" label="Avar khans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960545" start="15069" end="15095" title="Vainakh tower architecture" label="Vainakh tower architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497768" start="15267" end="15273" title="Khimoy" label="Khimoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="15275" end="15283" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145774" start="15359" end="15372" title="Proto-Indo-Europeans" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="15394" end="15403" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453813" start="15405" end="15418" title="Indo-Iranians" label="Indo-Iranians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="15420" end="15424" title="Celt" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="15427" end="15433" title="Ancient Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653992" start="15435" end="15451" title="Swastika (Germanic Iron Age)" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="15456" end="15461" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q656393" start="15466" end="15483" title="Sintashta culture" label="Sintashta culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4443328" start="15497" end="15513" title="Country of Towns" label="Country of Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145774" start="15529" end="15542" title="Proto-Indo-Europeans" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="15716" end="15724" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="15781" end="15797" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="15802" end="15812" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613392" start="15848" end="15862" title="Værløse Fibula" label="Værløse Fibula"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="15890" end="15896" title="Goths" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q140147" start="15912" end="15925" title="Brest-Litovsk" label="Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517645" start="15961" end="15976" title="Snoldelev Stone" label="Snoldelev Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636730" start="15982" end="15987" title="Ramsø" label="Ramsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q848960" start="16028" end="16037" title="bracteate" label="bracteate"/>
<link wikidata="Q537514" start="16079" end="16084" title="Anglo-Saxon paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="16085" end="16096" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145397" start="16097" end="16108" title="ship burial" label="ship burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q503256" start="16112" end="16122" title="Sutton Hoo" label="Sutton Hoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954733" start="16213" end="16261" title="Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q167685" start="16326" end="16333" title="Bifrons" label="Bifrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114011" start="16381" end="16401" title="Hilda Ellis Davidson" label="Hilda Ellis Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="16460" end="16464" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193813" start="16492" end="16499" title="Mjolnir" label="Mjolnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083647" start="16981" end="16996" title="funerary art" label="funerary symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379880" start="17002" end="17019" title="runic inscription" label="runic inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965839" start="17039" end="17049" title="Sæbø sword" label="Sæbø sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="17116" end="17130" title="Norse paganism" label="Norse paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="17206" end="17218" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q810945" start="17224" end="17240" title="Battersea Bridge" label="Battersea Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q810944" start="17254" end="17270" title="Battersea Shield" label="Battersea Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q184661" start="17337" end="17342" title="Ogham" label="Ogham"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="17366" end="17378" title="County Kerry" label="County Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080010" start="17389" end="17393" title="CIIC" label="CIIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q964444" start="17473" end="17485" title="cross pattée" label="cross pattée"/>
<link wikidata="Q204221" start="17509" end="17522" title="Book of Kells" label="Book of Kells"/>
<link wikidata="Q681929" start="17590" end="17601" title="Ilkley Moor" label="Ilkley Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653994" start="17689" end="17703" title="Swastika Stone" label="Swastika Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="17755" end="17763" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049966" start="17815" end="17829" title="Castro culture" label="Castro culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="17946" end="17952" title="Balts" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q616848" start="18012" end="18019" title="Perkons" label="Perkons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354242" start="18045" end="18056" title="ugunskrusts" label="ugunskrusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="18139" end="18165" title="Excavation (archaeology)" label="archaeological excavations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="18276" end="18288" title="Early Slavs" label="Early Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093553" start="18696" end="18716" title="Boreyko coat of arms" label="Boreyko coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="18779" end="18809" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650595" start="18825" end="18837" title="Boris Kuftin" label="Boris Kuftin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="18843" end="18851" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853751" start="19020" end="19038" title="Meshchera Lowlands" label="Meshchera Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748743" start="19460" end="19468" title="hexafoil" label="hexafoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q588279" start="19518" end="19531" title="Russian North" label="Russian North"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="19638" end="19642" title="Sami people" label="Sami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503498" start="19649" end="19655" title="noaidi" label="noaidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902515" start="19772" end="19782" title="Horagalles" label="Horagalles"/>
<link wikidata="Q815628" start="20195" end="20198" title="Bön" label="Bön"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="20219" end="20224" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191431" start="20432" end="20439" title="mandala" label="mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="20554" end="20560" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284472" start="20583" end="20590" title="rangoli" label="rangoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182436" start="20628" end="20634" title="deepak" label="deepak"/>
<link wikidata="Q204418" start="21061" end="21066" title="Surya" label="Surya"/>
<link wikidata="Q132127" start="21373" end="21377" title="Kali" label="Kali"/>
<link wikidata="Q494511" start="21402" end="21406" title="Devi" label="Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q382973" start="21407" end="21412" title="Durga" label="Durga"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="21641" end="21649" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="21809" end="21815" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q665056" start="21910" end="21934" title="Dharmachakra" label="&amp;quot;dharma wheel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993736" start="22001" end="22008" title="Saṃsāra (Buddhism)" label="samsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="22071" end="22110" title="esoteric Buddhism" label="esoteric tantric traditions of Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180720" start="22156" end="22162" title="chakra" label="chakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q815628" start="22306" end="22309" title="Bon" label="Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="22872" end="22879" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077817" start="22917" end="22928" title="Tirthankara" label="tīrthaṅkara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377741" start="22936" end="22949" title="Suparshvanatha" label="Suparśvanātha"/>
<link wikidata="Q280522" start="22958" end="22968" title="Śvētāmbara" label="Śvētāmbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911739" start="23008" end="23019" title="ashtamangala" label="aṣṭamaṅgala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613100" start="23059" end="23070" title="Jain temple" label="Jain temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410318" start="23476" end="23483" title="Saṃsāra (Jainism)" label="samsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725577" start="23525" end="23531" title="svarga" label="svarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965296" start="23564" end="23570" title="Naraka (Jainism)" label="naraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175425" start="23721" end="23727" title="moksha (Jainism)" label="moksha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23767" end="23773" title="Siddha#Siddha in Jainism" label="siddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424662" start="23834" end="23844" title="omniscience" label="omniscient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976823" start="24024" end="24048" title="Ahmedabad Stock Exchange" label="Ahmedabad Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940058" start="24391" end="24406" title="Musaeus College" label="Musaeus College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653993" start="24667" end="24685" title="Swastika Mukherjee" label="Swastika Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3475231" start="24691" end="24706" title="Emblem of Bihar" label="Emblem of Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="24865" end="24869" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q181510" start="25099" end="25105" title="Tantra" label="Tantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q485786" start="25135" end="25147" title="Ananda Marga" label="Ananda Marga"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="25494" end="25502" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="25523" end="25535" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9738" start="25617" end="25626" title="Wu Zetian" label="Wu Zetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066907" start="25991" end="26000" title="longevity" label="longevity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="26561" end="26573" title="Liao Dynasty" label="Liao Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="26604" end="26626" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q837611" start="26635" end="26653" title="variant Chinese characters" label="variant characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8689" start="26801" end="26807" title="myriad" label="myriad"/>
<link wikidata="Q600964" start="27177" end="27180" title="mon (emblem)" label="mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062437" start="27224" end="27236" title="Tsugaru clan" label="Tsugaru clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975261" start="27238" end="27252" title="Hachisuka clan" label="Hachisuka clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412769" start="27287" end="27300" title="Tokugawa clan" label="Tokugawa clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q194087" start="27314" end="27322" title="Hirosaki" label="Hirosaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q71699" start="27326" end="27343" title="Aomori Prefecture" label="Aomori Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062437" start="27437" end="27449" title="Tsugaru clan" label="Tsugaru clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q903555" start="27464" end="27479" title="Hirosaki Domain" label="Hirosaki Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="27491" end="27501" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013847" start="27545" end="27555" title="List of Japanese map symbols" label="map symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393308" start="27644" end="27659" title="Buddhist temple" label="Buddhist temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q756615" start="28085" end="28092" title="Chinese art" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q603399" start="28097" end="28109" title="Japanese art" label="Japanese art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="28445" end="28462" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165471" start="28503" end="28511" title="Guiyidao" label="Guiyidao"/>
<link wikidata="Q24907885" start="28516" end="28526" title="Shanrendao" label="Shanrendao"/>
<link wikidata="Q704706" start="28532" end="28552" title="Red Swastika Society" label="Red Swastika Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="28683" end="28695" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="28723" end="28732" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q185802" start="28922" end="28932" title="Falun Gong" label="Falun Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q204368" start="28933" end="28939" title="qigong" label="qigong"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="29097" end="29109" title="yin and yang" label="yin-and-yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="29143" end="29156" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q324926" start="29281" end="29288" title="fibula (brooch)" label="fibulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q183534" start="29449" end="29459" title="triskelion" label="triskelion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127311" start="29476" end="29483" title="lauburu" label="lauburu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14387" start="29712" end="29717" title="gamma" label="gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747618" start="29813" end="29824" title="Art in Ancient Greece" label="Greco-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="29854" end="29864" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="29869" end="29879" title="Gothic art" label="Gothic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="30205" end="30213" title="Augustus" label="Augustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q623612" start="30214" end="30223" title="Ara Pacis" label="Ara Pacis"/>
<link wikidata="Q214856" start="30279" end="30291" title="tessellation" label="tessellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106934" start="30313" end="30322" title="Amiens Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="30326" end="30332" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q898879" start="30512" end="30519" title="meander (art)" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q898879" start="30588" end="30610" title="Meander (art)" label="&amp;quot;Greek keys&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="30666" end="30673" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="30712" end="30721" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q179248" start="30946" end="30955" title="Albanians" label="Albanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302318" start="30982" end="30987" title="Albanian paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129254825" start="31067" end="31088" title="Albanian traditional tattooing" label="traditional tattooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q129164756" start="31246" end="31252" title="Dielli (Albanian paganism)" label="Dielli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374949" start="31268" end="31274" title="Zjarri (Albanian paganism)" label="zjarri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374949" start="31310" end="31314" title="Enji (deity)" label="Enji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302318" start="31320" end="31337" title="Albanian paganism" label="Albanian paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="31467" end="31480" title="apotropaic" label="ward off evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="31609" end="31624" title="Christian Cross" label="Christian Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261" start="31711" end="31721" title="Romanesque architecture" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="31726" end="31732" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="31846" end="31852" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830054" start="31860" end="31888" title="Saint Sophia Cathedral, Kyiv" label="Saint Sophia Cathedral, Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q60229606" start="31986" end="32009" title="Sarcophagus of Stilicho" label="Sarcophagus of Stilicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071570" start="32017" end="32047" title="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Ambrogio" label="Basilica of Sant&amp;#x27;Ambrogio"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="32051" end="32056" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329436" start="32092" end="32122" title="Grenoble Archaeological Museum" label="Grenoble Archaeological Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q106934" start="32246" end="32262" title="Amiens Cathedral" label="Amiens Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="32306" end="32312" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q732034" start="32370" end="32375" title="Stole (vestment)" label="stole"/>
<link wikidata="Q434461" start="32405" end="32437" title="Seven Sacraments Altarpiece" label="painting of the Seven Sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q68631" start="32441" end="32462" title="Rogier van der Weyden" label="Rogier van der Weyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="32579" end="32592" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="32662" end="32675" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260116" start="32679" end="32692" title="Droitwich Spa" label="Droitwich Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="32696" end="32710" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487406" start="32794" end="32815" title="Lansdowne manuscripts" label="Lansdowne manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="32823" end="32838" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q692003" start="32930" end="32944" title="breaking wheel" label="breaking wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q535449" start="32983" end="32989" title="tabard" label="tabard"/>
<link wikidata="Q384324" start="33007" end="33013" title="Ermine (heraldry)" label="ermine"/>
<link wikidata="Q664283" start="33103" end="33110" title="glazier" label="glazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q522388" start="33137" end="33150" title="Henry Bradley" label="Henry Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235684" start="33173" end="33185" title="John Goodall (author)" label="John Goodall"/>
<link wikidata="Q952519" start="33223" end="33233" title="set square" label="set square"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="33255" end="33273" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Thomas the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179718" start="33372" end="33395" title="Catherine of Alexandria" label="Catherine of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134526" start="33410" end="33424" title="Clive Cheesman" label="Clive Cheesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q331357" start="33492" end="33498" title="Escutcheon (heraldry)" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429148" start="33527" end="33532" title="Heraldic badge" label="badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="33688" end="33699" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="33704" end="33711" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q186953" start="33734" end="33754" title="The School of Athens" label="The School of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931413" start="33948" end="33966" title="Punta della Dogana" label="Punta della Dogana"/>
<link wikidata="Q52422" start="33974" end="33983" title="Dorsoduro" label="Dorsoduro"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="33984" end="33992" title="Sestiere (Venice)" label="sestiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="34008" end="34014" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="34024" end="34045" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="34205" end="34217" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093553" start="34416" end="34436" title="Boreyko coat of arms" label="Boreyko coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34599" end="34612" title="Coat of arms of Russia#1721–1917: Russian Empire" label="Russian eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="34662" end="34666" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="34676" end="34687" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q57106" start="34689" end="34708" title="Heinrich Schliemann" label="Heinrich Schliemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="34726" end="34752" title="archaeological excavations" label="archaeological excavations"/>
<link wikidata="Q273548" start="34835" end="34858" title="French School at Athens" label="French School at Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q274979" start="34860" end="34879" title="Émile-Louis Burnouf" label="Émile-Louis Burnouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="34973" end="34983" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan race"/>
<link wikidata="Q57797" start="35600" end="35611" title="Königswalde" label="Königswalde"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="35619" end="35623" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q122794626" start="35626" end="35637" title="Sarah Boxer" label="Sarah Boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="35670" end="35688" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614811" start="35755" end="35768" title="Steven Heller (design writer)" label="Steven Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q179674" start="35882" end="35889" title="Teutons" label="Teutons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="35891" end="35898" title="Homeric" label="Homeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="35910" end="35921" title="Vedic India" label="Vedic India"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="36272" end="36279" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q48780468" start="37062" end="37103" title="gold grave goods at Grave Circles A and B" label="gold grave goods at Grave Circles A and B"/>
<link wikidata="Q656884" start="37116" end="37124" title="repoussé" label="repoussé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597783" start="37155" end="37169" title="Grave Circle A, Mycenae" label="Grave Circle A"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="37447" end="37463" title="Mycenaean Greeks" label="Mycenaean Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="37472" end="37485" title="Trojan people" label="Trojan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049367" start="37747" end="37767" title="Panepistimiou Street" label="Panepistimiou Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q658339" start="37787" end="37802" title="Iliou Melathron" label="Iliou Melathron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38080" end="38097" title="Michał Żmigrodzki" label="Michał Żmigrodzki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960559" start="38099" end="38128" title="Eugène Goblet d&amp;#x27;Alviella" label="Eugène Goblet d&amp;#x27;Alviella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38130" end="38143" title="Thomas Wilson (anthropologist)" label="Thomas Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312397" start="38145" end="38160" title="Oscar Montelius" label="Oscar Montelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755384" start="38165" end="38182" title="Joseph Déchelette" label="Joseph Déchelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q94040" start="38256" end="38270" title="Guido von List" label="Guido von List"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="38338" end="38350" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515447" start="38358" end="38377" title="Battle of Carnuntum" label="Battle of Carnuntum"/>
<link wikidata="Q508815" start="38453" end="38462" title="Carnuntum" label="Carnuntum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="38498" end="38506" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q260703" start="38514" end="38535" title="division of the field" label="division of the field"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="38567" end="38572" title="runes" label="runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571949" start="38646" end="38654" title="Armanist" label="Armanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539747" start="38655" end="38667" title="Sacred king" label="priest-kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9298753" start="38762" end="38770" title="sig rune" label="sig rune"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38808" end="38839" title="Max Ferdinand Sebaldt von Werth" label="Max Ferdinand Sebaldt von Werth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366669" start="38875" end="38899" title="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke" label="Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976171" start="38909" end="38935" title="The Occult Roots of Nazism" label="The Occult Roots of Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="39015" end="39023" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q105062783" start="39313" end="39323" title="Fire drill (tool)" label="fire-whisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q635155" start="39348" end="39361" title="creator deity" label="creator deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="39512" end="39525" title="reincarnation" label="reincarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="39527" end="39532" title="karma" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571949" start="39540" end="39548" title="Wotanism (Guido von List)" label="Wotanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571949" start="39566" end="39574" title="Armanism" label="Armanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="39590" end="39602" title="theosophical" label="theosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q183534" start="39639" end="39650" title="triskelions" label="triskelions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571949" start="40024" end="40032" title="Armanist" label="Armanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9298753" start="40055" end="40068" title="Armanen runes" label="Armanen runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551408" start="40083" end="40098" title="German heraldry" label="German heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9298753" start="40166" end="40171" title="Gibor" label="Gibor"/>
<link wikidata="Q120083528" start="40197" end="40203" title="blazon" label="blazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553805" start="40225" end="40241" title="heraldic crosses" label="heraldic crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076566" start="40269" end="40279" title="Ordinary (heraldry)" label="ordinaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q593676" start="40280" end="40284" title="Pale (heraldry)" label="pale"/>
<link wikidata="Q805079" start="40286" end="40290" title="Bend (heraldry)" label="bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088484" start="40296" end="40300" title="fess" label="fess"/>
<link wikidata="Q174520" start="40404" end="40416" title="rose windows" label="rose windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q847108" start="40433" end="40440" title="tracery" label="tracery"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="40444" end="40468" title="late Gothic architecture" label="late Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="40729" end="40745" title="Helena Blavatsky" label="Helena Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q951888" start="40778" end="40787" title="root race" label="root race"/>
<link wikidata="Q112206098" start="40825" end="40836" title="Yuga cycle" label="Yuga cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q228409" start="40845" end="40854" title="Kali Yuga" label="Kali Yuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q864326" start="40993" end="40999" title="Kalpa (time)" label="kalpas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207923" start="41020" end="41030" title="Muspelheim" label="Muspelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q178182" start="41035" end="41041" title="Asgard" label="Asgard"/>
<link wikidata="Q749587" start="41043" end="41052" title="Vanaheimr" label="Vanaheimr"/>
<link wikidata="Q180682" start="41061" end="41068" title="Midgard" label="Midgard"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="41145" end="41156" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborean"/>
<link wikidata="Q214081" start="41202" end="41206" title="Ymir" label="Ymir"/>
<link wikidata="Q214081" start="41211" end="41219" title="Orgelmir" label="Orgelmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q470970" start="41231" end="41239" title="Lemuria" label="Lemurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757903" start="41261" end="41272" title="Thrudgelmir" label="Thrudgelmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q25373" start="41285" end="41294" title="Atlantis" label="Atlantean"/>
<link wikidata="Q266233" start="41319" end="41328" title="Bergelmir" label="Bergelmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018204" start="41608" end="41628" title="William Scott-Elliot" label="William Scott-Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061002" start="41705" end="41719" title="rocking stones" label="rocking stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="41723" end="41736" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="41750" end="41759" title="megaliths" label="megaliths"/>
<link wikidata="Q78764" start="41778" end="41802" title="Jörg Lanz von Liebenfels" label="Jörg Lanz von Liebenfels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41855" end="41863" title="Arktogäa" label="Arktogäa"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="41919" end="41931" title="Master race" label="master races"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="41971" end="41986" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571949" start="42045" end="42053" title="Armanism" label="Armanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q243362" start="42299" end="42307" title="Baphomet" label="Baphomet"/>
<link wikidata="Q94040" start="42344" end="42366" title="Guido von List Society" label="Guido von List Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42447" end="42462" title="Heinrich Winter" label="Heinrich Winter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42464" end="42488" title="Friedrich Oskar Wannieck" label="Friedrich Oskar Wannieck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42494" end="42510" title="Georg Hauerstein" label="Georg Hauerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="42597" end="42607" title="Cistercian" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718672" start="42625" end="42650" title="Order of the New Templars" label="Order of the New Templars"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="42704" end="42717" title="monastic rule" label="monastic rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="42753" end="42773" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="Bernard of Clairvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q155812" start="42828" end="42844" title="Pan-Germanism" label="Greater Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148836" start="42845" end="42850" title="Monastic order" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="42891" end="42909" title="Mediterranean area" label="Mediterranean area"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="42925" end="42944" title="sphere of influence" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="42959" end="42970" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q806865" start="43276" end="43291" title="heraldic banner" label="heraldic banner"/>
<link wikidata="Q858055" start="43299" end="43304" title="gules" label="gules"/>
<link wikidata="Q936472" start="43339" end="43345" title="argent" label="argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="43426" end="43439" title="fleurs-de-lis" label="fleurs-de-lis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785501" start="43446" end="43451" title="Azure (heraldry)" label="azure"/>
<link wikidata="Q430099" start="43475" end="43477" title="Or (heraldry)" label="or"/>
<link wikidata="Q315889" start="43798" end="43811" title="Lambach Abbey" label="Lambach Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="44027" end="44039" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44043" end="44058" title="Theoderich Hagn" label="Theoderich Hagn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="44190" end="44205" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q106449855" start="44281" end="44297" title="The Five Nations" label="The Five Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899714" start="44486" end="44493" title="Defacement (flag)" label="defaced"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="44541" end="44562" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920326" start="44577" end="44604" title="Eimskip" label="H/f. Eimskipafjelag Íslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="44696" end="44712" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348453" start="44858" end="44869" title="Lotta Svärd" label="Lotta Svärd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321586" start="44919" end="44935" title="Moscow Armistice" label="Moscow Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="44960" end="44966" title="Allies of World War II" label="allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="44967" end="44979" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418102" start="45021" end="45037" title="Order of the Cross of Liberty" label="Cross of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076324" start="45285" end="45294" title="Latvian Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q718738" start="45340" end="45357" title="Soviet occupation of Latvia in 1940" label="Soviet occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074039" start="45596" end="45608" title="Latvian Army" label="Latvian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314800" start="45667" end="45691" title="National Defence Academy of Latvia" label="National Defence Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q543042" start="45767" end="45794" title="Latvian War of Independence" label="Latvian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019203" start="45837" end="45855" title="Order of Lāčplēsis" label="Order of Lāčplēsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q746777" start="45948" end="45960" title="Pērkonkrusts" label="Pērkonkrusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="46097" end="46107" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="46342" end="46355" title="Balts" label="Baltic people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693963" start="46431" end="46439" title="Rokiškis" label="Rokiškis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845678" start="46489" end="46501" title="Mikal Sylten" label="Mikal Sylten"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="46519" end="46530" title="antisemitic" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q109700716" start="46549" end="46569" title="Nationalt Tidsskrift (magazine)" label="Nationalt Tidsskrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="46629" end="46641" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="46733" end="46753" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)" label="Alexandra Feodorovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q168782" start="46873" end="46880" title="Tobolsk" label="Tobolsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381934" start="46964" end="46977" title="Ipatiev House" label="Ipatiev House"/>
<link wikidata="Q239543" start="47091" end="47121" title="Russian Provisional Government" label="Russian Provisional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q41044" start="47330" end="47343" title="Russian ruble" label="Russian ruble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305152" start="47433" end="47440" title="sovznak" label="sovznak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="47515" end="47532" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851355" start="47610" end="47620" title="White Army" label="White Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058292" start="47621" end="47645" title="Asiatic Cavalry Division" label="Asiatic Cavalry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q70542" start="47649" end="47661" title="Roman von Ungern-Sternberg" label="Baron Ungern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475921" start="47677" end="47701" title="Bogd Khanate of Mongolia" label="Bogd Khanate of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="47776" end="47784" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q190209" start="47799" end="47805" title="Kalmyk people" label="Kalmyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="48002" end="48010" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="48012" end="48020" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="48025" end="48032" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="48143" end="48166" title="new religious movements" label="new religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q327625" start="48257" end="48277" title="Theosophical Society" label="Theosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q184128" start="48332" end="48334" title="Om" label="Om"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="48350" end="48363" title="star of David" label="star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q180439" start="48368" end="48372" title="Ankh" label="Ankh"/>
<link wikidata="Q237970" start="48381" end="48390" title="Ouroboros" label="Ouroboros"/>
<link wikidata="Q631897" start="48420" end="48436" title="Raëlian movement" label="Raëlian movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q631897" start="48627" end="48643" title="Raëlism" label="Raëlian Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="48795" end="48808" title="star of David" label="star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="49088" end="49101" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="49195" end="49203" title="neopaganism" label="neopagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285441" start="49204" end="49222" title="Heathenry (new religious movement)" label="Germanic Heathenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q193813" start="49239" end="49253" title="Mjölnir" label="hammer of Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="49258" end="49263" title="runes" label="runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="49600" end="49624" title="Weimar Republic" label="post-World War I Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="49648" end="49658" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="49868" end="49874" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q316128" start="50639" end="50668" title="Flag of the German Empire" label="flag of the old German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="50903" end="50908" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q717939" start="51146" end="51160" title="racial hygiene" label="racial hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="51165" end="51182" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q75849" start="51234" end="51250" title="Alfred Rosenberg" label="Alfred Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267849" start="51266" end="51284" title="Indo-Aryan peoples" label="Indo-Aryan peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="51691" end="51705" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315010" start="52340" end="52355" title="Hopewell Culture National Historical Park" label="Hopewell Mounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q485528" start="52359" end="52376" title="Ross County, Ohio" label="Ross County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52413" end="52455" title="Southeastern Ceremonial Complex#Motifs" label="Southeastern Ceremonial Complex (S.E.C.C.)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117255" start="52464" end="52468" title="Hopi" label="Hopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266" start="52512" end="52518" title="Navajo" label="Navajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="52670" end="52683" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q282749" start="52739" end="52764" title="Royal Saskatchewan Museum" label="Royal Saskatchewan Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332510" start="52814" end="52862" title="45th Infantry Division (United States)" label="45th Infantry Division of the United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q264471" start="53019" end="53030" title="Thunderbird (mythology)" label="thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="53718" end="53725" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q755103" start="53771" end="53796" title="Swastika, Ontario" label="Swastika, Ontario, Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158928" start="53816" end="53834" title="Swastika, New York" label="Swastika, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191718" start="53888" end="53906" title="K-R-I-T Motor Car Company" label="K-R-I-T automobile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53997" end="54020" title="Guna people#Flag" label="flag of the Guna people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="54422" end="54432" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900053" start="54619" end="54631" title="Biete Maryam" label="Biete Maryam"/>
<link wikidata="Q642979" start="54644" end="54672" title="Rock-Hewn Churches, Lalibela" label="Rock-Hewn Churches, Lalibela"/>
<link wikidata="Q357360" start="54688" end="54702" title="adinkra symbol" label="adinkra symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q415693" start="54736" end="54747" title="Akan people" label="Akan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291228" start="54846" end="54866" title="Akan goldweights" label="Ashanti gold weights"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354242" start="54913" end="54924" title="ugunskrusts" label="ugunskrusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q520230" start="54971" end="54989" title="Baltic neopaganism" label="Baltic neopaganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q94704" start="55000" end="55010" title="Dievturība" label="Dievturība"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094619" start="55025" end="55031" title="Romuva (religion)" label="Romuva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163615" start="55136" end="55154" title="Alexey Dobrovolsky" label="Alexey Dobrovolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644726" start="55509" end="55519" title="Oera Linda Book" label="Oera Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q592023" start="55549" end="55561" title="Herman Wirth" label="Herman Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q160394" start="55585" end="55594" title="Ahnenerbe" label="Ahnenerbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q393942" start="55885" end="55889" title="Zhyd" label="Zhyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258217" start="56112" end="56131" title="Slavic Native Faith" label="Slavic Native Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="56253" end="56259" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q57366" start="56271" end="56287" title="Emomali Rahmonov" label="Emomali Rahmonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="56313" end="56318" title="Aryan" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934714" start="57135" end="57152" title="Virginia v. Black" label="Virginia v. Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q674827" start="57398" end="57411" title="Strafgesetzbuch" label="criminal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q9298753" start="57458" end="57466" title="sig rune" label="sig rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q229788" start="57472" end="57484" title="Celtic cross" label="Celtic cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57499" end="57543" title="Celtic cross#White supremacist symbolism" label="the variations used by white power activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401643" start="57556" end="57565" title="odal (rune)" label="odal rune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="57990" end="57999" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q75791" start="58449" end="58461" title="Claudia Roth" label="Claudia Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="58573" end="58582" title="neo-Nazis" label="neo-Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q687323" start="58882" end="58917" title="Federal Court of Justice of Germany" label="Federal Court of Justice of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="59749" end="59751" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q457195" start="59770" end="59781" title="Arrow Cross" label="Arrow Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041293" start="59912" end="59928" title="communist symbol" label="communist symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q170266" start="59933" end="59950" title="hammer and sickle" label="hammer and sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208578" start="59959" end="59967" title="red star" label="red star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="60521" end="60526" title="euros" label="euros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="60660" end="60664" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="60807" end="60813" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="61000" end="61042" title="European Commission" label="European Union&amp;#x27;s Executive Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="61492" end="61515" title="Holocaust denial" label="denial of the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q48790" start="61910" end="61946" title="Fundamental Rights Agency" label="European Union wide anti-racism laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="62274" end="62278" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="62337" end="62386" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="62418" end="62435" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q527072" start="62452" end="62470" title="Reichskriegsflagge" label="Reichskriegsflagge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62587" end="62610" title="Flags of the Confederate States of America#Battle flag" label="Confederate battle flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="62626" end="62648" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="63203" end="63211" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="63499" end="63508" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="63576" end="63596" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63603" end="63626" title="Call of Duty: Black Ops" label="Call of Duty: Black Ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610706" start="63784" end="63800" title="Stephen Toulouse" label="Stephen Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q170073" start="63814" end="63823" title="Xbox Live" label="Xbox Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150107" start="63981" end="64012" title="Indiana Jones Stunt Spectacular" label="Indiana Jones Stunt Spectacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345090" start="64022" end="64046" title="Disney Hollywood Studios" label="Disney Hollywood Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="64160" end="64183" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="64251" end="64259" title="neo-Nazi" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q465904" start="64289" end="64308" title="American Nazi Party" label="American Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q440145" start="64443" end="64466" title="George Lincoln Rockwell" label="George Lincoln Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="64685" end="64693" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="65124" end="65136" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183534" start="65149" end="65183" title="Triskelion" label="&amp;quot;three-bladed&amp;quot; variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625151" start="65192" end="65201" title="White power skinhead" label="skinheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q385873" start="65233" end="65268" title="Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging" label="some South African extremist groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401018" start="65290" end="65312" title="Russian National Unity" label="Russian National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q113391513" start="65685" end="65701" title="Rusich Group" label="Rusich Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335075" start="65763" end="65776" title="War in Donbas (2014–2022)" label="war in Donbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16942189" start="65821" end="65834" title="Azov Regiment" label="Azov Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878794" start="66358" end="66376" title="Lynbrook, New York" label="Lynbrook, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056309" start="66394" end="66407" title="Pokémon Trading Card Game" label="Pokémon cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="66625" end="66644" title="Nintendo of America" label="Nintendo of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="66812" end="66834" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776859" start="67025" end="67042" title="Christmas cracker" label="Christmas cracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q107377209" start="67375" end="67380" title="Shein (company)" label="Shein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614811" start="67815" end="67828" title="Steven Heller (design writer)" label="Steven Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="67859" end="67865" title="Hinduism" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="67867" end="67876" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="67882" end="67898" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q152971" start="68157" end="68178" title="Hofbräuhaus am Platzl" label="Hofbräuhaus am Platzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="68621" end="68638" title="white supremacist" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q111103866" start="69167" end="69186" title="Z (military symbol)" label="Z (military symbol)"/>
<link wikidata="Q238990" start="69332" end="69371" title="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum" label="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="69402" end="69410" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45945" wikidata="Q1134180" url="?curid=45945" title="Lower Canada">
<text>The Province of Lower Canada () was a British colony on the lower Saint Lawrence River and the shores of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence (1791–1841). It covered the southern portion of the current Province of Quebec and the Labrador region of the current Province of Newfoundland and Labrador (until the Labrador region was transferred to Newfoundland in 1809).

Lower Canada consisted of part of the former colony of Canada of New France, conquered by Great Britain in the Seven Years&#x27; War ending in 1763 (also called the French and Indian War in the United States). Other parts of New France conquered by Britain became the Colonies of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island.

The Province of Lower Canada was created by the &quot;Constitutional Act 1791&quot; from the partition of the British colony of the Province of Quebec (1763–1791) into the Province of Lower Canada and the Province of Upper Canada. The prefix &quot;lower&quot; in its name refers to its geographic position farther downriver from the headwaters of the St. Lawrence River than its contemporary Upper Canada, present-day southern Ontario.

Lower Canada was abolished in 1841 when it and adjacent Upper Canada were united into the Province of Canada.

==Rebellion==

Like Upper Canada, there was significant political unrest. Twenty-two years after an invasion by the United States in the War of 1812, a rebellion now challenged the British rule of the predominantly French population. After the Patriote Rebellion in the Rebellions of 1837–1838 was suppressed by government troops and Loyal volunteers, the 1791 Constitution was suspended on 27 March 1838 and a special council was appointed to administer the colony. An abortive attempt by revolutionary Robert Nelson to declare a Republic of Lower Canada was quickly thwarted.

The provinces of Lower Canada and Upper Canada were combined as the United Province of Canada in 1841, when the &quot;Act of Union 1840&quot; came into force. Their separate legislatures were combined into a single parliament with equal representation for both constituent parts, even though Lower Canada had a greater population.

==Constitution==

The Province of Lower Canada inherited the mixed set of French and English institutions that existed in the Province of Quebec during the 1763–1791 period and which continued to exist later in Canada-East (1841–1867) and ultimately in the current Province of Quebec (since 1867).

==Population==
Lower Canada was populated mainly by Canadiens, an ethnic group who trace their ancestry to French colonists who settled in Canada from the 17th century onward.
==Transportation==

Travelling around Lower Canada was mainly by water along the St. Lawrence River. On land, the only long-distance route was the Chemin du Roy, or King&#x27;s Highway; it was built in the 1730s by New France. The King&#x27;s Highway was, in addition to the mail route, the primary means of long-distance passenger travel until steamboats (1815) and railways (1850s) began to challenge the royal road. The royal road&#x27;s importance waned after the 1850s and would not re-emerge as a key means of transportation until the highway system of Quebec was created in the 20th century.

==See also==
*Canada East, period after the &quot;Act of Union 1840&quot;
*Former colonies and territories in Canada
*French and Indian War
* French and Indian Wars
*French colonial empire
*List of lieutenant governors of Quebec
*National Patriots&#x27; Day
*Ottawa River timber trade
*Province of Quebec (1763–1791)
* Rebellion
*Republic of Lower Canada
*The Canadas
*Timeline of Quebec history
*Upper Canada
==References==
==Further reading==
* Robert Christie. &quot;A History of the Late Province of Lower Canada&quot;, Quebec City: T. Cary/R. Montreal: Worthington, 1848–1855 (Internet Archive: All 6 volumes)
* François-Xavier Garneau. &quot;History of Canada : from the time of its discovery till the union year&quot;, Montreal : J. Lovell, 1860 (Internet Archive: All 3 Volumes)
* Saul, John Ralston. &quot;Louis-Hippolyte LaFontaine and Robert Baldwin&quot; (2010) online

==External links==
*Lower Canada – The Canadian Encyclopedia
*Canada East and Lower Canada – Encyclopædia Britannica
*Governors of Lower Canada – &quot;Histoire du Québec&quot; 
*Lower Canada – Quebec Parliament library </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1134180" start="4" end="28" title="Lower Canada" label="Province of Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="38" end="52" title="British colonization of the Americas" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="66" end="86" title="Saint Lawrence River" label="Saint Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="109" end="131" title="Gulf of Saint Lawrence" label="Gulf of Saint Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="192" end="210" title="Province of Quebec" label="Province of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q380307" start="219" end="227" title="Labrador" label="Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="250" end="287" title="Province of Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Province of Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569593" start="413" end="419" title="Canada (New France)" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="423" end="433" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="469" end="490" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="523" end="544" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="638" end="649" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="651" end="664" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="670" end="690" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090855" start="747" end="770" title="Constitutional Act 1791" label="Constitutional Act 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="825" end="843" title="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)" label="Province of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="898" end="922" title="Upper Canada" label="Province of Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="1044" end="1062" title="St. Lawrence River" label="St. Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="1204" end="1210" title="Union of Upper and Lower Canada" label="united"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="1220" end="1238" title="Province of Canada" label="Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1357" end="1370" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="1378" end="1389" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466441" start="1485" end="1503" title="Lower Canada Rebellion" label="Patriote Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560445" start="1511" end="1534" title="Rebellions of 1837–1838" label="Rebellions of 1837–1838"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466441" start="1575" end="1591" title="Loyal (Lower Canada)" label="Loyal volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090855" start="1597" end="1614" title="Constitutional Act 1791" label="1791 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994287" start="1652" end="1667" title="Special Council of Lower Canada" label="special council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435997" start="1745" end="1758" title="Robert Nelson (insurrectionist)" label="Robert Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456436" start="1772" end="1796" title="Republic of Lower Canada" label="Republic of Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="1888" end="1913" title="United Province of Canada" label="United Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823561" start="1938" end="1955" title="Act of Union 1840" label="Act of Union 1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="2503" end="2512" title="Canadiens" label="Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="2517" end="2529" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="2558" end="2564" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569593" start="2590" end="2596" title="Canada (New France)" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="2708" end="2726" title="St. Lawrence River" label="St. Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069348" start="2774" end="2787" title="Chemin du Roy" label="Chemin du Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="2842" end="2852" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457053" start="3168" end="3192" title="Highways in Quebec" label="highway system of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935756" start="3241" end="3252" title="Canada East" label="Canada East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823561" start="3277" end="3294" title="Act of Union 1840" label="Act of Union 1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470145" start="3302" end="3343" title="Former colonies and territories in Canada" label="Former colonies and territories in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="3345" end="3366" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q681416" start="3369" end="3391" title="French and Indian Wars" label="French and Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="3393" end="3415" title="French colonial empire" label="French colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853545" start="3417" end="3455" title="List of lieutenant governors of Quebec" label="List of lieutenant governors of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187072" start="3457" end="3484" title="National Patriots&amp;#x27; Day" label="National Patriots&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109234" start="3486" end="3511" title="Ottawa River timber trade" label="Ottawa River timber trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="3513" end="3543" title="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)" label="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="3546" end="3555" title="Rebellion" label="Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456436" start="3557" end="3581" title="Republic of Lower Canada" label="Republic of Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721124" start="3583" end="3594" title="The Canadas" label="The Canadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966956" start="3596" end="3622" title="Timeline of Quebec history" label="Timeline of Quebec history"/>
<link wikidata="Q795427" start="3624" end="3636" title="Upper Canada" label="Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434800" start="3674" end="3689" title="Robert Christie (Quebec politician)" label="Robert Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758691" start="3844" end="3867" title="François-Xavier Garneau" label="François-Xavier Garneau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45948" wikidata="Q134750" url="?curid=45948" title="St. Lawrence River">
<text>The St. Lawrence River (, ) is a large international river in the middle latitudes of North America connecting the Great Lakes to the North Atlantic Ocean. Its waters flow in a northeasterly direction from Lake Ontario to the Gulf of St. Lawrence, traversing Ontario and Quebec in Canada and New York in the United States. A section of the river demarcates the Canada–U.S. border.

As the primary drainage outflow of the Great Lakes Basin, the St. Lawrence has the second-highest discharge of any river in North America (after the Mississippi River) and the 16th-highest in the world. The estuary of St. Lawrence is often cited by scientists as the largest in the world. Significant natural landmarks of the river and estuary include the 1,864 river islands of the Thousand Islands, the endangered whales of Saguenay–St. Lawrence Marine Park, and the limestone monoliths of the Mingan Archipelago.

Long a transportation route to Indigenous peoples, the St. Lawrence River has played a key role in the history of Canada and in the development of cities such as Montreal and Quebec City. The river remains an important shipping route as the backbone of the St. Lawrence Seaway, a lock and canal system that enables world marine traffic to access the inland ports of the Great Lakes Waterway.

==Etymology==
The river has been called a variety of names by local First Nations. Beginning in the 16th century, French explorers visited what is now Canada and gave the river names such as the &quot;Grand fleuve de Hochelaga&quot; and the &quot;Grande rivière du Canada&quot;, where &quot;fleuve&quot; and &quot;rivière&quot; are two French words (&quot;fleuve&quot; being a river that flows into the sea).

The river&#x27;s present name has been used since 1604 when it was recorded on a map by Samuel de Champlain Champlain opted for the names &quot;Grande riviere de sainct Laurens&quot; and &quot;Fleuve sainct Laurens&quot; in his writings, supplanting the earlier names. In contemporary French, the name is rendered as the &quot;fleuve Saint-Laurent&quot;. The name &quot;Saint-Laurent&quot; (Saint Lawrence) was originally applied to the eponymous bay by Jacques Cartier upon his arrival into the region on the 10th of August feast day for Saint Lawrence in 1535.

Indigenous people use the following names:
*Innu-aimun, the language of Nitassinan, refer to it as &quot;Wepistukujaw Sipo&quot;/&quot;Wepìstùkwiyaht sīpu&quot;.
*the Abenaki call it &quot;Moliantegok&quot;/&quot;Moliantekw&quot; (&quot;Montréal River&quot;), &quot;Kchitegw&quot;/&quot;Ktsitekw&quot;/&quot;Gicitegw&quot; (&quot;Great River&quot;), or &quot;Oss8genaizibo&quot;/&quot;Ws8genaisibo&quot;/&quot;Wsogenaisibo&quot; (&quot;River of the Algonquins&quot;).
*in Mohawk language it is &quot;Roiatatokenti&quot;, &quot;Raoteniateara&quot;, &quot;Ken’tarókwen&quot;, or &quot;Kaniatarowanénhne&quot;.
*Tuscarora people call it &quot;Kahnawáˀkye&quot; or &quot;Kaniatarowanenneh&quot; (&quot;Big Water Current&quot;).
*Algonquin people call it &quot;the Walking Path&quot; or &quot;Magtogoek&quot;, or &quot;Kitcikanii sipi&quot;, the &quot;Large Water River&quot;.
*the Huron-Wendat Nation call it &quot;Lada8anna&quot; or &quot;Laooendaooena&quot;&#x27;.
*the Atikamekw of Nitaskinan refer to it as &quot;Micta sipi&quot; (&quot;Huge River&quot;).

==Geography==


===Marine weather===
In winter, the St. Lawrence River begins producing ice in December, with the formation of ice cubes between Montreal and Quebec City. The prevailing winds and currents push this ice towards the estuary, and it reaches the east of Les Méchins at the end of December. Ice covers the entire Gulf of St. Lawrence in January and February.

Ice helps navigation by preventing the formation of waves, and therefore spray, and prevents the icing of ships.

===Watershed===
With the draining of the Champlain Sea, due to a rebounding continent from the Last Glacial Maximum, the St. Lawrence River was formed. The Champlain Sea lasted from about 13,000 years ago to about 10,000 years ago and was continuously shrinking during that time, a process that continues today. The head of the St. Lawrence River, near Lake Ontario, is home to the Thousand Islands.

Today, the St. Lawrence River begins at the outflow of Lake Ontario and flows adjacent to Cape Vincent, Gananoque, Clayton, Alexandria Bay, Brockville, Morristown, Ogdensburg, Massena, Cornwall, Montreal, Trois-Rivières, and Quebec City before draining into the Gulf of St. Lawrence, often given as the largest estuary in the world. The estuary begins at the eastern tip of Île d&#x27;Orléans, just downstream from Quebec City. The river becomes tidal around Quebec City.

The St. Lawrence River runs from the farthest headwater to the mouth and from the outflow of Lake Ontario. These numbers include the estuary; without the estuary, the length from Lake Ontario is c. 500 km (c. 300 mi). The farthest headwater is the North River in the Mesabi Range at Hibbing, Minnesota. Its drainage area, which includes the Great Lakes, the world&#x27;s largest system of freshwater lakes, is , of which is in Canada and is in the United States. The basin covers parts of Ontario and Quebec in Canada, parts of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York, Vermont, and nearly the entirety of the state of Michigan in the United States. The average discharge below the Saguenay River is . At Quebec City, it is . The average discharge at the river&#x27;s source, the outflow of Lake Ontario, is .

The St. Lawrence River includes Lake Saint Francis at Salaberry-de-Valleyfield, Lake Saint-Louis south of Montreal and Lake Saint Pierre east of Montreal. It encompasses four archipelagoes: the Thousand Islands chain near Alexandria Bay, New York and Kingston, Ontario; the Hochelaga Archipelago, including the Island of Montreal and Île Jésus (Laval); the Lake St. Pierre Archipelago (classified a biosphere world reserve by the UNESCO in 2000) and the smaller Mingan Archipelago. Other islands include Île d&#x27;Orléans near Quebec City and Anticosti Island north of the Gaspé. It is the second longest river in Canada.

Lake Champlain and the Ottawa, Richelieu, Saint-Maurice, Saint-François, Chaudière and Saguenay rivers drain into the St. Lawrence.

The St. Lawrence River is in a seismically active zone where fault reactivation is believed to occur along late Proterozoic to early Paleozoic normal faults related to the opening of the Iapetus Ocean. The faults in the area are rift-related and comprise the Saint Lawrence rift system.

According to the United States Geological Survey, the St. Lawrence Valley is a physiographic province of the larger Appalachian division, containing the Champlain section. However, in Canada, where most of the valley is, it is instead considered part of a distinct St. Lawrence Lowlands physiographic division, and not part of the Appalachian division at all.

===Sources===

The source of the North River in the Mesabi Range in Minnesota (Seven Beaver Lake) is considered to be the source of the St. Lawrence River. Because it crosses so many lakes, the water system frequently changes its name. From source to mouth, the names are:
The St. Lawrence River also passes through Lake Saint-Louis and Lake Saint-Pierre in Quebec.

==Tributaries==

The St. Lawrence River and the largest tributaries of the Great Lakes.

The St. Lawrence River tributaries are listed upstream from the mouth. The major tributaries of the inter-lake sections are also shown, as well as the major rivers that flow into the Great Lakes. Great Lakes tributaries are listed in alphabetical order. 

The list includes all tributaries with a drainage area of at least 1,000 square kilometres and an average flow of more than 10 cubic metres per second.
==Discharge==

==Biodiversity==
The diversity of the St. Lawrence River includes:
* 19 species of marine mammals
* More than 230 species of birds
* Nearly 35 species of amphibians and reptiles
* 200 species of freshwater and saltwater fish (including 19 sharks and rays)
* 2200 invertebrates in the estuary and its gulf (sponges, jellyfish, corals, crustaceans, etc.)
* Nearly 2000 vascular plants

===Marine mammals===
Large marine mammals travel in all the seas of the earth, the research and observations of these giants concern fishermen and shipping industry, exercise a fascination and a keen interest for laymen and, subjects of endless studies for scientists from Quebec, Canada and around the world.

Thirteen species of cetaceans frequent the waters of the estuary and the Gulf of St. Lawrence:
# Northern bottlenose whale
# Delphinapterus leucas (Beluga Whale)
# Sperm whale
# Atlantic white-sided dolphin
# White-beaked dolphin
# Orca
# Long-finned pilot whale
# Phocoena phocoena (Harbour Porpoise)
# North Atlantic right whale
# Common minke whale
# Blue whale
# Humpback whale
# Fin whale

==History==


===First Nations===
Flowing through and adjacent to numerous Indigenous homelands, the river was a primary thoroughfare for many peoples. Beginning in Dawnland at the Gulf of St. Lawrence, the river borders Mi&#x27;kma&#x27;ki in the South (what is today known as the Canadian Maritimes), and Nitassinan in the North, the national territory of the Innu people. On the south shore beyond the Mi&#x27;kmaw district of Gespe&#x27;gewa&#x27;ki, the river passes Wolastokuk (the Maliseet homeland), Pαnawαhpskewahki (the Penobscot homeland), and Ndakinna (the Abenaki homeland). Continuing, the river passes through the former country of the St. Lawrence Iroquois and then three of the six homelands of the Haudenosaunee: the Mohawk or Kanienʼkehá꞉ka, the Oneida or Onyota&#x27;a:ka, and the Onondaga or Onöñda’gaga’.

In the early 17th century, the Huron-Wendat Nation migrated from their original country of Huronia to what is now known as Nionwentsïo centred around Wendake. Nionwentsïo occupies both the north and south shores of the river, overlapping with Nitassinan and the more western Wabanaki or Dawnland countries. Adjacent on the north shore is the Atikamekw territorial homeland of Nitaskinan and, upstream, the further reaches of Anishinaabewaki, specifically the homelands of the Algonquin and Mississauga Nations.

===European exploration===
The Norse explored the Gulf of St. Lawrence in the 11th century and were followed by fifteenth- and early sixteenth-century European mariners, such as John Cabot, and the brothers Gaspar and Miguel Corte-Real. The first European explorer known to have sailed up the St. Lawrence River itself was Jacques Cartier. At that time, the land along the river described as &quot;about two leagues, a mountain as tall as a heap of wheat&quot; was inhabited by the St. Lawrence Iroquoians. During Cartier&#x27;s second voyage in 1535, because Cartier arrived in the estuary on Saint Lawrence&#x27;s feast day 10 August, he named it the &quot;Gulf of Saint Lawrence&quot;.
The St. Lawrence River is today partly within the U.S. and as such is that country&#x27;s sixth oldest surviving European place-name.

===Early colonists===
The earliest regular Europeans in the area were the Basques, who came to the St Lawrence Gulf and River in pursuit of whales from the early 16th century. The Basque whalers and fishermen traded with indigenous Americans and set up settlements, leaving vestiges all over the coast of eastern Canada and deep into the St. Lawrence River. Basque commercial and fishing activity reached its peak before the &quot;Armada Invencible&quot;&#x27;s disaster (1588), when the Basque whaling fleet was confiscated by King Philip II of Spain. Initially, the whaling galleons from Labourd were not affected by the Spanish defeat.

Until the early 17th century, the French used the name &quot;Rivière du Canada&quot; to designate the St. Lawrence upstream to Montreal and the Ottawa River after Montreal. The St. Lawrence River served as the main route for European exploration of the North American interior, first pioneered by French explorer Samuel de Champlain.

===Colonial control===
Control of the river was crucial to British strategy to capture New France in the Seven Years&#x27; War. Having captured Louisbourg in 1758, the British sailed up to Quebec the following year thanks to charts drawn up by James Cook. British troops were ferried via the St. Lawrence to attack the city from the west, which they successfully did at the Battle of the Plains of Abraham. The river was used again by the British to defeat the French siege of Quebec under the Chevalier de Lévis in 1760.

In 1809, the first steamboat to ply its trade on the St. Lawrence was built and operated by John Molson and associates, a scant two years after Fulton&#x27;s steam-powered navigation of the Hudson River. The &quot;Accommodation&quot; with ten passengers made her maiden voyage from Montreal to Quebec City in 66 hours, for 30 of which she was at anchor. She had a keel of 75 feet, and a length overall of 85 feet. The cost of a ticket was eight dollars upstream, and nine dollars down. She had berths that year for twenty passengers.
Within a decade, daily service was available in the hotly-contested Montreal-Quebec route.

Because of the virtually impassable Lachine Rapids, the St. Lawrence was once continuously navigable only as far as Montreal. Opened in 1825, the Lachine Canal was the first to allow ships to pass the rapids. An extensive system of canals and locks, known as the St. Lawrence Seaway, was officially opened on 26 June 1959 by Elizabeth II (representing Canada) and President Dwight D. Eisenhower (representing the United States). The Seaway (including the Welland Canal) now permits ocean-going vessels to pass all the way to Lake Superior.

===Modern Canada===
During the Second World War, the Battle of the St. Lawrence involved submarine and anti-submarine actions throughout the lower St. Lawrence River and the entire Gulf of St. Lawrence, Strait of Belle Isle and Cabot Strait from May to October 1942, September 1943, and again in October and November 1944. During this time, German U-boats sank several merchant marine ships and three Canadian warships.

In the late 1970s, the river was the subject of a successful ecological campaign (called &quot;Save the River&quot;), originally responding to planned development by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The campaign was organized, among others, by Abbie Hoffman.

==In popular culture==
* Gatien Lapointe, &quot;Ode au Saint-Laurent&quot;, Éditions du Jour, Montréal, 1963, Paradis, A. (1963), report, 3 pages.
* The river was the setting for the Canadian television drama series &quot;Seaway&quot;.
* It is the namesake of &quot;Saint-Laurent Herald&quot;.
* In 1980, Jacques Cousteau filmed &quot;Cries from the Deep&quot; and &quot;St. Lawrence: Stairway to the Sea&quot;.
*The 1993 Canadian animated short film &quot;The Mighty River&quot; was about the river.
*The novel and film &quot;Black Robe&quot; are set primarily on the St. Lawrence River during the 17th century.
*The 1941 children&#x27;s book &quot;Paddle-to-the-Sea&quot;, and the film &quot;Paddle to the Sea&quot;, involve passage through the St. Lawrence River.
*The St. Lawrence River is mentioned in the 1967 single Canadian Railroad Trilogy by Gordon Lightfoot.

==See also==

==References==
==Bibliography==

==External links==

* Fur Trade Canoe Routes of Canada/Then and Now, 1969, Eric W. Morse, M.A.;F.R.G.S, 121 p.
*The Saint Lawrence Its Basin &amp; Border-Lands, 1905, Dr. S. E. Dawson, 584 p.
* St. Lawrence Parks Commission (Ontario)
* Great Lakes St. Lawrence Seaway System
*Radio Aids to Marine Navigation 2024, Radio Aids to Marine Navigation 2024, (Atlantic, St. Lawrence, Great Lakes, Lake Winnipeg, Arctic and Pacific) Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 298 pages
* Safe Passage: Aids to Navigation on the St. Lawrence – Historical essay, illustrated with drawings and photographs
* Annotated Bibliography on St. Lawrence County and Northern New York region.
* International St. Lawrence River Board of Control 
* Saint Lawrence River, The Canadian Encyclopedia
* Watch the Jacques Cousteau documentary, &quot;St. Lawrence: Stairway to the Sea&quot;
* Timing and position of late Wisconsinan ice-margins on the upper slope seaward of Laurentian Channel David J. W. Piper et Adam Macdonald, 2001, 11 page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="4" end="22" title="St. Lawrence River" label="St. Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="53" end="58" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="73" end="81" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="86" end="99" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="115" end="126" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q659" start="134" end="139" title="North" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="140" end="154" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062" start="206" end="218" title="Lake Ontario" label="Lake Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="226" end="246" title="Gulf of St. Lawrence" label="Gulf of St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="259" end="266" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="271" end="277" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="292" end="300" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="361" end="379" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–U.S. border"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="397" end="413" title="Discharge (hydrology)" label="drainage outflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599423" start="421" end="438" title="Great Lakes Basin" label="Great Lakes Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394831" start="465" end="489" title="List of rivers by discharge" label="second-highest discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="497" end="502" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="506" end="519" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="531" end="548" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059074" start="589" end="612" title="estuary of St. Lawrence" label="estuary of St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050549" start="765" end="781" title="Thousand Islands" label="Thousand Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q862222" start="808" end="841" title="Saguenay–St. Lawrence Marine Park" label="Saguenay–St. Lawrence Marine Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q862157" start="878" end="896" title="Mingan Archipelago National Park Reserve" label="Mingan Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="930" end="948" title="Indigenous peoples in Canada" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945" start="1002" end="1019" title="history of Canada" label="history of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="1061" end="1069" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="1074" end="1085" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q753288" start="1156" end="1175" title="St. Lawrence Seaway" label="St. Lawrence Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q485940" start="1269" end="1289" title="Great Lakes Waterway" label="Great Lakes Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="1360" end="1373" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q544356" start="1509" end="1518" title="Hochelaga (village)" label="Hochelaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1628" end="1634" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q68529" start="1790" end="1809" title="Samuel de Champlain" label="Samuel de Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="2139" end="2152" title="Gulf of Saint Lawrence" label="eponymous bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321" start="2156" end="2171" title="Jacques Cartier" label="Jacques Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="2227" end="2236" title="Calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q17590" start="2241" end="2255" title="Saint Lawrence" label="Saint Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="2266" end="2283" title="Indigenous peoples in Canada" label="Indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q13351" start="2310" end="2320" title="Innu-aimun" label="Innu-aimun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947339" start="2338" end="2348" title="Nitassinan" label="Nitassinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q318806" start="2433" end="2440" title="Abenaki" label="Abenaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q13339" start="2738" end="2753" title="Mohawk language" label="Mohawk language"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="2875" end="2891" title="Tuscarora people" label="Tuscarora people"/>
<link wikidata="Q135863" start="2991" end="3007" title="Algonquin people" label="Algonquin people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946834" start="3143" end="3162" title="Huron-Wendat Nation" label="Huron-Wendat Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q491706" start="3234" end="3243" title="Atikamekw" label="Atikamekw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041208" start="3247" end="3257" title="Nitaskinan" label="Nitaskinan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3279" end="3289" title=":atj:Micta sipi" label="Micta sipi"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="3468" end="3476" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="3481" end="3492" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234105" start="3590" end="3601" title="Les Méchins" label="Les Méchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="3648" end="3668" title="Gulf of St. Lawrence" label="Gulf of St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061490" start="3850" end="3863" title="Champlain Sea" label="Champlain Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979625" start="3904" end="3924" title="Last Glacial Maximum" label="Last Glacial Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050549" start="4191" end="4207" title="Thousand Islands" label="Thousand Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062" start="4265" end="4277" title="Lake Ontario" label="Lake Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460792" start="4300" end="4312" title="Cape Vincent (village), New York" label="Cape Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208051" start="4314" end="4323" title="Gananoque, Ontario" label="Gananoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130156" start="4325" end="4332" title="Clayton, New York" label="Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166832" start="4334" end="4348" title="Alexandria Bay, New York" label="Alexandria Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q34047" start="4350" end="4360" title="Brockville" label="Brockville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914118" start="4362" end="4372" title="Morristown, New York" label="Morristown"/>
<link wikidata="Q684406" start="4374" end="4384" title="Ogdensburg, New York" label="Ogdensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306151" start="4386" end="4393" title="Massena (village), New York" label="Massena"/>
<link wikidata="Q956690" start="4395" end="4403" title="Cornwall, Ontario" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="4405" end="4413" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44012" start="4415" end="4429" title="Trois-Rivières" label="Trois-Rivières"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="4435" end="4446" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="4472" end="4492" title="Gulf of St. Lawrence" label="Gulf of St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="4521" end="4528" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128172" start="4584" end="4602" title="Île d&amp;#x27;Orléans" label="Île d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514516" start="4931" end="4942" title="North River (Minnesota)" label="North River"/>
<link wikidata="Q909225" start="4950" end="4962" title="Mesabi Range" label="Mesabi Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q828736" start="4966" end="4973" title="Hibbing" label="Hibbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="5172" end="5179" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="5184" end="5190" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="5211" end="5220" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="5222" end="5231" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="5233" end="5241" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="5243" end="5250" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="5252" end="5256" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="5258" end="5270" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="5272" end="5280" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="5282" end="5289" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="5331" end="5339" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q392161" start="5394" end="5408" title="Saguenay River" label="Saguenay River"/>
<link wikidata="Q22352699" start="5555" end="5573" title="Lake Saint Francis (Canada)" label="Lake Saint Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q142039" start="5577" end="5601" title="Salaberry-de-Valleyfield" label="Salaberry-de-Valleyfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q175828" start="5603" end="5619" title="Lake Saint-Louis" label="Lake Saint-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q842881" start="5642" end="5659" title="Lake Saint Pierre" label="Lake Saint Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="5698" end="5709" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050549" start="5717" end="5733" title="Thousand Islands" label="Thousand Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166832" start="5745" end="5769" title="Alexandria Bay, New York" label="Alexandria Bay, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="5774" end="5791" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252239" start="5797" end="5818" title="Hochelaga Archipelago" label="Hochelaga Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q292354" start="5834" end="5852" title="Island of Montreal" label="Island of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q292060" start="5857" end="5866" title="Île Jésus" label="Île Jésus"/>
<link wikidata="Q141810" start="5868" end="5873" title="Laval, Quebec" label="Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864692" start="5985" end="6003" title="Mingan Archipelago" label="Mingan Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q575033" start="6067" end="6083" title="Anticosti Island" label="Anticosti Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q151559" start="6097" end="6102" title="Gaspé Peninsula" label="Gaspé"/>
<link wikidata="Q68467" start="6147" end="6161" title="Lake Champlain" label="Lake Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q60974" start="6170" end="6176" title="Ottawa River" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809877" start="6178" end="6187" title="Richelieu River" label="Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q203862" start="6189" end="6202" title="Saint-Maurice River" label="Saint-Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q844339" start="6204" end="6218" title="Saint-Francois River" label="Saint-François"/>
<link wikidata="Q843024" start="6220" end="6229" title="Chaudière River" label="Chaudière"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="6341" end="6346" title="fault (geology)" label="fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="6392" end="6403" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="6413" end="6422" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q581244" start="6467" end="6480" title="Iapetus Ocean" label="Iapetus Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="6509" end="6513" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401636" start="6539" end="6565" title="Saint Lawrence rift system" label="Saint Lawrence rift system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067021" start="6647" end="6669" title="Physiographic regions of the world" label="physiographic province"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="6684" end="6695" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554098" start="6721" end="6730" title="Champlain Valley" label="Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17137745" start="6833" end="6854" title="St. Lawrence Lowlands" label="St. Lawrence Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q909225" start="6981" end="6993" title="Mesabi Range" label="Mesabi Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="6997" end="7006" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q175828" start="7245" end="7261" title="Lake Saint-Louis" label="Lake Saint-Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q842881" start="7266" end="7283" title="Lake Saint-Pierre" label="Lake Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="7371" end="7382" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="7682" end="7695" title="Drainage basin" label="drainage area"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="7891" end="7904" title="marine mammal" label="marine mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="7933" end="7937" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="7962" end="7971" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="7977" end="7984" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="8047" end="8052" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="8071" end="8083" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059074" start="8092" end="8099" title="Estuary of St. Lawrence" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="8108" end="8112" title="Gulf of St. Lawrence" label="gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q18960" start="8114" end="8120" title="sponge" label="sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178" start="8123" end="8132" title="jellyfish" label="jellyfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="8134" end="8139" title="coral" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="8142" end="8152" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27133" start="8175" end="8190" title="vascular plants" label="vascular plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="8219" end="8232" title="marine mammal" label="marine mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q331432" start="8325" end="8334" title="Fisherman" label="fishermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="8339" end="8356" title="Maritime transport" label="shipping industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059074" start="8560" end="8567" title="Estuary of St. Lawrence" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="8576" end="8596" title="Gulf of St. Lawrence" label="Gulf of St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q300949" start="8600" end="8625" title="Northern bottlenose whale" label="Northern bottlenose whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q132072" start="8628" end="8649" title="Delphinapterus leucas" label="Delphinapterus leucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="8667" end="8678" title="Sperm whale" label="Sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q216435" start="8681" end="8709" title="Atlantic white-sided dolphin" label="Atlantic white-sided dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217147" start="8712" end="8732" title="White-beaked dolphin" label="White-beaked dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="8735" end="8739" title="Orca" label="Orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q207744" start="8742" end="8765" title="Long-finned pilot whale" label="Long-finned pilot whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q27027" start="8768" end="8785" title="Phocoena phocoena" label="Phocoena phocoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q193683" start="8807" end="8833" title="North Atlantic right whale" label="North Atlantic right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q201808" start="8836" end="8854" title="Common minke whale" label="Common minke whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q42196" start="8857" end="8867" title="Blue whale" label="Blue whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="8870" end="8884" title="Humpback whale" label="Humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q179020" start="8887" end="8896" title="Fin whale" label="Fin whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="8973" end="8983" title="Indigenous peoples of Canada" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322019" start="9063" end="9071" title="Dawnland" label="Dawnland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27943532" start="9119" end="9138" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kma&amp;#x27;ki" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kma&amp;#x27;ki"/>
<link wikidata="Q731613" start="9180" end="9198" title="Canadian Maritimes" label="Canadian Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947339" start="9205" end="9215" title="Nitassinan" label="Nitassinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q497568" start="9260" end="9271" title="Innu people" label="Innu people"/>
<link wikidata="Q495751" start="9303" end="9315" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq people" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q151559" start="9328" end="9351" title="Gaspé Peninsula" label="Gespe&amp;#x27;gewa&amp;#x27;ki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563033" start="9386" end="9394" title="Maliseet" label="Maliseet"/>
<link wikidata="Q774932" start="9428" end="9437" title="Penobscot" label="Penobscot"/>
<link wikidata="Q318806" start="9467" end="9474" title="Abenaki" label="Abenaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q129060" start="9549" end="9570" title="St. Lawrence Iroquoians" label="St. Lawrence Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="9614" end="9627" title="Haudenosaunee" label="Haudenosaunee"/>
<link wikidata="Q116971" start="9633" end="9657" title="Mohawk people" label="Mohawk or Kanienʼkehá꞉ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572875" start="9663" end="9689" title="Oneida people" label="Oneida or Onyota&amp;#x27;a:ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q21056" start="9699" end="9723" title="Onondaga people" label="Onondaga or Onöñda’gaga’"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946834" start="9757" end="9776" title="Huron-Wendat Nation" label="Huron-Wendat Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946986" start="9817" end="9824" title="Huronia (region)" label="Huronia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9849" end="9860" title=":fr:Nionwentsïo" label="Nionwentsïo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567224" start="9876" end="9883" title="Wendake, Quebec" label="Wendake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322019" start="10001" end="10009" title="Wabanaki Confederacy" label="Wabanaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041208" start="10102" end="10112" title="Nitaskinan" label="Nitaskinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q135863" start="10202" end="10211" title="Algonquin people" label="Algonquin"/>
<link wikidata="Q950097" start="10216" end="10227" title="Mississaugas" label="Mississauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q582948" start="10269" end="10283" title="Norse colonization of the Americas" label="Norse explored"/>
<link wikidata="Q85642" start="10416" end="10426" title="John Cabot" label="John Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q374424" start="10445" end="10451" title="Gaspar Corte Real" label="Gaspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q748766" start="10456" end="10473" title="Miguel Corte-Real" label="Miguel Corte-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321" start="10561" end="10576" title="Jacques Cartier" label="Jacques Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q129060" start="10720" end="10743" title="St. Lawrence Iroquoians" label="St. Lawrence Iroquoians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17590" start="10832" end="10846" title="Lawrence of Rome" label="Saint Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11136" end="11143" title="History of the Basque people#Modern Period" label="Basques"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680130" start="11242" end="11256" title="History of Basque whaling" label="Basque whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="11493" end="11510" title="Armada Invencible" label="Armada Invencible"/>
<link wikidata="Q34417" start="11595" end="11613" title="Philip II of Spain" label="Philip II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q671023" start="11652" end="11659" title="Labourd" label="Labourd"/>
<link wikidata="Q68529" start="12015" end="12034" title="Samuel de Champlain" label="Samuel de Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828922" start="12096" end="12134" title="Great Britain in the Seven Years War" label="British strategy to capture New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="12142" end="12163" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050672" start="12172" end="12191" title="Siege of Louisbourg (1758)" label="captured Louisbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="12281" end="12291" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q311726" start="12411" end="12442" title="Battle of the Plains of Abraham" label="Battle of the Plains of Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q17346979" start="12484" end="12493" title="Battle of Neuville" label="to defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q560639" start="12531" end="12549" title="Chevalier de Lévis" label="Chevalier de Lévis"/>
<link wikidata="Q282067" start="12652" end="12663" title="John Molson" label="John Molson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="12750" end="12762" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120787" start="12774" end="12787" title="PS Accommodation" label="Accommodation"/>
<link wikidata="Q652156" start="13222" end="13236" title="Lachine Rapids" label="Lachine Rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718234" start="13332" end="13345" title="Lachine Canal" label="Lachine Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q753288" start="13449" end="13468" title="St. Lawrence Seaway" label="St. Lawrence Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="13511" end="13523" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="13560" end="13580" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q14348" start="13641" end="13654" title="Welland Canal" label="Welland Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066" start="13711" end="13724" title="Lake Superior" label="Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13758" end="13774" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993443" start="13780" end="13806" title="Battle of the St. Lawrence" label="Battle of the St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q169523" start="13908" end="13928" title="Gulf of St. Lawrence" label="Gulf of St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q815831" start="13930" end="13950" title="Strait of Belle Isle" label="Strait of Belle Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024939" start="13955" end="13967" title="Cabot Strait" label="Cabot Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="14075" end="14081" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="14318" end="14355" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="United States Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q306514" start="14402" end="14415" title="Abbie Hoffman" label="Abbie Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099267" start="14443" end="14458" title="Gatien Lapointe" label="Gatien Lapointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953687" start="14640" end="14646" title="Seaway (TV series)" label="Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872809" start="14684" end="14704" title="Saint-Laurent Herald" label="Saint-Laurent Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q83233" start="14723" end="14739" title="Jacques Cousteau" label="Jacques Cousteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185123" start="14753" end="14772" title="Cries from the Deep" label="Cries from the Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810333" start="14875" end="14891" title="The Mighty River" label="The Mighty River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254384" start="14945" end="14955" title="Black Robe" label="Black Robe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123343" start="15068" end="15085" title="Paddle-to-the-Sea" label="Paddle-to-the-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123355" start="15112" end="15129" title="Paddle to the Sea" label="Paddle to the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030517" start="15241" end="15266" title="Canadian Railroad Trilogy" label="Canadian Railroad Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q359552" start="15270" end="15286" title="Gordon Lightfoot" label="Gordon Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q349666" start="15761" end="15788" title="Fisheries and Oceans Canada" label="Fisheries and Oceans Canada"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="45949" wikidata="Q501004" url="?curid=45949" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director">
<text>The Academy Award for Best Assistant Director was awarded from 1933 through 1937. In the first year of this award, it referred to no specific film.

* [[6th Academy Awards|1933]]:
**[[Charles Barton (director)|Charles Barton]] (Paramount) - winner
**[[Scott Beal]] (Universal) - winner
**[[Charles Dorian]] (M-G-M) - winner
**[[Fred Fox (director)|Fred Fox]] (United Artists) - winner
**[[Gordon Hollingshead]] (Warner Bros.) - winner
**[[Dewey Starkey]] (RKO Radio) - winner
**[[William Tummel]] (Fox) - winner
**Al Alleborn (Warner Bros.) - nominee
**Sid Brod (Paramount) - nominee
**Orville O. Dull (M-G-M) - nominee
**Percy Ikerd (Fox) - nominee
**Arthur Jacobson (Paramount) - nominee
**Edward Killy (RKO Radio) - nominee
**Joseph A. McDonough (Universal) - nominee
**William J. Reiter (Universal) - nominee
**Frank X. Shaw (Warner Bros.) - nominee
**Ben Silvey (UA) - nominee
**John Waters (M-G-M) - nominee
* [[7th Academy Awards|1934]]: [[John Waters (director born 1893)|John Waters]] – &quot;[[Viva Villa!]]&quot; 
** Scott Beal – &quot;Imitation of Life&quot;
** Cullen Tate – &quot;Cleopatra&quot;
* [[8th Academy Awards|1935]]: [[Clem Beauchamp]] and [[Paul Wing]] – &quot;[[The Lives of a Bengal Lancer (film)|The Lives of a Bengal Lancer]]&quot;
** Joseph Newman – &quot;David Copperfield&quot;
** Eric Stacey – &quot;Les Misérables&quot;
** Sherry Shourds – &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot; (write in)
* [[9th Academy Awards|1936]]: [[Jack Sullivan (film director)|Jack Sullivan]] – &quot;[[The Charge of the Light Brigade (1936 film)|The Charge of the Light Brigade]]&quot;
** Clem Beauchamp – &quot;The Last of the Mohicans&quot;
** William Cannon – &quot;Anthony Adverse&quot;
** Joseph Newman – &quot;San Francisco&quot;
** Eric G. Stacey – &quot;The Garden of Allah&quot;
* [[10th Academy Awards|1937]]: [[Robert D. Webb|Robert Webb]] – &quot;[[In Old Chicago]]&quot;
** C. C. Coleman, Jr. – &quot;Lost Horizon&quot;
** Russ Saunders – &quot;The Life of Emile Zola&quot;
** Eric Stacey – &quot;A Star Is Born&quot;
** Hal Walker – &quot;Souls at Sea&quot;

==See also==
* List of Academy Award–nominated films

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="4" end="17" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="151" end="178" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[6th Academy Awards|1933]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="178" end="179" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label=":"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="182" end="247" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[Charles Barton (director)|Charles Barton]] (Paramount) - winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="250" end="285" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[Scott Beal]] (Universal) - winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="288" end="323" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[Charles Dorian]] (M-G-M) - winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="326" end="384" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[Fred Fox (director)|Fred Fox]] (United Artists) - winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="387" end="434" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[Gordon Hollingshead]] (Warner Bros.) - winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="437" end="475" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[Dewey Starkey]] (RKO Radio) - winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="478" end="511" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[William Tummel]] (Fox) - winner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635998" start="514" end="525" title="Al Alleborn" label="Al Alleborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281608" start="553" end="561" title="Sid Brod" label="Sid Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032329" start="586" end="601" title="Orville O. Dull" label="Orville O. Dull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070257" start="622" end="633" title="Percy Ikerd" label="Percy Ikerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q709995" start="652" end="667" title="Arthur Jacobson" label="Arthur Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292801" start="692" end="704" title="Edward Killy" label="Edward Killy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438724" start="729" end="748" title="Joseph A. McDonough" label="Joseph A. McDonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346867" start="773" end="790" title="William J. Reiter" label="William J. Reiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444494" start="815" end="828" title="Frank X. Shaw" label="Frank X. Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q816591" start="856" end="866" title="Ben Silvey" label="Ben Silvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q506081" start="884" end="895" title="John Waters (director born 1893)" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="916" end="1017" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[7th Academy Awards|1934]]: [[John Waters (director born 1893)|John Waters]] – &amp;quot;[[Viva Villa!]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261020" start="1028" end="1038" title="Scott Beal" label="Scott Beal"/>
<link wikidata="Q391541" start="1047" end="1064" title="Imitation of Life (1934 film)" label="Imitation of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143442" start="1074" end="1085" title="Cullen Tate" label="Cullen Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100552" start="1094" end="1103" title="Cleopatra (1934 film)" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="1112" end="1254" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[8th Academy Awards|1935]]: [[Clem Beauchamp]] and [[Paul Wing]] – &amp;quot;[[The Lives of a Bengal Lancer (film)|The Lives of a Bengal Lancer]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q466631" start="1264" end="1277" title="Joseph M. Newman" label="Joseph Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174069" start="1286" end="1303" title="David Copperfield (1935 film)" label="David Copperfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351650" start="1313" end="1324" title="Eric G. Stacey" label="Eric Stacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q259574" start="1333" end="1347" title="Les Misérables (1935 film)" label="Les Misérables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620910" start="1357" end="1371" title="Sherry Shourds" label="Sherry Shourds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305191" start="1380" end="1410" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (1935 film)" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="1430" end="1594" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[9th Academy Awards|1936]]: [[Jack Sullivan (film director)|Jack Sullivan]] – &amp;quot;[[The Charge of the Light Brigade (1936 film)|The Charge of the Light Brigade]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q973126" start="1604" end="1618" title="Clem Beauchamp" label="Clem Beauchamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q989531" start="1627" end="1651" title="The Last of the Mohicans (1936 film)" label="The Last of the Mohicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579030" start="1661" end="1675" title="William Cannon (director)" label="William Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305647" start="1684" end="1699" title="Anthony Adverse" label="Anthony Adverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q466631" start="1709" end="1722" title="Joseph M. Newman" label="Joseph Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q130769" start="1731" end="1744" title="San Francisco (1936 film)" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351650" start="1754" end="1768" title="Eric G. Stacey" label="Eric G. Stacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193704" start="1777" end="1796" title="The Garden of Allah (1936 film)" label="The Garden of Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q501004" start="1805" end="1892" title="Academy Award for Best Assistant Director" label="[[10th Academy Awards|1937]]: [[Robert D. Webb|Robert Webb]] – &amp;quot;[[In Old Chicago]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063870" start="1902" end="1920" title="Charles C. Coleman (director)" label="C. C. Coleman, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1619885" start="1929" end="1941" title="Lost Horizon (1937 film)" label="Lost Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893400" start="1951" end="1964" title="Russ Saunders" label="Russ Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q738552" start="1973" end="1995" title="The Life of Emile Zola" label="The Life of Emile Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351650" start="2005" end="2016" title="Eric G. Stacey" label="Eric Stacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q873186" start="2025" end="2039" title="A Star Is Born (1937 film)" label="A Star Is Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570158" start="2049" end="2059" title="Hal Walker" label="Hal Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q280470" start="2068" end="2080" title="Souls at Sea" label="Souls at Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q126362374" start="2103" end="2140" title="List of Academy Award–nominated films" label="List of Academy Award–nominated films"/>
</links>
</doc>
