<doc id="50595" wikidata="Q174077" url="?curid=50595" title="Flash memory">
<text>Flash memory is an electronic non-volatile computer memory storage medium that can be electrically erased and reprogrammed. The two main types of flash memory, NOR flash and NAND flash, are named for the NOR and NAND logic gates. Both use the same cell design, consisting of floating-gate MOSFETs. They differ at the circuit level depending on whether the state of the bit line or word lines is pulled high or low: in NAND flash, the relationship between the bit line and the word lines resembles a NAND gate; in NOR flash, it resembles a NOR gate.

Flash memory, a type of floating-gate memory, was invented by Fujio Masuoka at Toshiba in 1980 and is based on EEPROM technology. Toshiba began marketing flash memory in 1987. EPROMs had to be erased completely before they could be rewritten. NAND flash memory, however, may be erased, written, and read in blocks (or pages), which generally are much smaller than the entire device. NOR flash memory allows a single machine word to be written to an erased location or read independently. A flash memory device typically consists of one or more flash memory chips (each holding many flash memory cells), along with a separate flash memory controller chip.

The NAND type is found mainly in memory cards, USB flash drives, solid-state drives (those produced since 2009), feature phones, smartphones, and similar products, for general storage and transfer of data. NAND or NOR flash memory is also often used to store configuration data in digital products, a task previously made possible by EEPROM or battery-powered static RAM. A key disadvantage of flash memory is that it can endure only a relatively small number of write cycles in a specific block.

NOR flash is known for its direct random access capabilities, making it apt for executing code directly. Its architecture allows for individual byte access, facilitating faster read speeds compared to NAND flash. NAND flash memory operates with a different architecture, relying on a serial access approach. This makes NAND suitable for high-density data storage but less efficient for random access tasks. NAND flash is often employed in scenarios where cost-effective, high-capacity storage is crucial, such as in USB drives, memory cards, and solid-state drives (SSDs).

The primary differentiator lies in their use cases and internal structures. NOR flash is optimal for applications requiring quick access to individual bytes, like in embedded systems for program execution. NAND flash, on the other hand, shines in scenarios demanding cost-effective, high-capacity storage with sequential data access.

Flash memory is used in computers, PDAs, digital audio players, digital cameras, mobile phones, synthesizers, video games, scientific instrumentation, industrial robotics, and medical electronics. Flash memory has a fast read access time but it is not as fast as static RAM or ROM. In portable devices, it is preferred to use flash memory because of its mechanical shock resistance since mechanical drives are more prone to mechanical damage.

Because erase cycles are slow, the large block sizes used in flash memory erasing give it a significant speed advantage over non-flash EEPROM when writing large amounts of data. flash memory costs greatly less than byte-programmable EEPROM and had become the dominant memory type wherever a system required a significant amount of non-volatile solid-state storage. EEPROMs, however, are still used in applications that require only small amounts of storage, e.g. in SPD implementations on computer memory modules.

Flash memory packages can use die stacking with through-silicon vias and several dozen layers of 3D TLC NAND cells (per die) simultaneously to achieve capacities of up to 1 tebibyte per package using 16 stacked dies and an integrated flash controller as a separate die inside the package.

==History==
===Background===
The origins of flash memory can be traced back to the development of the floating-gate MOSFET (FGMOS), also known as the floating-gate transistor. The original MOSFET was invented at Bell Labs between 1955 and 1960, after Frosch and Derick discovered surface passivation and used their discovery to create the first planar transistors. Dawon Kahng went on to develop a variation, the floating-gate MOSFET, with Taiwanese-American engineer Simon Min Sze at Bell Labs in 1967. They proposed that it could be used as floating-gate memory cells for storing a form of programmable read-only memory (PROM) that is both non-volatile and re-programmable.

Early types of floating-gate memory included EPROM (erasable PROM) and EEPROM (electrically erasable PROM) in the 1970s. However, early floating-gate memory required engineers to build a memory cell for each bit of data, which proved to be cumbersome, slow, and expensive, restricting floating-gate memory to niche applications in the 1970s, such as military equipment and the earliest experimental mobile phones.

===Invention and commercialization===
Modern EEPROM based on Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling to erase data was invented by Bernward and patented by Siemens in 1974. And further developed between 1976 and 1978 by Eliyahou Harari at Hughes Aircraft Company and George Perlegos and others at Intel. This led to Masuoka&#x27;s invention of flash memory at Toshiba in 1980. The improvement between EEPROM and flash being that flash is programmed in blocks while EEPROM is programmed in bytes. According to Toshiba, the name &quot;flash&quot; was suggested by Masuoka&#x27;s colleague, Shōji Ariizumi, because the erasure process of the memory contents reminded him of the flash of a camera. Masuoka and colleagues presented the invention of NOR flash in 1984, and then NAND flash at the &quot;IEEE 1987 International Electron Devices Meeting&quot; (IEDM) held in San Francisco.

Toshiba commercially launched NAND flash memory in 1987. Intel Corporation introduced the first commercial NOR type flash chip in 1988. NOR-based flash has long erase and write times, but provides full address and data buses, allowing random access to any memory location. This makes it a suitable replacement for older read-only memory (ROM) chips, which are used to store program code that rarely needs to be updated, such as a computer&#x27;s BIOS or the firmware of set-top boxes. Its endurance may be from as little as 100 erase cycles for an on-chip flash memory, to a more typical 10,000 or 100,000 erase cycles, up to 1,000,000 erase cycles. NOR-based flash was the basis of early flash-based removable media; CompactFlash was originally based on it, though later cards moved to less expensive NAND flash.

NAND flash has reduced erase and write times, and requires less chip area per cell, thus allowing greater storage density and lower cost per bit than NOR flash. However, the I/O interface of NAND flash does not provide a random-access external address bus. Rather, data must be read on a block-wise basis, with typical block sizes of hundreds to thousands of bits. This makes NAND flash unsuitable as a drop-in replacement for program ROM, since most microprocessors and microcontrollers require byte-level random access. In this regard, NAND flash is similar to other secondary data storage devices, such as hard disks and optical media, and is thus highly suitable for use in mass-storage devices, such as memory cards and solid-state drives (SSD). For example, SSDs store data using multiple NAND flash memory chips.

The first NAND-based removable memory card format was SmartMedia, released in 1995. Many others followed, including MultiMediaCard, Secure Digital, Memory Stick, and xD-Picture Card.

===Later developments===
A new generation of memory card formats, including RS-MMC, miniSD and microSD, feature extremely small form factors. For example, the microSD card has an area of just over 1.5 cm2, with a thickness of less than 1 mm.

NAND flash has achieved significant levels of memory density as a result of several major technologies that were commercialized during the late 2000s to early 2010s.

NOR flash was the most common type of Flash memory sold until 2005, when NAND flash overtook NOR flash in sales.

Multi-level cell (MLC) technology stores more than one bit in each memory cell. NEC demonstrated multi-level cell (MLC) technology in 1998, with an 80Mb flash memory chip storing 2 bits per cell. STMicroelectronics also demonstrated MLC in 2000, with a 64MB NOR flash memory chip. In 2009, Toshiba and SanDisk introduced NAND flash chips with QLC technology storing 4 bits per cell and holding a capacity of 64Gbit. Samsung Electronics introduced triple-level cell (TLC) technology storing 3-bits per cell, and began mass-producing NAND chips with TLC technology in 2010.

====Charge trap flash====
Charge trap flash (CTF) technology replaces the polysilicon floating gate, which is sandwiched between a blocking gate oxide above and a tunneling oxide below it, with an electrically insulating silicon nitride layer; the silicon nitride layer traps electrons. In theory, CTF is less prone to electron leakage, providing improved data retention.

Because CTF replaces the polysilicon with an electrically insulating nitride, it allows for smaller cells and higher endurance (lower degradation or wear). However, electrons can become trapped and accumulate in the nitride, leading to degradation. Leakage is exacerbated at high temperatures since electrons become more excited with increasing temperatures. CTF technology however still uses a tunneling oxide and blocking layer which are the weak points of the technology, since they can still be damaged in the usual ways (the tunnel oxide can be degraded due to extremely high electric fields and the blocking layer due to Anode Hot Hole Injection (AHHI).

Degradation or wear of the oxides is the reason why flash memory has limited endurance, and data retention goes down (the potential for data loss increases) with increasing degradation, since the oxides lose their electrically insulating characteristics as they degrade. The oxides must insulate against electrons to prevent them from leaking which would cause data loss.

In 1991, NEC researchers including N. Kodama, K. Oyama and Hiroki Shirai described a type of flash memory with a charge trap method. In 1998, Boaz Eitan of Saifun Semiconductors (later acquired by Spansion) patented a flash memory technology named NROM that took advantage of a charge trapping layer to replace the conventional floating gate used in conventional flash memory designs. In 2000, an Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) research team led by Richard M. Fastow, Egyptian engineer Khaled Z. Ahmed and Jordanian engineer Sameer Haddad (who later joined Spansion) demonstrated a charge-trapping mechanism for NOR flash memory cells. CTF was later commercialized by AMD and Fujitsu in 2002. 3D V-NAND (vertical NAND) technology stacks NAND flash memory cells vertically within a chip using 3D charge trap flash (CTP) technology. 3D V-NAND technology was first announced by Toshiba in 2007, and the first device, with 24 layers, was first commercialized by Samsung Electronics in 2013.

====3D integrated circuit technology====

3D integrated circuit (3D IC) technology stacks integrated circuit (IC) chips vertically into a single 3D IC package. Toshiba introduced 3D IC technology to NAND flash memory in April 2007, when they debuted a 16GB eMMC compliant (product number THGAM0G7D8DBAI6, often abbreviated THGAM on consumer websites) embedded NAND flash memory package, which was manufactured with eight stacked 2GB NAND flash chips. In September 2007, Hynix Semiconductor (now SK Hynix) introduced 24-layer 3D IC technology, with a 16GB flash memory package that was manufactured with 24 stacked NAND flash chips using a wafer bonding process. Toshiba also used an eight-layer 3D IC for their 32GB THGBM flash package and in 2008. In 2010, Toshiba used a 16-layer 3D IC for their 128GB THGBM2 flash package, which was manufactured with 16 stacked 8GB chips. In the 2010s, 3D ICs came into widespread commercial use for NAND flash memory in mobile devices.

In 2016, Micron and Intel introduced a technology known as CMOS Under the Array/CMOS Under Array (CUA), Core over Periphery (COP), Periphery Under Cell (PUA), or Xtacking, in which the control circuitry for the flash memory is placed under or above the flash memory cell array. This has allowed for an increase in the number of planes or sections a flash memory chip has, increasing from 2 planes to 4, without increasing the area dedicated to the control or periphery circuitry. This increases the number of IO operations per flash chip or die, but it also introduces challenges when building capacitors for charge pumps used to write to the flash memory. Some flash dies have as many as 6 planes.

As of August 2017, microSD cards with a capacity up to 400 GB (400 billion bytes) are available. The same year, Samsung combined 3D IC chip stacking with its 3D V-NAND and TLC technologies to manufacture its 512GB KLUFG8R1EM flash memory package with eight stacked 64-layer V-NAND chips. In 2019, Samsung produced a 1024GB flash package, with eight stacked 96-layer V-NAND package and with QLC technology.

==Principles of operation==
Flash memory stores information in an array of memory cells made from floating-gate transistors. In single-level cell (SLC) devices, each cell stores only one bit of information. Multi-level cell (MLC) devices, including triple-level cell (TLC) devices, can store more than one bit per cell.

The floating gate may be conductive (typically polysilicon in most kinds of flash memory) or non-conductive (as in SONOS flash memory).

===Floating-gate MOSFET===
In flash memory, each memory cell resembles a standard metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) except that the transistor has two gates instead of one. The cells can be seen as an electrical switch in which current flows between two terminals (source and drain) and is controlled by a floating gate (FG) and a control gate (CG). The CG is similar to the gate in other MOS transistors, but below this, there is the FG insulated all around by an oxide layer. The FG is interposed between the CG and the MOSFET channel. Because the FG is electrically isolated by its insulating layer, electrons placed on it are trapped. When the FG is charged with electrons, this charge screens the electric field from the CG, thus, increasing the threshold voltage (VT) of the cell. This means that the VT of the cell can be changed between the &quot;uncharged FG threshold voltage&quot; (VT1) and the higher &quot;charged FG threshold voltage&quot; (VT2) by changing the FG charge. In order to read a value from the cell, an intermediate voltage (VI) between VT1 and VT2 is applied to the CG. If the channel conducts at VI, the FG must be uncharged (if it were charged, there would not be conduction because VI is less than VT2). If the channel does not conduct at the VI, it indicates that the FG is charged. The binary value of the cell is sensed by determining whether there is current flowing through the transistor when VI is asserted on the CG. In a multi-level cell device, which stores more than one bit per cell, the amount of current flow is sensed (rather than simply its presence or absence), in order to determine more precisely the level of charge on the FG.

Floating gate MOSFETs are so named because there is an electrically insulating tunnel oxide layer between the floating gate and the silicon, so the gate &quot;floats&quot; above the silicon. The oxide keeps the electrons confined to the floating gate. Degradation or wear (and the limited endurance of floating gate Flash memory) occurs due to the extremely high electric field (10 million volts per centimeter) experienced by the oxide. Such high voltage densities can break atomic bonds over time in the relatively thin oxide, gradually degrading its electrically insulating properties and allowing electrons to be trapped in and pass through freely (leak) from the floating gate into the oxide, increasing the likelihood of data loss since the electrons (the quantity of which is used to represent different charge levels, each assigned to a different combination of bits in MLC Flash) are normally in the floating gate. This is why data retention goes down and the risk of data loss increases with increasing degradation. The silicon oxide in a cell degrades with every erase operation. The degradation increases the amount of negative charge in the cell over time due to trapped electrons in the oxide and negates some of the control gate voltage, this over time also makes erasing the cell slower, so to maintain the performance and reliability of the NAND chip, the cell must be retired from use. Endurance also decreases with the number of bits in a cell. With more bits in a cell, the number of possible states (each represented by a different voltage level) in a cell increases and is more sensitive to the voltages used for programming. Voltages may be adjusted to compensate for degradation of the silicon oxide, and as the number of bits increases, the number of possible states also increases and thus the cell is less tolerant of adjustments to programming voltages, because there is less space between the voltage levels that define each state in a cell.

===Fowler–Nordheim tunneling===
The process of moving electrons from the control gate and into the floating gate is called Fowler–Nordheim tunneling, and it fundamentally changes the characteristics of the cell by increasing the MOSFET&#x27;s threshold voltage. This, in turn, changes the drain-source current that flows through the transistor for a given gate voltage, which is ultimately used to encode a binary value. The Fowler-Nordheim tunneling effect is reversible, so electrons can be added to or removed from the floating gate, processes traditionally known as writing and erasing.

===Internal charge pumps===
Despite the need for relatively high programming and erasing voltages, virtually all flash chips today require only a single supply voltage and produce the high voltages that are required using on-chip charge pumps.

Over half the energy used by a 1.8 V-NAND flash chip is lost in the charge pump itself. Since boost converters are inherently more efficient than charge pumps, researchers developing low-power SSDs have proposed returning to the dual Vcc/Vpp supply voltages used on all early flash chips, driving the high Vpp voltage for all flash chips in an SSD with a single shared external boost converter.

In spacecraft and other high-radiation environments, the on-chip charge pump is the first part of the flash chip to fail, although flash memories will continue to work in read-only mode at much higher radiation levels.

===NOR flash===
In NOR flash, each cell has one end connected directly to ground, and the other end connected directly to a bit line. This arrangement is called &quot;NOR flash&quot; because it acts like a NOR gate: when one of the word lines (connected to the cell&#x27;s CG) is brought high, the corresponding storage transistor acts to pull the output bit line low. NOR flash continues to be the technology of choice for embedded applications requiring a discrete non-volatile memory device. The low read latencies characteristic of NOR devices allow for both direct code execution and data storage in a single memory product.

====Programming====

A single-level NOR flash cell in its default state is logically equivalent to a binary &quot;1&quot; value, because current will flow through the channel under application of an appropriate voltage to the control gate, so that the bitline voltage is pulled down. A NOR flash cell can be programmed, or set to a binary &quot;0&quot; value, by the following procedure:

* an elevated on-voltage (typically &gt;5 V) is applied to the CG
* the channel is now turned on, so electrons can flow from the source to the drain (assuming an NMOS transistor)
* the source-drain current is sufficiently high to cause some high energy electrons to jump through the insulating layer onto the FG, via a process called hot-electron injection.

====Erasing====
To erase a NOR flash cell (resetting it to the &quot;1&quot; state), a large voltage &quot;of the opposite polarity&quot; is applied between the CG and source terminal, pulling the electrons off the FG through Fowler–Nordheim tunneling (FN tunneling). This is known as Negative gate source source erase. Newer NOR memories can erase using negative gate channel erase, which biases the wordline on a NOR memory cell block and the P-well of the memory cell block to allow FN tunneling to be carried out, erasing the cell block. Older memories used source erase, in which a high voltage was applied to the source and then electrons from the FG were moved to the source. Modern NOR flash memory chips are divided into erase segments (often called blocks or sectors). The erase operation can be performed only on a block-wise basis; all the cells in an erase segment must be erased together. Programming of NOR cells, however, generally can be performed one byte or word at a time.


===NAND flash===
NAND flash also uses floating-gate transistors, but they are connected in a way that resembles a NAND gate: several transistors are connected in series, and the bit line is pulled low only if all the word lines are pulled high (above the transistors&#x27; VT). These groups are then connected via some additional transistors to a NOR-style bit line array in the same way that single transistors are linked in NOR flash.

Compared to NOR flash, replacing single transistors with serial-linked groups adds an extra level of addressing. Whereas NOR flash might address memory by page then word, NAND flash might address it by page, word and bit. Bit-level addressing suits bit-serial applications (such as hard disk emulation), which access only one bit at a time. applications, on the other hand, require every bit in a word to be accessed simultaneously. This requires word-level addressing. In any case, both bit and word addressing modes are possible with either NOR or NAND flash.

To read data, first the desired group is selected (in the same way that a single transistor is selected from a NOR array). Next, most of the word lines are pulled up above VT2, while one of them is pulled up to VI. The series group will conduct (and pull the bit line low) if the selected bit has not been programmed.

Despite the additional transistors, the reduction in ground wires and bit lines allows a denser layout and greater storage capacity per chip. (The ground wires and bit lines are actually much wider than the lines in the diagrams.) In addition, NAND flash is typically permitted to contain a certain number of faults (NOR flash, as is used for a BIOS ROM, is expected to be fault-free). Manufacturers try to maximize the amount of usable storage by shrinking the size of the transistors or cells, however the industry can avoid this and achieve higher storage densities per die by using 3D NAND, which stacks cells on top of each other.

NAND flash cells are read by analysing their response to various voltages.

====Writing and erasing====
NAND flash uses tunnel injection for writing and tunnel release for erasing. NAND flash memory forms the core of the removable USB storage devices known as USB flash drives, as well as most memory card formats and solid-state drives available today.

The hierarchical structure of NAND flash starts at a cell level which establishes strings, then pages, blocks, planes and ultimately a die. A string is a series of connected NAND cells in which the source of one cell is connected to the drain of the next one. Depending on the NAND technology, a string typically consists of 32 to 128 NAND cells. Strings are organised into pages which are then organised into blocks in which each string is connected to a separate line called a bitline. All cells with the same position in the string are connected through the control gates by a wordline. A plane contains a certain number of blocks that are connected through the same bitline. A flash die consists of one or more planes, and the peripheral circuitry that is needed to perform all the read, write, and erase operations.

The architecture of NAND flash means that data can be read and programmed (written) in pages, typically between 4 KiB and 16 KiB in size, but can only be erased at the level of entire blocks consisting of multiple pages. When a block is erased, all the cells are logically set to 1. Data can only be programmed in one pass to a page in a block that was erased. The programming process is set one or more cells from 1 to 0. Any cells that have been set to 0 by programming can only be reset to 1 by erasing the entire block. This means that before new data can be programmed into a page that already contains data, the current contents of the page plus the new data must be copied to a new, erased page. If a suitable erased page is available, the data can be written to it immediately. If no erased page is available, a block must be erased before copying the data to a page in that block. The old page is then marked as invalid and is available for erasing and reuse. This is different from operating system LBA view, for example, if operating system writes 1100 0011 to the flash storage device (such as SSD), the data actually written to the flash memory may be 0011 1100.

===Vertical NAND===

Vertical NAND (V-NAND) or 3D NAND memory stacks memory cells vertically and uses a charge trap flash architecture. The vertical layers allow larger areal bit densities without requiring smaller individual cells. It is also sold under the trademark &quot;BiCS Flash&quot;, which is a trademark of Kioxia Corporation (formerly Toshiba Memory Corporation). 3D NAND was first announced by Toshiba in 2007. V-NAND was first commercially manufactured by Samsung Electronics in 2013.

====Structure====
V-NAND uses a charge trap flash geometry (which was commercially introduced in 2002 by AMD and Fujitsu) that stores charge on an embedded silicon nitride film. Such a film is more robust against point defects and can be made thicker to hold larger numbers of electrons. V-NAND wraps a planar charge trap cell into a cylindrical form. As of 2020, 3D NAND flash memories by Micron and Intel instead use floating gates, however, Micron 128 layer and above 3D NAND memories use a conventional charge trap structure, due to the dissolution of the partnership between Micron and Intel. Charge trap 3D NAND flash is thinner than floating gate 3D NAND. In floating gate 3D NAND, the memory cells are completely separated from one another, whereas in charge trap 3D NAND, vertical groups of memory cells share the same silicon nitride material. 

An individual memory cell is made up of one planar polysilicon layer containing a hole filled by multiple concentric vertical cylinders. The hole&#x27;s polysilicon surface acts as the gate electrode. The outermost silicon dioxide cylinder acts as the gate dielectric, enclosing a silicon nitride cylinder that stores charge, in turn enclosing a silicon dioxide cylinder as the tunnel dielectric that surrounds a central rod of conducting polysilicon which acts as the conducting channel.

Memory cells in different vertical layers do not interfere with each other, as the charges cannot move vertically through the silicon nitride storage medium, and the electric fields associated with the gates are closely confined within each layer. The vertical collection is electrically identical to the serial-linked groups in which conventional NAND flash memory is configured. There is also string stacking, which builds several 3D NAND memory arrays or &quot;plugs&quot; separately, but stacked together to create a product with a higher number of 3D NAND layers on a single die. Often, two or 3 arrays are stacked. The misalignment between plugs is in the order of 30 to 10nm.

====Construction====
Growth of a group of V-NAND cells begins with an alternating stack of conducting (doped) polysilicon layers and insulating silicon dioxide layers.

The next step is to form a cylindrical hole through these layers. In practice, a 128 Gbit V-NAND chip with 24 layers of memory cells requires about 2.9 billion such holes. Next, the hole&#x27;s inner surface receives multiple coatings, first silicon dioxide, then silicon nitride, then a second layer of silicon dioxide. Finally, the hole is filled with conducting (doped) polysilicon.

====Performance====
 V-NAND flash architecture allows read and write operations twice as fast as conventional NAND and can last up to 10 times as long, while consuming 50 percent less power. They offer comparable physical bit density using 10-nm lithography but may be able to increase bit density by up to two orders of magnitude, given V-NAND&#x27;s use of up to several hundred layers. As of 2020, V-NAND chips with 160 layers are under development by Samsung. As the number of layers increases, the capacity and endurance of flash memory may be increased.

====Cost====

The wafer cost of a 3D NAND is comparable with scaled down (32 nm or less) planar NAND flash. However, with planar NAND scaling stopping at 16 nm, the cost per bit reduction can continue by 3D NAND starting with 16 layers. However, due to the non-vertical sidewall of the hole etched through the layers; even a slight deviation leads to a minimum bit cost, i.e., minimum equivalent design rule (or maximum density), for a given number of layers; this minimum bit cost layer number decreases for smaller hole diameter.

==Limitations==

===Block erasure===
One limitation of flash memory is that it can be erased only a block at a time. This generally sets all bits in the block to 1. Starting with a freshly erased block, any location within that block can be programmed. However, once a bit has been set to 0, only by erasing the entire block can it be changed back to 1. In other words, flash memory (specifically NOR flash) offers random-access read and programming operations but does not offer arbitrary random-access rewrite or erase operations. A location can, however, be rewritten as long as the new value&#x27;s 0 bits are a superset of the over-written values. For example, a nibble value may be erased to 1111, then written as 1110. Successive writes to that nibble can change it to 1010, then 0010, and finally 0000. Essentially, erasure sets all bits to 1, and programming can only clear bits to 0.
Some file systems designed for flash devices make use of this rewrite capability, for example YAFFS1, to represent sector metadata. Other flash file systems, such as YAFFS2, never make use of this &quot;rewrite&quot; capability – they do a lot of extra work to meet a &quot;write once rule&quot;.

Although data structures in flash memory cannot be updated in completely general ways, this allows members to be &quot;removed&quot; by marking them as invalid. This technique may need to be modified for multi-level cell devices, where one memory cell holds more than one bit.

Common flash devices such as USB flash drives and memory cards provide only a block-level interface, or flash translation layer (FTL), which writes to a different cell each time to wear-level the device. This prevents incremental writing within a block; however, it does help the device from being prematurely worn out by intensive write patterns.

===Data retention===

Data stored on flash cells is steadily lost due to electron detrapping. The rate of loss increases exponentially as the absolute temperature increases. For example: For a 45 nm NOR flash, at 1000 hours, the threshold voltage (Vt) loss at 25°C is about half that at 90°C.

===Memory wear===
Another limitation is that flash memory has a finite number of program–erase cycles (typically written as P/E cycles). Micron Technology and Sun Microsystems announced an SLC NAND flash memory chip rated for 1,000,000 P/E cycles on 17 December 2008.

The guaranteed cycle count may apply only to block zero (as is the case with TSOP NAND devices), or to all blocks (as in NOR). This effect is mitigated in some chip firmware or file system drivers by counting the writes and dynamically remapping blocks in order to spread write operations between sectors; this technique is called wear leveling. Another approach is to perform write verification and remapping to spare sectors in case of write failure, a technique called bad block management (BBM). For portable consumer devices, these wear out management techniques typically extend the life of the flash memory beyond the life of the device itself, and some data loss may be acceptable in these applications. For high-reliability data storage, however, it is not advisable to use flash memory that would have to go through a large number of programming cycles. This limitation also exists for &quot;read-only&quot; applications such as thin clients and routers, which are programmed only once or at most a few times during their lifetimes, due to &quot;read disturb&quot; (see below).

In December 2012, Taiwanese engineers from Macronix revealed their intention to announce at the 2012 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting that they had figured out how to improve NAND flash storage read/write cycles from 10,000 to 100 million cycles using a &quot;self-healing&quot; process that used a flash chip with &quot;onboard heaters that could anneal small groups of memory cells.&quot; The built-in thermal annealing was to replace the usual erase cycle with a local high temperature process that not only erased the stored charge, but also repaired the electron-induced stress in the chip, giving write cycles of at least 100 million. The result was to be a chip that could be erased and rewritten over and over, even when it should theoretically break down. As promising as Macronix&#x27;s breakthrough might have been for the mobile industry, however, there were no plans for a commercial product featuring this capability to be released any time in the near future.

===Read disturb===
The method used to read NAND flash memory can cause nearby cells in the same memory block to change over time (become programmed). This is known as read disturb. The threshold number of reads is generally in the hundreds of thousands of reads between intervening erase operations. If reading continually from one cell, that cell will not fail but rather one of the surrounding cells will on a subsequent read. To avoid the read disturb problem the flash controller will typically count the total number of reads to a block since the last erase. When the count exceeds a target limit, the affected block is copied over to a new block, erased, then released to the block pool. The original block is as good as new after the erase. If the flash controller does not intervene in time, however, a read disturb error will occur with possible data loss if the errors are too numerous to correct with an error-correcting code.

=== X-ray effects ===
Most flash ICs come in ball grid array (BGA) packages, and even the ones that do not are often mounted on a PCB next to other BGA packages. After PCB Assembly, boards with BGA packages are often X-rayed to see if the balls are making proper connections to the proper pad, or if the BGA needs rework. These X-rays can erase programmed bits in a flash chip (convert programmed &quot;0&quot; bits into erased &quot;1&quot; bits). Erased bits (&quot;1&quot; bits) are not affected by X-rays.

Some manufacturers are now making X-ray proof SD and USB memory devices.

==Low-level access==
The low-level interface to flash memory chips differs from those of other memory types such as DRAM, ROM, and EEPROM, which support bit-alterability (both zero to one and one to zero) and random access via externally accessible address buses.

NOR memory has an external address bus for reading and programming. For NOR memory, reading and programming are random-access, and unlocking and erasing are block-wise. For NAND memory, reading and programming are page-wise, and unlocking and erasing are block-wise.

===NOR memories===

Reading from NOR flash is similar to reading from random-access memory, provided the address and data bus are mapped correctly. Because of this, most microprocessors can use NOR flash memory as execute in place (XIP) memory, meaning that programs stored in NOR flash can be executed directly from the NOR flash without needing to be copied into RAM first. NOR flash may be programmed in a random-access manner similar to reading. Programming changes bits from a logical one to a zero. Bits that are already zero are left unchanged. Erasure must happen a block at a time, and resets all the bits in the erased block back to one. Typical block sizes are 64, 128, or 256 KiB.

Bad block management is a relatively new feature in NOR chips. In older NOR devices not supporting bad block management, the software or device driver controlling the memory chip must correct for blocks that wear out, or the device will cease to work reliably.

The specific commands used to lock, unlock, program, or erase NOR memories differ for each manufacturer. To avoid needing unique driver software for every device made, special Common Flash Memory Interface (CFI) commands allow the device to identify itself and its critical operating parameters.

Besides its use as random-access ROM, NOR flash can also be used as a storage device, by taking advantage of random-access programming. Some devices offer read-while-write functionality so that code continues to execute even while a program or erase operation is occurring in the background. For sequential data writes, NOR flash chips typically have slow write speeds, compared with NAND flash.

Typical NOR flash does not need an error correcting code.

===NAND memories===
NAND flash architecture was introduced by Toshiba in 1989. These memories are accessed much like block devices, such as hard disks. Each block consists of a number of pages. The pages are typically 512, 2,048 or 4,096 bytes in size. Associated with each page are a few bytes (typically 1/32 of the data size) that can be used for storage of an error correcting code (ECC) checksum.

Typical block sizes include:

* 32 pages of 512+16 bytes each for a block size (effective) of 16 KiB
* 64 pages of 2,048+64 bytes each for a block size of 128 KiB
* 64 pages of 4,096+128 bytes each for a block size of 256 KiB
* 128 pages of 4,096+128 bytes each for a block size of 512 KiB.

Modern NAND flash may have erase block size between 1 MiB to 128 MiB. While reading and programming is performed on a page basis, erasure can only be performed on a block basis. Because change a cell from 0 to 1 needs to erase entire block, not just modify some pages, so modify the data of a block may need a read-erase-write process, and the new data is actually moved to another block. In addition, on a NVM Express Zoned Namespaces SSD, it usually uses flash block size as the zone size.

NAND devices also require bad block management by the device driver software or by the flash memory controller chip. Some SD cards, for example, include controller circuitry to perform bad block management and wear leveling. When a logical block is accessed by high-level software, it is mapped to a physical block by the device driver or controller. A number of blocks on the flash chip may be set aside for storing mapping tables to deal with bad blocks, or the system may simply check each block at power-up to create a bad block map in RAM. The overall memory capacity gradually shrinks as more blocks are marked as bad.

NAND relies on ECC to compensate for bits that may spontaneously fail during normal device operation. A typical ECC will correct a one-bit error in each 2048 bits (256 bytes) using 22 bits of ECC, or a one-bit error in each 4096 bits (512 bytes) using 24 bits of ECC. If the ECC cannot correct the error during read, it may still detect the error. When doing erase or program operations, the device can detect blocks that fail to program or erase and mark them bad. The data is then written to a different, good block, and the bad block map is updated.

Hamming codes are the most commonly used ECC for SLC NAND flash. Reed–Solomon codes and BCH codes (Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem codes) are commonly used ECC for MLC NAND flash. Some MLC NAND flash chips internally generate the appropriate BCH error correction codes.

Most NAND devices are shipped from the factory with some bad blocks. These are typically marked according to a specified bad block marking strategy. By allowing some bad blocks, manufacturers achieve far higher yields than would be possible if all blocks had to be verified to be good. This significantly reduces NAND flash costs and only slightly decreases the storage capacity of the parts.

When executing software from NAND memories, virtual memory strategies are often used: memory contents must first be paged or copied into memory-mapped RAM and executed there (leading to the common combination of NAND + RAM). A memory management unit (MMU) in the system is helpful, but this can also be accomplished with overlays. For this reason, some systems will use a combination of NOR and NAND memories, where a smaller NOR memory is used as software ROM and a larger NAND memory is partitioned with a file system for use as a non-volatile data storage area.

NAND sacrifices the random-access and execute-in-place advantages of NOR. NAND is best suited to systems requiring high capacity data storage. It offers higher densities, larger capacities, and lower cost. It has faster erases, sequential writes, and sequential reads.
===Standardization===
A group called the Open NAND Flash Interface Working Group (ONFI) has developed a standardized low-level interface for NAND flash chips. This allows interoperability between conforming NAND devices from different vendors. The ONFI specification version 1.0 was released on 28 December 2006. It specifies:

* A standard physical interface (pinout) for NAND flash in TSOP-48, WSOP-48, LGA-52, and BGA-63 packages
* A standard command set for reading, writing, and erasing NAND flash chips
* A mechanism for self-identification (comparable to the serial presence detection feature of SDRAM memory modules)

The ONFI group is supported by major NAND flash manufacturers, including Hynix, Intel, Micron Technology, and Numonyx, as well as by major manufacturers of devices incorporating NAND flash chips.

Two major flash device manufacturers, Toshiba and Samsung, have chosen to use an interface of their own design known as Toggle Mode (and now Toggle). This interface isn&#x27;t pin-to-pin compatible with the ONFI specification. The result is that a product designed for one vendor&#x27;s devices may not be able to use another vendor&#x27;s devices.

A group of vendors, including Intel, Dell, and Microsoft, formed a Non-Volatile Memory Host Controller Interface (NVMHCI) Working Group. The goal of the group is to provide standard software and hardware programming interfaces for nonvolatile memory subsystems, including the &quot;flash cache&quot; device connected to the PCI Express bus.

==Distinction between NOR and NAND flash==
NOR and NAND flash differ in two important ways:
* The connections of the individual memory cells are different.
* The interface provided for reading and writing the memory is different; NOR allows random access as it can be either byte-addressable or word-addressable, with words being for example 32 bits long, while NAND allows only page access.

NOR and NAND flash get their names from the structure of the interconnections between memory cells. In NOR flash, cells are connected in parallel to the bit lines, allowing cells to be read and programmed individually. The parallel connection of cells resembles the parallel connection of transistors in a CMOS NOR gate. In NAND flash, cells are connected in series, resembling a CMOS NAND gate. The series connections consume less space than parallel ones, reducing the cost of NAND flash. It does not, by itself, prevent NAND cells from being read and programmed individually.

Each NOR flash cell is larger than a NAND flash cell 10 F2 vs 4 F2 even when using exactly the same semiconductor device fabrication and so each transistor, contact, etc. is exactly the same size because NOR flash cells require a separate metal contact for each cell.

Because of the series connection and removal of wordline contacts, a large grid of NAND flash memory cells will occupy perhaps only 60% of the area of equivalent NOR cells (assuming the same CMOS process resolution, for example, 130 nm, 90 nm, or 65 nm). NAND flash&#x27;s designers realized that the area of a NAND chip, and thus the cost, could be further reduced by removing the external address and data bus circuitry. Instead, external devices could communicate with NAND flash via sequential-accessed command and data registers, which would internally retrieve and output the necessary data. This design choice made random-access of NAND flash memory impossible, but the goal of NAND flash was to replace mechanical hard disks, not to replace ROMs. 

The first GSM phones and many feature phones had NOR flash memory, from which processor instructions could be executed directly in an execute in place architecture and allowed for short boot times. With smartphones, NAND flash memory was adopted as it has larger storage capacities and lower costs, but causes longer boot times because instructions cannot be executed from it directly, and must be copied to RAM memory first before execution.

===Write endurance===
The write endurance of SLC floating-gate NOR flash is typically equal to or greater than that of NAND flash, while MLC NOR and NAND flash have similar endurance capabilities. Examples of endurance cycle ratings listed in datasheets for NAND and NOR flash, as well as in storage devices using flash memory, are provided.

However, by applying certain algorithms and design paradigms such as wear leveling and memory over-provisioning, the endurance of a storage system can be tuned to serve specific requirements.

In order to compute the longevity of the NAND flash, one must account for the size of the memory chip, the type of memory (e.g. SLC/MLC/TLC), and use pattern. Industrial NAND and server NAND are in demand due to their capacity, longer endurance and reliability in sensitive environments.

As the number of bits per cell increases, performance and life of NAND flash may degrade, increasing random read times to 100μs for TLC NAND which is 4 times the time required in SLC NAND, and twice the time required in MLC NAND, for random reads.

==Flash file systems==
Because of the particular characteristics of flash memory, it is best used with either a controller to perform wear leveling and error correction or specifically designed flash file systems, which spread writes over the media and deal with the long erase times of NOR flash blocks. The basic concept behind flash file systems is the following: when the flash store is to be updated, the file system will write a new copy of the changed data to a fresh block, remap the file pointers, then erase the old block later when it has time.

In practice, flash file systems are used only for memory technology devices (MTDs), which are embedded flash memories that do not have a controller. Removable flash memory cards, SSDs, eMMC/eUFS chips and USB flash drives have built-in controllers to perform wear leveling and error correction so use of a specific flash file system may not add benefit.

==Capacity==
Multiple chips are often arrayed or die stacked to achieve higher capacities for use in consumer electronic devices such as multimedia players or GPSs. The capacity scaling (increase) of flash chips used to follow Moore&#x27;s law because they are manufactured with many of the same integrated circuits techniques and equipment. Since the introduction of 3D NAND, scaling is no longer necessarily associated with Moore&#x27;s law since ever smaller transistors (cells) are no longer used.

Consumer flash storage devices typically are advertised with usable sizes expressed as a small integer power of two (2, 4, 8, etc.) and a conventional designation of megabytes (MB) or gigabytes (GB); e.g., 512 MB, 8 GB. This includes SSDs marketed as hard drive replacements, in accordance with traditional hard drives, which use decimal prefixes. Thus, an SSD marked as &quot;64 GB&quot; is at least bytes (64 GB). Most users will have slightly less capacity than this available for their files, due to the space taken by file system metadata and because some operating systems report SSD capacity using binary prefixes which are somewhat larger than conventional prefixes .

The flash memory chips inside them are sized in strict binary multiples, but the actual total capacity of the chips is not usable at the drive interface.
It is considerably larger than the advertised capacity in order to allow for distribution of writes (wear leveling), for sparing, for error correction codes, and for other metadata needed by the device&#x27;s internal firmware.

In 2005, Toshiba and SanDisk developed a NAND flash chip capable of storing 1 GB of data using multi-level cell (MLC) technology, capable of storing two bits of data per cell. In September 2005, Samsung Electronics announced that it had developed the world&#x27;s first 2 GB chip.

In March 2006, Samsung announced flash hard drives with capacity of 4 GB, essentially the same order of magnitude as smaller laptop hard drives, and in September 2006, Samsung announced an 8 GB chip produced using a 40 nm manufacturing process.
In January 2008, SanDisk announced availability of their 16 GB MicroSDHC and 32 GB SDHC Plus cards.

More recent flash drives (as of 2012) have much greater capacities, holding 64, 128, and 256 GB.

A joint development at Intel and Micron will allow the production of 32-layer 3.5 terabyte (TB) NAND flash sticks and 10 TB standard-sized SSDs. The device includes 5 packages of 16 × 48 GB TLC dies, using a floating gate cell design.

Flash chips continue to be manufactured with capacities under or around 1 MB (e.g. for BIOS-ROMs and embedded applications).

In July 2016, Samsung announced the 4 TB Samsung 850 EVO which utilizes their 256 Gbit 48-layer TLC 3D V-NAND. In August 2016, Samsung announced a 32 TB 2.5-inch SAS SSD based on their 512 Gbit 64-layer TLC 3D V-NAND. Further, Samsung expects to unveil SSDs with up to 100 TB of storage by 2020.

==Transfer rates==
Flash memory devices are typically much faster at reading than writing. Performance also depends on the quality of storage controllers, which become more critical when devices are partially full. Even when the only change to manufacturing is die-shrink, the absence of an appropriate controller can result in degraded speeds.

==Applications==

===Serial flash===

Serial flash is a small, low-power flash memory that provides only serial access to the data - rather than addressing individual bytes, the user reads or writes large contiguous groups of bytes in the address space serially. Serial Peripheral Interface Bus (SPI) is a typical protocol for accessing the device. 
When incorporated into an embedded system, serial flash requires fewer wires on the PCB than parallel flash memories, since it transmits and receives data one bit at a time. This may permit a reduction in board space, power consumption, and total system cost.

There are several reasons why a serial device, with fewer external pins than a parallel device, can significantly reduce overall cost:

* Many ASICs are pad-limited, meaning that the size of the die is constrained by the number of wire bond pads, rather than the complexity and number of gates used for the device logic. Eliminating bond pads thus permits a more compact integrated circuit, on a smaller die; this increases the number of dies that may be fabricated on a wafer, and thus reduces the cost per die.
* Reducing the number of external pins also reduces assembly and packaging costs. A serial device may be packaged in a smaller and simpler package than a parallel device.
* Smaller and lower pin-count packages occupy less PCB area.
* Lower pin-count devices simplify PCB routing.

There are two major SPI flash types. The first type is characterized by small blocks and one internal SRAM block buffer allowing a complete block to be read to the buffer, partially modified, and then written back (for example, the Atmel AT45 &quot;DataFlash&quot; or the Micron Technology Page Erase NOR Flash). The second type has larger sectors where the smallest sectors typically found in this type of SPI flash are 4 kB, but they can be as large as 64 kB. Since this type of SPI flash lacks an internal SRAM buffer, the complete block must be read out and modified before being written back, making it slow to manage. However, the second type is cheaper than the first and is therefore a good choice when the application is code shadowing.

The two types are not easily exchangeable, since they do not have the same pinout, and the command sets are incompatible.

Most FPGAs are based on SRAM configuration cells and require an external configuration device, often a serial flash chip, to reload the configuration bitstream every power cycle.

====Firmware storage====
With the increasing speed of modern CPUs, parallel flash devices are often much slower than the memory bus of the computer they are connected to. Conversely, modern SRAM offers access times below 10 ns, while DDR2 SDRAM offers access times below 20 ns. Because of this, it is often desirable to shadow code stored in flash into RAM; that is, the code is copied from flash into RAM before execution, so that the CPU may access it at full speed. Device firmware may be stored in a serial flash chip, and then copied into SDRAM or SRAM when the device is powered-up. Using an external serial flash device rather than on-chip flash removes the need for significant process compromise (a manufacturing process that is good for high-speed logic is generally not good for flash and vice versa). Once it is decided to read the firmware in as one big block it is common to add compression to allow a smaller flash chip to be used. Since 2005, many devices use serial NOR flash to deprecate parallel NOR flash for firmware storage. Typical applications for serial NOR flash include storing firmware for hard drives, BIOS, Option ROM of expansion cards, DSL modems, etc.

===Flash memory as a replacement for hard drives===
One more recent application for flash memory is as a replacement for hard disks. Flash memory does not have the mechanical limitations and latencies of hard drives, so a solid-state drive (SSD) is attractive when considering speed, noise, power consumption, and reliability. Flash drives are gaining traction as mobile device secondary storage devices; they are also used as substitutes for hard drives in high-performance desktop computers and some servers with RAID and SAN architectures.

There remain some aspects of flash-based SSDs that make them unattractive. The cost per gigabyte of flash memory remains significantly higher than that of hard disks. Also flash memory has a finite number of P/E (&quot;program/erase&quot;) cycles, but this seems to be currently under control since warranties on flash-based SSDs are approaching those of current hard drives. In addition, deleted files on SSDs can remain for an indefinite period of time before being overwritten by fresh data; erasure or shred techniques or software that work well on magnetic hard disk drives have no effect on SSDs, compromising security and forensic examination. However, due to the so-called &quot;TRIM&quot; command employed by most solid state drives, which marks the logical block addresses occupied by the deleted file as unused to enable garbage collection, data recovery software is not able to restore files deleted from such.

For relational databases or other systems that require ACID transactions, even a modest amount of flash storage can offer vast speedups over arrays of disk drives.

In May 2006, Samsung Electronics announced two flash-memory based PCs, the Q1-SSD and Q30-SSD were expected to become available in June 2006, both of which used 32 GB SSDs, and were at least initially available only in South Korea. The Q1-SSD and Q30-SSD launch was delayed and finally was shipped in late August 2006.

The first flash-memory based PC to become available was the Sony Vaio UX90, announced for pre-order on 27 June 2006 and began to be shipped in Japan on 3 July 2006 with a 16 GB flash memory hard drive. In late September 2006 Sony upgraded the flash-memory in the Vaio UX90 to 32 GB.

A solid-state drive was offered as an option with the first MacBook Air introduced in 2008, and from 2010 onwards, all models were shipped with an SSD. Starting in late 2011, as part of Intel&#x27;s Ultrabook initiative, an increasing number of ultra-thin laptops are being shipped with SSDs standard.

There are also hybrid techniques such as hybrid drive and ReadyBoost that attempt to combine the advantages of both technologies, using flash as a high-speed non-volatile cache for files on the disk that are often referenced, but rarely modified, such as application and operating system executable files.

On smartphones, the NAND flash products are used as file storage device, for example, eMMC and eUFS.

===Flash memory as RAM===
 there are attempts to use flash memory as the main computer memory, DRAM.

===Archival or long-term storage===
Floating-gate transistors in the flash storage device hold charge which represents data. This charge gradually leaks over time, leading to an accumulation of logical errors, also known as &quot;bit rot&quot; or &quot;bit fading&quot;.

==== Data retention ====
It is unclear how long data on flash memory will persist under archival conditions (i.e., benign temperature and humidity with infrequent access with or without prophylactic rewrite). Datasheets of Atmel&#x27;s flash-based &quot;ATmega&quot; microcontrollers typically promise retention times of 20 years at 85 °C (185 °F) and 100 years at 25 °C (77 °F).

The retention span varies among types and models of flash storage. When supplied with power and idle, the charge of the transistors holding the data is routinely refreshed by the firmware of the flash storage. The ability to retain data varies among flash storage devices due to differences in firmware, data redundancy, and error correction algorithms.

An article from CMU in 2015 states &quot;Today&#x27;s flash devices, which do not require flash refresh, have a typical retention age of 1 year at room temperature.&quot; And that retention time decreases exponentially with increasing temperature. The phenomenon can be modeled by the Arrhenius equation.

=== FPGA configuration ===

Some FPGAs are based on flash configuration cells that are used directly as (programmable) switches to connect internal elements together, using the same kind of floating-gate transistor as the flash data storage cells in data storage devices.

==Industry==
One source states that, in 2008, the flash memory industry includes about US$9.1 billion in production and sales. Other sources put the flash memory market at a size of more than US$20 billion in 2006, accounting for more than eight percent of the overall semiconductor market and more than 34 percent of the total semiconductor memory market.
In 2012, the market was estimated at $26.8 billion. It can take up to 10 weeks to produce a flash memory chip.

===Manufacturers===
The following were the largest NAND flash memory manufacturers, as of the second quarter of 2023.

#Samsung Electronics 31.4%
#Kioxia 20.6% 
#Western Digital Corporation 12.6%
#SK Hynix 18.5%
#Micron Technology 12.3%
#Others 8.7% Note: SK Hynix acquired Intel&#x27;s NAND business at the end of 2021 Kioxia spun out and got renamed of Toshiba in 2018/2019.

Samsung remains the largest NAND flash memory manufacturer as of first quarter 2022.

===Shipments===


In addition to individual flash memory chips, flash memory is also embedded in microcontroller (MCU) chips and system-on-chip (SoC) devices. Flash memory is embedded in ARM chips, which have sold 150billion units worldwide , and in programmable system-on-chip (PSoC) devices, which have sold 1.1billion units . This adds up to at least 151.1billion MCU and SoC chips with embedded flash memory, in addition to the 45.4billion known individual flash chip sales , totalling at least 196.5billion chips containing flash memory.

==Flash scalability==
Due to its relatively simple structure and high demand for higher capacity, NAND flash memory is the most aggressively scaled technology among electronic devices. The heavy competition among the top few manufacturers only adds to the aggressiveness in shrinking the floating-gate MOSFET design rule or process technology node. While the expected shrink timeline is a factor of two every three years per original version of Moore&#x27;s law, this has recently been accelerated in the case of NAND flash to a factor of two every two years. 


As the MOSFET feature size of flash memory cells reaches the 15–16 nm minimum limit, further flash density increases will be driven by TLC (3 bits/cell) combined with vertical stacking of NAND memory planes. The decrease in endurance and increase in uncorrectable bit error rates that accompany feature size shrinking can be compensated by improved error correction mechanisms. Even with these advances, it may be impossible to economically scale flash to smaller and smaller dimensions as the number of electron holding capacity reduces. Many promising new technologies (such as FeRAM, MRAM, PMC, PCM, ReRAM, and others) are under investigation and development as possible more scalable replacements for flash.

===Timeline===


==See also==
* eMMC
* Flash memory controller
* Intel hex file format
* List of flash file systems
* List of flash memory controller manufacturers
* microSDXC (up to 2 TB), and the successor format Secure Digital Ultra Capacity (SDUC) supporting cards up to 128 TiB
* NOR flash replacement
* Open NAND Flash Interface Working Group
* Read-mostly memory (RMM)
* Universal Flash Storage
* USB flash drive security
* Write amplification

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==External links==

* Semiconductor Characterization System has diverse functions 
* Understanding and selecting higher performance NAND architectures 
* How flash storage works, presentation by David Woodhouse from Intel
* Flash endurance testing
* NAND Flash Data Recovery Cookbook
* Type of Flash Memory by OpenWrt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="0" end="12" title="Flash memory" label="Flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="19" end="29" title="Integrated circuit" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997658" start="30" end="42" title="Non-volatile memory" label="non-volatile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="43" end="58" title="computer memory" label="computer memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="59" end="73" title="storage medium" label="storage medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="160" end="169" title="Flash memory" label="NOR flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="174" end="184" title="Flash memory" label="NAND flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065380" start="204" end="207" title="NOR gate" label="NOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q575178" start="212" end="216" title="NAND gate" label="NAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="217" end="227" title="logic gate" label="logic gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="275" end="295" title="floating-gate MOSFET" label="floating-gate MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="574" end="587" title="floating-gate" label="floating-gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118272" start="612" end="625" title="Fujio Masuoka" label="Fujio Masuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="629" end="636" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="661" end="667" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="726" end="731" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="966" end="978" title="machine word" label="machine word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143031" start="1100" end="1111" title="memory chip" label="memory chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457562" start="1175" end="1198" title="flash memory controller" label="flash memory controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q183731" start="1239" end="1250" title="memory card" label="memory card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647694" start="1253" end="1268" title="USB flash drive" label="USB flash drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="1271" end="1288" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q965424" start="1319" end="1332" title="feature phone" label="feature phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="1335" end="1345" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="1566" end="1576" title="static RAM" label="static RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="2270" end="2273" title="SSD" label="SSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="2637" end="2646" title="computers" label="computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="2648" end="2651" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="2654" end="2675" title="digital audio players" label="digital audio players"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="2677" end="2691" title="digital camera" label="digital camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="2694" end="2707" title="mobile phones" label="mobile phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="2709" end="2721" title="synthesizers" label="synthesizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="2723" end="2734" title="video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099911" start="2736" end="2757" title="scientific instrument" label="scientific instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128980" start="2764" end="2783" title="industrial robotics" label="industrial robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q327092" start="2789" end="2808" title="medical electronics" label="medical electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q46306" start="2839" end="2850" title="access time" label="access time"/>
<link wikidata="Q19280237" start="3401" end="3420" title="solid-state storage" label="solid-state storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548452" start="3523" end="3526" title="serial presence detect" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q229370" start="3602" end="3614" title="Three-dimensional integrated circuit" label="die stacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578120" start="3620" end="3639" title="through-silicon via" label="through-silicon via"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="3745" end="3753" title="tebibyte" label="tebibyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457562" start="3806" end="3822" title="flash controller" label="flash controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="3964" end="3992" title="Floating-gate MOSFET" label="floating-gate MOSFET (FGMOS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="4051" end="4057" title="MOSFET" label="MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q249228" start="4227" end="4238" title="Dawon Kahng" label="Dawon Kahng"/>
<link wikidata="Q711761" start="4330" end="4343" title="Simon Min Sze" label="Simon Min Sze"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343761" start="4419" end="4431" title="memory cell (computing)" label="memory cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="4467" end="4483" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q381364" start="4485" end="4489" title="Programmable read-only memory" label="PROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="4747" end="4750" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q329864" start="4889" end="4907" title="military equipment" label="military equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="4938" end="4951" title="mobile phones" label="mobile phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="4999" end="5005" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5015" end="5041" title="Field electron emission#Fowler–Nordheim tunneling" label="Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="5097" end="5104" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797531" start="5161" end="5176" title="Eli Harari" label="Eliyahou Harari"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="5180" end="5203" title="Hughes Aircraft Company" label="Hughes Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101827" start="5208" end="5223" title="George Perlegos" label="George Perlegos"/>
<link wikidata="Q221836" start="5616" end="5633" title="flash (photography)" label="flash of a camera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5685" end="5688" title="#NOR memories" label="NOR"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5713" end="5717" title="#NAND memories" label="NAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="5737" end="5741" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="5880" end="5897" title="Intel Corporation" label="Intel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="6037" end="6045" title="data bus" label="data bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="6058" end="6071" title="random access" label="random access"/>
<link wikidata="Q835713" start="6079" end="6094" title="memory location" label="memory location"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="6143" end="6159" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q226264" start="6269" end="6273" title="BIOS" label="BIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="6281" end="6289" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q842729" start="6293" end="6304" title="set-top box" label="set-top box"/>
<link wikidata="Q678615" start="6541" end="6553" title="CompactFlash" label="CompactFlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="7217" end="7236" title="data storage device" label="data storage device"/>
<link wikidata="Q234870" start="7262" end="7275" title="optical media" label="optical media"/>
<link wikidata="Q183731" start="7346" end="7357" title="memory card" label="memory card"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="7363" end="7380" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051763" start="7513" end="7523" title="SmartMedia" label="SmartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q646104" start="7575" end="7589" title="MultiMediaCard" label="MultiMediaCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="7591" end="7605" title="Secure Digital" label="Secure Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q733906" start="7607" end="7619" title="Memory Stick" label="Memory Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q283631" start="7625" end="7640" title="xD-Picture Card" label="xD-Picture Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q646104" start="7719" end="7725" title="RS-MMC" label="RS-MMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="7727" end="7733" title="miniSD" label="miniSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="7738" end="7745" title="microSD" label="microSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623746" start="7939" end="7946" title="Transistor density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q492591" start="8167" end="8183" title="Multi-level cell" label="Multi-level cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="8222" end="8225" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343761" start="8234" end="8245" title="memory cell (computing)" label="memory cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="8247" end="8250" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q492591" start="8264" end="8280" title="multi-level cell" label="multi-level cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="8317" end="8319" title="Mebibit" label="Mb"/>
<link wikidata="Q661845" start="8363" end="8381" title="STMicroelectronics" label="STMicroelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="8425" end="8434" title="NOR flash" label="NOR flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q260833" start="8469" end="8476" title="SanDisk" label="SanDisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="8583" end="8602" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q492591" start="8614" end="8631" title="triple-level cell" label="triple-level cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036055" start="8766" end="8783" title="Charge trap flash" label="Charge trap flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="10156" end="10159" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192654" start="10303" end="10324" title="Saifun Semiconductors" label="Saifun Semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192654" start="10344" end="10352" title="Spansion" label="Spansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="10354" end="10362" title="patented" label="patented"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="10475" end="10488" title="floating gate" label="floating gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="10544" end="10566" title="Advanced Micro Devices" label="Advanced Micro Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="10821" end="10828" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="10841" end="10847" title="V-NAND" label="V-NAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="11103" end="11122" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q229370" start="11175" end="11196" title="3D integrated circuit" label="3D integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="11223" end="11241" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="11387" end="11389" title="Gibibyte" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q370719" start="11603" end="11622" title="Hynix Semiconductor" label="Hynix Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q370719" start="11628" end="11636" title="SK Hynix" label="SK Hynix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="12091" end="12105" title="mobile devices" label="mobile devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="12867" end="12869" title="gigabyte" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="13128" end="13130" title="Gigabyte" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="13313" end="13337" title="floating-gate transistor" label="floating-gate transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q492591" start="13343" end="13360" title="single-level cell" label="single-level cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q492591" start="13422" end="13438" title="Multi-level cell" label="Multi-level cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q492591" start="13464" end="13481" title="triple-level cell" label="triple-level cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q737038" start="13583" end="13594" title="polycrystalline silicon" label="polysilicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392090" start="13651" end="13656" title="SONOS" label="SONOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="13755" end="13804" title="metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor" label="metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175727" start="14388" end="14395" title="electric field screening" label="screens"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="14400" end="14414" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754002" start="14449" end="14466" title="threshold voltage" label="threshold voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="15211" end="15214" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="15740" end="15754" title="electric field" label="electric field"/>
<link wikidata="Q902877" start="17472" end="17497" title="Fowler–Nordheim tunneling" label="Fowler–Nordheim tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q440704" start="18171" end="18182" title="charge pump" label="charge pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q760134" start="18280" end="18295" title="boost converter" label="boost converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692774" start="18369" end="18378" title="low-power electronics" label="low-power"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065380" start="19008" end="19017" title="NOR gate" label="NOR gate:"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445876" start="20156" end="20178" title="hot carrier injection" label="hot-electron injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q902877" start="20407" end="20432" title="Fowler–Nordheim tunneling" label="Fowler–Nordheim tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="21214" end="21238" title="Floating-gate MOSFET" label="floating-gate transistor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21290" end="21299" title="NAND gate" label="NAND gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q226264" start="22841" end="22845" title="BIOS" label="BIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853312" start="23253" end="23269" title="tunnel injection" label="tunnel injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853312" start="23286" end="23300" title="tunnel release" label="tunnel release"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="23364" end="23367" title="Universal Serial Bus" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647694" start="23393" end="23408" title="USB flash drive" label="USB flash drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q183731" start="23427" end="23438" title="memory card" label="memory card"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="23451" end="23468" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162337" start="25319" end="25322" title="logical block addressing" label="LBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="25416" end="25419" title="SSD" label="SSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036055" start="25591" end="25608" title="charge trap flash" label="charge trap flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="25893" end="25900" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="25956" end="25975" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036055" start="26018" end="26035" title="charge trap flash" label="charge trap flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="26091" end="26094" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="26099" end="26106" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q413828" start="26142" end="26157" title="silicon nitride" label="silicon nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="28270" end="28274" title="Gbit" label="Gbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q740943" start="30334" end="30340" title="nibble" label="nibble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492291" start="30654" end="30660" title="YAFFS" label="YAFFS1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492291" start="30726" end="30732" title="YAFFS" label="YAFFS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q492591" start="31062" end="31078" title="multi-level cell" label="multi-level cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647694" start="31165" end="31180" title="USB flash drive" label="USB flash drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457562" start="31240" end="31263" title="flash translation layer" label="flash translation layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q264647" start="31627" end="31647" title="absolute temperature" label="absolute temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197548" start="31916" end="31933" title="Micron Technology" label="Micron Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="31938" end="31954" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336851" start="32125" end="32129" title="Thin small-outline package" label="TSOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108884" start="32379" end="32392" title="wear leveling" label="wear leveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q168370" start="32520" end="32529" title="Bad sector" label="bad block"/>
<link wikidata="Q918090" start="32987" end="32998" title="thin client" label="thin client"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="33004" end="33011" title="Router (computing)" label="routers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33104" end="33116" title="#Read disturb" label="read disturb"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="35039" end="35060" title="error-correcting code" label="error-correcting code"/>
<link wikidata="Q570628" start="35108" end="35123" title="ball grid array" label="ball grid array"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="35231" end="35243" title="PCB Assembly" label="PCB Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147046" start="35377" end="35383" title="rework (electronics)" label="rework"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="35764" end="35768" title="dynamic random access memory" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="35770" end="35773" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="35779" end="35785" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="35857" end="35870" title="random access" label="random access"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="35897" end="35908" title="address bus" label="address bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978082" start="36395" end="36411" title="execute in place" label="execute in place"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="36869" end="36872" title="KiB" label="KiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="37012" end="37025" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116088" start="37313" end="37342" title="Common Flash Memory Interface" label="Common Flash Memory Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="37866" end="37887" title="error correcting code" label="error correcting code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146944" start="38007" end="38020" title="block size (data storage and transmission)" label="block devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="38254" end="38275" title="error correcting code" label="error correcting code"/>
<link wikidata="Q218341" start="38282" end="38290" title="checksum" label="checksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="38390" end="38393" title="Kibibyte" label="KiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157198" start="38992" end="39003" title="NVM Express" label="NVM Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457562" start="39165" end="39188" title="flash memory controller" label="flash memory controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108884" start="39288" end="39301" title="wear leveling" label="wear leveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q853922" start="40258" end="40270" title="Hamming code" label="Hamming code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061598" start="40323" end="40341" title="Reed–Solomon error correction" label="Reed–Solomon codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q795705" start="40346" end="40355" title="BCH codes" label="BCH codes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40735" end="40741" title="Semiconductor device fabrication#Device test" label="yields"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="40962" end="40976" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q656083" start="41034" end="41039" title="paging" label="paged"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="41145" end="41167" title="memory management unit" label="memory management unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q910289" start="41239" end="41247" title="overlay (programming)" label="overlays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045907" start="41794" end="41833" title="Open NAND Flash Interface Working Group" label="Open NAND Flash Interface Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517415" start="42114" end="42120" title="pinout" label="pinout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336851" start="42140" end="42144" title="Thin small-outline package" label="TSOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q130913" start="42158" end="42161" title="Land grid array" label="LGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q570628" start="42170" end="42173" title="Ball grid array" label="BGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074550" start="42177" end="42185" title="IC package" label="packages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548452" start="42319" end="42341" title="serial presence detect" label="serial presence detect"/>
<link wikidata="Q370719" start="42452" end="42457" title="Hynix" label="Hynix"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="42459" end="42464" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197548" start="42466" end="42483" title="Micron Technology" label="Micron Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q673595" start="42489" end="42496" title="Numonyx" label="Numonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="42614" end="42621" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716" start="42626" end="42633" title="Samsung" label="Samsung"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42752" end="42773" title="Pin compatibility#Pin-to-pin compatibility" label="pin-to-pin compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="42956" end="42961" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="42963" end="42967" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="42973" end="42982" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157198" start="42993" end="43038" title="NVM Express" label="Non-Volatile Memory Host Controller Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q206924" start="43250" end="43261" title="PCI Express" label="PCI Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="43509" end="43522" title="random access" label="random access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="44341" end="44373" title="semiconductor device fabrication" label="semiconductor device fabrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q173431" start="44701" end="44705" title="CMOS" label="CMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="44743" end="44745" title="nanometer" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="45232" end="45241" title="hard disk" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="45277" end="45280" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q965424" start="45297" end="45310" title="feature phone" label="feature phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108884" start="46123" end="46136" title="wear leveling" label="wear leveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167496" start="46141" end="46165" title="Flash over-provisioning" label="memory over-provisioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q277041" start="47392" end="47416" title="memory technology device" label="memory technology device"/>
<link wikidata="Q183731" start="47507" end="47518" title="memory card" label="memory card"/>
<link wikidata="Q646104" start="47527" end="47531" title="eMMC" label="eMMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q826138" start="47532" end="47536" title="Universal Flash Storage" label="eUFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647694" start="47547" end="47562" title="USB flash drive" label="USB flash drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457562" start="47578" end="47588" title="Flash memory controller" label="controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="47856" end="47859" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="47924" end="47940" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="47993" end="48012" title="integrated circuits" label="integrated circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="48434" end="48437" title="solid-state drive" label="SSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="48507" end="48517" title="hard drive" label="hard drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="48530" end="48546" title="SI prefix" label="decimal prefixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="48580" end="48582" title="Gigabyte" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="48805" end="48818" title="binary prefix" label="binary prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108884" start="49132" end="49145" title="wear leveling" label="wear leveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="49165" end="49187" title="error correction codes" label="error correction codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="49203" end="49211" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q260833" start="49281" end="49288" title="SanDisk" label="SanDisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q492591" start="49355" end="49371" title="multi-level cell" label="multi-level cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="49455" end="49474" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q849492" start="51254" end="51285" title="Serial Peripheral Interface Bus" label="Serial Peripheral Interface Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="51367" end="51382" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="51425" end="51428" title="printed circuit board" label="PCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="51745" end="51750" title="application-specific integrated circuit" label="ASICs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072430" start="51797" end="51800" title="die (integrated circuit)" label="die"/>
<link wikidata="Q750783" start="51833" end="51842" title="wire bond" label="wire bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q267131" start="52073" end="52078" title="wafer (electronics)" label="wafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074550" start="52180" end="52189" title="IC package" label="packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446839" start="52386" end="52393" title="routing (EDA)" label="routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227113" start="52634" end="52638" title="AT45" label="AT45"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197548" start="52668" end="52685" title="Micron Technology" label="Micron Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="53271" end="53275" title="FPGA" label="FPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q415568" start="53416" end="53425" title="bitstream" label="bitstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q267416" start="53636" end="53640" title="Static RAM" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q838801" start="53670" end="53672" title="nanosecond" label="ns"/>
<link wikidata="Q847146" start="53680" end="53690" title="DDR2 SDRAM" label="DDR2 SDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="53766" end="53772" title="shadow RAM" label="shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="53922" end="53930" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="54564" end="54574" title="hard drive" label="hard drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q226264" start="54577" end="54581" title="BIOS" label="BIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099005" start="54583" end="54593" title="Option ROM" label="Option ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q216158" start="54597" end="54611" title="expansion card" label="expansion card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155692" start="54614" end="54623" title="DSL modem" label="DSL modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="54753" end="54762" title="hard disk" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="54854" end="54871" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q179299" start="55147" end="55151" title="RAID" label="RAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q237576" start="55156" end="55159" title="Storage area network" label="SAN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55863" end="55867" title="Trim (computing)#SD/MMC" label="TRIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="56008" end="56026" title="garbage collection (computing)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q288435" start="56155" end="56159" title="ACID" label="ACID"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="56278" end="56297" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="56484" end="56495" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q488192" start="56929" end="56940" title="MacBook Air" label="MacBook Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="57055" end="57060" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477770" start="57068" end="57077" title="Ultrabook" label="Ultrabook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143962" start="57213" end="57225" title="hybrid drive" label="hybrid drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q426740" start="57230" end="57240" title="ReadyBoost" label="ReadyBoost"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="57343" end="57348" title="cache (computing)" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q778586" start="57460" end="57470" title="executable" label="executable"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="57482" end="57492" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q646104" start="57565" end="57569" title="eMMC" label="eMMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q826138" start="57574" end="57578" title="eUFS" label="eUFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="57676" end="57680" title="Dynamic random-access memory" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57877" end="57891" title="Data integrity#Logical integrity" label="logical errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390705" start="57913" end="57920" title="Data rot" label="bit rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q216651" start="58209" end="58215" title="ATmega" label="ATmega"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="58515" end="58523" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q838123" start="58640" end="58655" title="data redundancy" label="data redundancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="58661" end="58677" title="error correction" label="error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="58707" end="58710" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="CMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q507505" start="58976" end="58994" title="Arrhenius equation" label="Arrhenius equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="59030" end="59034" title="FPGA" label="FPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q20718" start="59859" end="59878" title="Samsung Electronics" label="Samsung Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q28840043" start="59886" end="59892" title="Kioxia" label="Kioxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q738770" start="59901" end="59928" title="Western Digital Corporation" label="Western Digital Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q370719" start="59936" end="59944" title="SK Hynix" label="SK Hynix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197548" start="59952" end="59969" title="Micron Technology" label="Micron Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="60288" end="60296" title="embedded system" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="60300" end="60315" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="60332" end="60346" title="system-on-chip" label="system-on-chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="60390" end="60399" title="ARM chips" label="ARM chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640617" start="60453" end="60480" title="programmable system-on-chip" label="programmable system-on-chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638116" start="60888" end="60905" title="List of semiconductor scale examples" label="scaled technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="60912" end="60930" title="electronic devices" label="electronic devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="61035" end="61055" title="floating-gate MOSFET" label="floating-gate MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="61192" end="61208" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="61317" end="61323" title="MOSFET" label="MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q703656" start="61890" end="61895" title="Ferroelectric RAM" label="FeRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061546" start="61897" end="61901" title="Magnetoresistive Random Access Memory" label="MRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075992" start="61903" end="61906" title="Programmable metallization cell" label="PMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153902" start="61908" end="61911" title="Phase-change memory" label="PCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143830" start="61913" end="61918" title="Resistive random-access memory" label="ReRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q646104" start="62055" end="62059" title="eMMC" label="eMMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457562" start="62062" end="62085" title="Flash memory controller" label="Flash memory controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q572649" start="62088" end="62109" title="Intel hex file format" label="Intel hex file format"/>
<link wikidata="Q633005" start="62112" end="62138" title="List of flash file systems" label="List of flash file systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620515" start="62141" end="62186" title="List of flash memory controller manufacturers" label="List of flash memory controller manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="62189" end="62198" title="microSDXC" label="microSDXC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="62208" end="62210" title="terabyte" label="TB"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="62269" end="62273" title="SDUC" label="SDUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="62302" end="62305" title="Tebibyte" label="TiB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954949" start="62308" end="62329" title="NOR flash replacement" label="NOR flash replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045907" start="62332" end="62371" title="Open NAND Flash Interface Working Group" label="Open NAND Flash Interface Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q97187383" start="62374" end="62392" title="Read-mostly memory" label="Read-mostly memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q826138" start="62401" end="62424" title="Universal Flash Storage" label="Universal Flash Storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865909" start="62427" end="62451" title="USB flash drive security" label="USB flash drive security"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167496" start="62454" end="62473" title="Write amplification" label="Write amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140401" start="62824" end="62831" title="OpenWrt" label="OpenWrt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50597" wikidata="Q205908" url="?curid=50597" title="EEPROM">
<text>EEPROM or E2PROM (electrically erasable programmable read-only memory) is a type of non-volatile memory. It is used in computers, usually integrated in microcontrollers such as smart cards and remote keyless systems, or as a separate chip device, to store relatively small amounts of data by allowing individual bytes to be erased and reprogrammed.

EEPROMs are organized as arrays of floating-gate transistors. EEPROMs can be programmed and erased in-circuit, by applying special programming signals. Originally, EEPROMs were limited to single-byte operations, which made them slower, but modern EEPROMs allow multi-byte page operations. An EEPROM has a limited life for erasing and reprogramming, reaching a million operations in modern EEPROMs. In an EEPROM that is frequently reprogrammed, the life of the EEPROM is an important design consideration.

Flash memory is a type of EEPROM designed for high speed and high density, at the expense of large erase blocks (typically 512 bytes or larger) and limited number of write cycles (often 10,000). There is no clear boundary dividing the two, but the term &quot;EEPROM&quot; is generally used to describe non-volatile memory with small erase blocks (as small as one byte) and a long lifetime (typically 1,000,000 cycles). Many past microcontrollers included both (flash memory for the firmware and a small EEPROM for parameters), though the trend with modern microcontrollers is to emulate EEPROM using flash.

As of 2020, flash memory costs much less than byte-programmable EEPROM and is the dominant memory type wherever a system requires a significant amount of non-volatile solid-state storage. EEPROMs, however, are still used on applications that only require small amounts of storage, like in serial presence detect.

==History==

=== Early attempts ===
In the early 1970s, some studies, inventions, and development for electrically re-programmable non-volatile memories were performed by various companies and organizations.

In 1971, early research was presented at &quot;the 3rd Conference on Solid State Devices, Tokyo&quot; in Japan by Yasuo Tarui, Yutaka Hayashi, and Kiyoko Nagai at &quot;Electrotechnical Laboratory&quot;; a Japanese national research institute.
They fabricated an electrically re-programmable non-volatile memory in 1972, and continued this study for more than 10 years. However this early memory depended on capacitors to work, which modern EEPROM lacks.

In 1972 IBM patented an electrically re-programmable non-volatile memory invention. Later that year, an avalanche injection type MOS was patented by Fujio Masuoka, the inventor of flash memory, at Toshiba and IBM patented another later that year.

In 1974, NEC patented a electrically erasable carrier injection device. The next year, NEC applied for the trademark &quot;EEPROM®&quot; with the Japan Patent Office. The trademark was granted in 1978.

The theoretical basis of these devices is avalanche hot-carrier injection. In general, programmable memories, including EPROM, of early 1970s had reliability and endurance problems such as the data retention periods and the number of erase/write cycles.

Most of the major semiconductor manufactures, such as
Toshiba,
Sanyo (later, ON Semiconductor),
IBM,
Intel,
NEC (later, Renesas Electronics),
Philips (later, NXP Semiconductors),
Siemens (later, Infineon Technologies),
Honeywell (later, Atmel),
Texas Instruments,
studied, invented, and manufactured some electrically re-programmable non-volatile devices until 1977.

=== Modern EEPROM ===
The first EEPROM that used Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling to erase data was invented by Bernward and patented by Siemens in 1974. In February 1977, Israeli-American Eliyahou Harari at Hughes Aircraft Company patented in the US a modern EEPROM technology, based on Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling through a thin silicon dioxide layer between the floating-gate and the wafer.
Hughes went on to produce this new EEPROM devices.

In May 1977, some important research result was disclosed by Fairchild and Siemens. They used &quot;SONOS&quot; (polysilicon-oxynitride-nitride-oxide-silicon) structure with thickness of silicon dioxide less than 30 Å, and &quot;SIMOS&quot; (stacked-gate injection MOS) structure, respectively, for using &quot;Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling&quot; hot-carrier injection.

Around 1976 to 1978, Intel&#x27;s team, including George Perlegos, made some inventions to improve this tunneling E2PROM technology.
In 1978, they developed a 16K (2K word × 8) bit &quot;Intel 2816&quot; chip with a thin silicon dioxide layer, which was less than 200 Å.
In 1980, this structure was publicly introduced as &quot;FLOTOX&quot;; floating gate tunnel oxide.
The &quot;FLOTOX&quot; structure improved reliability of erase/write cycles per byte up to 10,000 times.
But this device required additional 2022V VPP bias voltage supply for byte erase, except for 5V read operations.
In 1981, Perlegos and 2 other members left Intel to form Seeq Technology,
which used on-device charge pumps to supply the high voltages necessary for programming E2PROMs.
In 1984, Perlogos left Seeq Technology to found Atmel, then Seeq Technology was acquired by Atmel.

Electrically alterable read-only memory (EAROM) is a type of EEPROM that can be modified one or a few bits at a time. Writing is a very slow process and again needs higher voltage (usually around 12 V) than is used for read access. EAROMs are intended for applications that require infrequent and only partial rewriting.

==Theoretical basis of FLOTOX structure==

As is described in former section, old EEPROMs are based on avalanche breakdown-based hot-carrier injection with high reverse breakdown voltage. But &quot;FLOTOX&quot; theoretical basis is Fowler–Nordheim tunneling hot-carrier injection through a thin silicon dioxide layer between the floating gate and the wafer. In other words, it uses a tunnel junction.

Theoretical basis of the physical phenomenon itself is the same as today&#x27;s flash memory. But each FLOTOX structure is in conjunction with another read-control transistor because the floating gate itself is just programming and erasing one data bit.

Intel&#x27;s FLOTOX device structure improved EEPROM reliability, in other words, the endurance of the write and erase cycles, and the data retention period. A material of study for single-event effect about FLOTOX is available.

Today, an academic explanation of the FLOTOX device structure can be found in several sources.

==Today&#x27;s EEPROM structure==

Nowadays, EEPROM is used for embedded microcontrollers as well as standard EEPROM products.
EEPROM still requires a 2-transistor structure per bit to erase a dedicated byte in the memory, while flash memory has 1 transistor per bit to erase a region of the memory.

==Security protections==

Because EEPROM technology is used for some security gadgets, such as credit cards, SIM cards, key-less entry, etc., some devices have security protection mechanisms, such as copy-protection.

==Electrical interface==
EEPROM devices use a serial or parallel interface for data input/output.

===Serial bus devices===
The common serial interfaces are SPI, I²C, Microwire, UNI/O, and 1-Wire. These use from 1 to 4 device pins and allow devices to use packages with 8 pins or less.

A typical EEPROM serial protocol consists of three phases: OP-code phase, address phase and data phase. The OP-code is usually the first 8 bits input to the serial input pin of the EEPROM device (or with most I²C devices, is implicit); followed by 8 to 24 bits of addressing, depending on the depth of the device, then the read or write data.

Each EEPROM device typically has its own set of OP-code instructions mapped to different functions. Common operations on SPI EEPROM devices are:
* Write enable (WRENAL)
* Write disable (WRDI)
* Read status register (RDSR)
* Write status register (WRSR)
* Read data (READ)
* Write data (WRITE)

Other operations supported by some EEPROM devices are:
* Program
* Sector erase
* Chip erase commands

===Parallel bus devices===
Parallel EEPROM devices typically have an 8-bit data bus and an address bus wide enough to cover the complete memory. Most devices have chip select and write protect pins. Some microcontrollers also have integrated parallel EEPROM.

Operation of a parallel EEPROM is simple and fast when compared to serial EEPROM, but these devices are larger due to the higher pin count (28 pins or more) and have been decreasing in popularity in favor of serial EEPROM or flash.

===Other devices===
EEPROM memory is used to enable features in other types of products that are not strictly memory products. Products such as real-time clocks, digital potentiometers, digital temperature sensors, among others, may have small amounts of EEPROM to store calibration information or other data that needs to be available in the event of power loss.
It was also used on video game cartridges to save game progress and configurations, before the usage of external and internal flash memories.

==Failure modes==
There are two limitations of stored information: endurance and data retention.

During rewrites, the gate oxide in the floating-gate transistors gradually accumulates trapped electrons. The electric field of the trapped electrons adds to the electrons in the floating gate, lowering the window between threshold voltages for zeros vs ones. After sufficient number of rewrite cycles, the difference becomes too small to be recognizable, the cell is stuck in programmed state, and endurance failure occurs. The manufacturers usually specify the maximum number of rewrites being 1 million or more.

During storage, the electrons injected into the floating gate may drift through the insulator, especially at increased temperature, and cause charge loss, reverting the cell into erased state. The manufacturers usually guarantee data retention of 10 years or more.

==Related types==
Flash memory is a later form of EEPROM. In the industry, there is a convention to reserve the term EEPROM to byte-wise erasable memories compared to block-wise erasable flash memories. EEPROM occupies more die area than flash memory for the same capacity, because each cell usually needs a read, a write, and an erase transistor, while flash memory erase circuits are shared by large blocks of cells (often 512×8).

Newer non-volatile memory technologies such as FeRAM and MRAM are slowly replacing EEPROMs in some applications, but are expected to remain a small fraction of the EEPROM market for the foreseeable future.

===Comparison with EPROM and EEPROM/flash===
The difference between EPROM and EEPROM lies in the way that the memory programs and erases. EEPROM can be programmed and erased electrically using field electron emission (more commonly known in the industry as &quot;Fowler–Nordheim tunneling&quot;).

EPROMs can&#x27;t be erased electrically and are programmed by hot-carrier injection onto the floating gate. Erase is by an ultraviolet light source, although in practice many EPROMs are encapsulated in plastic that is opaque to UV light, making them &quot;one-time programmable&quot;.

Most NOR flash memory is a hybrid style—programming is through hot-carrier injection and erase is through Fowler–Nordheim tunneling.

==See also==
* Avalanche breakdown
* DataFlash
* EPROM
* Flash memory
* Floating-gate MOSFET
* Intel HEX – file format
* Programmer (hardware)
* Quantum tunnelling
* SREC – file format
* Tunnel junction
* Read-mostly memory (RMM)

==References==
==External links==
* Gutmann (2001) papaer: &quot;Data Remanence in Semiconductor Devices&quot; | USENIX</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="0" end="6" title="EEPROM" label="EEPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="10" end="16" title="EEPROM" label="E2PROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q205908" start="18" end="69" title="EEPROM" label="electrically erasable programmable read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997658" start="84" end="103" title="non-volatile memory" label="non-volatile memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="152" end="168" title="microcontrollers" label="microcontrollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41349" start="177" end="187" title="smart card" label="smart card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521940" start="193" end="214" title="remote keyless system" label="remote keyless system"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="385" end="409" title="floating-gate transistor" label="floating-gate transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="856" end="868" title="Flash memory" label="Flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="1285" end="1301" title="microcontrollers" label="microcontrollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="1338" end="1346" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="1435" end="1442" title="Emulation (computing)" label="emulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19280237" start="1631" end="1650" title="solid-state storage" label="solid-state storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548452" start="1753" end="1775" title="serial presence detect" label="serial presence detect"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="1848" end="1858" title="inventions" label="inventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997658" start="1909" end="1930" title="non-volatile memory" label="non-volatile memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="2056" end="2075" title="Solid-state electronics" label="Solid State Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="2077" end="2082" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076542" start="2156" end="2183" title="Electrotechnical Laboratory" label="Electrotechnical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="2236" end="2246" title="Semiconductor device fabrication" label="fabricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118272" start="2592" end="2605" title="Fujio Masuoka" label="Fujio Masuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="2623" end="2635" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="2700" end="2703" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q175906" start="2936" end="2945" title="Avalanche breakdown" label="avalanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445876" start="2946" end="2967" title="hot-carrier injection" label="hot-carrier injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="3203" end="3210" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q49203" start="3212" end="3217" title="Sanyo" label="Sanyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671509" start="3226" end="3242" title="ON Semiconductor" label="ON Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="3245" end="3248" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="3250" end="3255" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219203" start="3257" end="3260" title="NEC" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196269" start="3269" end="3288" title="Renesas Electronics" label="Renesas Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="3291" end="3298" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155668" start="3307" end="3325" title="NXP Semiconductors" label="NXP Semiconductors"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="3328" end="3335" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q311394" start="3344" end="3365" title="Infineon Technologies" label="Infineon Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q898208" start="3368" end="3377" title="Honeywell" label="Honeywell"/>
<link wikidata="Q757489" start="3386" end="3391" title="Atmel" label="Atmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="3394" end="3411" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3566" end="3592" title="Field electron emission#Fowler–Nordheim tunneling" label="Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="3648" end="3655" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797531" start="3700" end="3715" title="Eli Harari" label="Eliyahou Harari"/>
<link wikidata="Q196253" start="3719" end="3742" title="Hughes Aircraft Company" label="Hughes Aircraft Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="3841" end="3856" title="silicon dioxide" label="silicon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="3875" end="3888" title="Floating-gate MOSFET" label="floating-gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q267131" start="3897" end="3902" title="wafer (electronics)" label="wafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038586" start="4017" end="4026" title="Fairchild Camera and Instrument" label="Fairchild"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="4031" end="4038" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q737038" start="4069" end="4080" title="polysilicon" label="polysilicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515030" start="4081" end="4091" title="Silicon oxynitride" label="oxynitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q410851" start="4092" end="4099" title="nitride" label="nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="4100" end="4105" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="4106" end="4113" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="4172" end="4173" title="Ångström" label="Å"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445876" start="4211" end="4220" title="Hot-carrier injection" label="injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="4221" end="4224" title="MOSFET" label="MOS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4261" end="4299" title="Field electron emission#Fowler–Nordheim tunneling" label="&amp;quot;Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445876" start="4300" end="4321" title="hot-carrier injection" label="hot-carrier injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101827" start="4374" end="4389" title="George Perlegos" label="George Perlegos"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="4545" end="4560" title="silicon dioxide" label="silicon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="4592" end="4593" title="Ångström" label="Å"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="4666" end="4679" title="Floating-gate MOSFET" label="floating gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183536" start="4680" end="4686" title="Tunnel junction" label="tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="4687" end="4692" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4969" end="4984" title="Atmel#Founding and 1980s growth" label="Seeq Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q440704" start="5007" end="5018" title="charge pump" label="charge pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q757489" start="5131" end="5136" title="Atmel" label="Atmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="5285" end="5288" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="5382" end="5383" title="Volt" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q175906" start="5608" end="5627" title="avalanche breakdown" label="avalanche breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445876" start="5634" end="5655" title="hot-carrier injection" label="hot-carrier injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267190" start="5666" end="5691" title="breakdown voltage" label="reverse breakdown voltage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5737" end="5762" title="Field electron emission#Fowler–Nordheim tunneling" label="Fowler–Nordheim tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445876" start="5763" end="5784" title="hot-carrier injection" label="hot-carrier injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="5800" end="5815" title="silicon dioxide" label="silicon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="5834" end="5847" title="Floating-gate MOSFET" label="floating gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183536" start="5889" end="5904" title="tunnel junction" label="tunnel junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="5987" end="5999" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476733" start="6344" end="6363" title="single-event upset" label="single-event effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="6561" end="6577" title="microcontrollers" label="microcontrollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="6717" end="6729" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q849492" start="7164" end="7167" title="Serial Peripheral Interface Bus" label="SPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q750469" start="7169" end="7172" title="I²C" label="I²C"/>
<link wikidata="Q849492" start="7174" end="7183" title="Microwire" label="Microwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865273" start="7185" end="7190" title="UNI/O" label="UNI/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q161688" start="7196" end="7202" title="1-Wire" label="1-Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q766483" start="7353" end="7366" title="Opcode" label="OP-code phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q849492" start="7759" end="7762" title="Serial Peripheral Interface Bus" label="SPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="8239" end="8254" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q862594" start="8672" end="8687" title="real-time clock" label="real-time clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="8698" end="8711" title="potentiometer" label="potentiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515014" start="8722" end="8740" title="Silicon bandgap temperature sensor" label="temperature sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q633454" start="8912" end="8932" title="video game cartridge" label="video game cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="9172" end="9196" title="floating-gate transistor" label="floating-gate transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="9933" end="9945" title="Flash memory" label="Flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="10251" end="10261" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q703656" start="10396" end="10401" title="Ferroelectric RAM" label="FeRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061546" start="10406" end="10410" title="Magnetoresistive RAM" label="MRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="10624" end="10629" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q902877" start="10749" end="10772" title="field electron emission" label="field electron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445876" start="10917" end="10938" title="hot-carrier injection" label="hot-carrier injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="10978" end="10989" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445876" start="11204" end="11225" title="hot-carrier injection" label="hot-carrier injection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11247" end="11272" title="Field_electron_emission#Fowler–Nordheim_tunneling" label="Fowler–Nordheim tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q175906" start="11290" end="11309" title="Avalanche breakdown" label="Avalanche breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227113" start="11312" end="11321" title="DataFlash" label="DataFlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="11324" end="11329" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="11332" end="11344" title="Flash memory" label="Flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q933186" start="11347" end="11367" title="Floating-gate MOSFET" label="Floating-gate MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q572649" start="11370" end="11379" title="Intel HEX" label="Intel HEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374194" start="11396" end="11417" title="Programmer (hardware)" label="Programmer (hardware)"/>
<link wikidata="Q175751" start="11420" end="11438" title="Quantum tunnelling" label="Quantum tunnelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q947746" start="11441" end="11445" title="SREC (file format)" label="SREC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183536" start="11462" end="11477" title="Tunnel junction" label="Tunnel junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q97187383" start="11480" end="11498" title="Read-mostly memory" label="Read-mostly memory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50601" wikidata="Q178194" url="?curid=50601" title="Cystic fibrosis">
<text>Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder inherited in an autosomal recessive manner that impairs the normal clearance of mucus from the lungs, which facilitates the colonization and infection of the lungs by bacteria, notably &quot;Staphylococcus aureus&quot;. CF is a rare genetic disorder that affects mostly the lungs, but also the pancreas, liver, kidneys, and intestine. The hallmark feature of CF is the accumulation of thick mucus in different organs. Long-term issues include difficulty breathing and coughing up mucus as a result of frequent lung infections. Other signs and symptoms may include sinus infections, poor growth, fatty stool, clubbing of the fingers and toes, and infertility in most males. Different people may have different degrees of symptoms.

Cystic fibrosis is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. It is caused by the presence of mutations in both copies (alleles) of the gene encoding the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein. Those with a single working copy are carriers and otherwise mostly healthy. CFTR is involved in the production of sweat, digestive fluids, and mucus. When the CFTR is not functional, secretions that are usually thin instead become thick. The condition is diagnosed by a sweat test and genetic testing. The sweat test measures sodium concentration, as people with cystic fibrosis have abnormally salty sweat, which can often be tasted by parents kissing their children. Screening of infants at birth takes place in some areas of the world.

There is no known cure for cystic fibrosis. Lung infections are treated with antibiotics which may be given intravenously, inhaled, or by mouth. Sometimes, the antibiotic azithromycin is used long-term. Inhaled hypertonic saline and salbutamol may also be useful. Lung transplantation may be an option if lung function continues to worsen. Pancreatic enzyme replacement and fat-soluble vitamin supplementation are important, especially in the young. Airway clearance techniques such as chest physiotherapy may have some short-term benefit, but long-term effects are unclear. The average life expectancy is between 42 and 50 years in the developed world, with a median of 40.7 years. Lung problems are responsible for death in 70% of people with cystic fibrosis.

CF is most common among people of Northern European ancestry, for whom it affects about 1 out of 3,000 newborns, and among which around 1 out of 25 people is a carrier. It is least common in Africans and Asians, though it does occur in all races. It was first recognized as a specific disease by Dorothy Andersen in 1938, with descriptions that fit the condition occurring at least as far back as 1595. The name &quot;cystic fibrosis&quot; refers to the characteristic fibrosis and cysts that form within the pancreas.
==Signs and symptoms==
Cystic fibrosis typically manifests early in life. Newborns and infants with cystic fibrosis tend to have frequent, large, greasy stools (a result of malabsorption) and are underweight for their age. 15–20% of newborns have their small intestine blocked by meconium, often requiring surgery to correct. Newborns occasionally have neonatal jaundice due to blockage of the bile ducts. Children with cystic fibrosis lose excessive salt in their sweat, and parents often notice salt crystallizing on the skin, or a salty taste when they kiss their child.

The primary cause of morbidity and death in people with cystic fibrosis is progressive lung disease, which eventually leads to respiratory failure. This typically begins as a prolonged respiratory infection that continues until treated with antibiotics. Chronic infection of the respiratory tract is nearly universal in people with cystic fibrosis, with &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot;, fungi, and mycobacteria all becoming increasingly common over time. Inflammation of the upper airway results in frequent runny nose and nasal obstruction. Nasal polyps are common, particularly in children and teenagers. As the disease progresses, people tend to have shortness of breath, and a chronic cough that produces sputum. Breathing problems make it increasingly challenging to exercise, and prolonged illness causes those affected to be underweight for their age. In late adolescence or adulthood, people begin to develop severe signs of lung disease: wheezing, digital clubbing, cyanosis, coughing up blood, pulmonary heart disease, and collapsed lung (atelectasis or pneumothorax).

In rare cases, cystic fibrosis can manifest itself as a coagulation disorder. Vitamin K is normally absorbed from breast milk, formula, and later, solid foods. This absorption is impaired in some CF patients. Young children are especially sensitive to vitamin K malabsorptive disorders because only a very small amount of vitamin K crosses the placenta, leaving the child with very low reserves and limited ability to absorb vitamin K from dietary sources after birth. Because clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X are vitamin K–dependent, low levels of vitamin K can result in coagulation problems. Consequently, when a child presents with unexplained bruising, a coagulation evaluation may be warranted to determine whether an underlying disease is present.

===Lungs and sinuses===

Lung disease results from clogging of the airways due to mucus build-up, decreased mucociliary clearance, and resulting inflammation. In later stages, changes in the architecture of the lung, such as pathology in the major airways (bronchiectasis), further exacerbate difficulties in breathing. Other signs include high blood pressure in the lung (pulmonary hypertension), heart failure, difficulties getting enough oxygen to the body (hypoxia), and respiratory failure requiring support with breathing masks, such as bilevel positive airway pressure machines or ventilators. &quot;Staphylococcus aureus&quot;, &quot;Haemophilus influenzae&quot;, and &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot; are the three most common organisms causing lung infections in CF patients. In addition, opportunistic infection due to &quot;Burkholderia cepacia&quot; complex can occur, especially through transmission from patient to patient.

In addition to typical bacterial infections, people with CF more commonly develop other types of lung diseases. Among these is allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, in which the body&#x27;s response to the common fungus &quot;Aspergillus fumigatus&quot; causes worsening of breathing problems. Another is infection with &quot;Mycobacterium avium&quot; complex, a group of bacteria related to tuberculosis, which can cause lung damage and do not respond to common antibiotics.

The mucus in the paranasal sinuses is equally thick and may also cause blockage of the sinus passages, leading to infection. This may cause facial pain, fever, nasal drainage, and headaches. Individuals with CF may develop overgrowth of the nasal tissue (nasal polyps) due to inflammation from chronic sinus infections. Recurrent sinonasal polyps can occur in 10% to 25% of CF patients. These polyps can block the nasal passages and increase breathing difficulties.

Cardiorespiratory complications are the most common causes of death (about 80%) in patients at most CF centers in the United States.

===Gastrointestinal===
Digestive problems are also prevalent in individuals with CF. Approximately 15%-20% of newborns diagnosed with CF experience intestinal blockage (meconium ileus), and other digestive issues may arise due to mucus accumulation in the pancreas. Consequently, there is impaired insulin production, leading to cystic fibrosis-related diabetes mellitus. Moreover, enzyme transport disruption from the pancreas to the intestines results in digestive problems such as recurrent diarrhea or weight loss.

In cystic fibrosis, there is impaired chloride secretion due to the mutation of CFTR. This disrupts the ionic balance, causes impaired bicarbonate secretion, and alters the pH. The pancreatic enzymes that work in a specific pH range cannot act as the chyme is not neutralized by bicarbonate ions. This causes impairment of the digestion process.

The thick mucus seen in the lungs has a counterpart in thickened secretions from the pancreas, an organ responsible for providing digestive juices that help break down food. These secretions block the exocrine movement of the digestive enzymes into the duodenum and result in irreversible damage to the pancreas, often with painful inflammation (pancreatitis). The pancreatic ducts are totally plugged in more advanced cases, usually seen in older children or adolescents. This causes atrophy of the exocrine glands and progressive fibrosis.

In addition, protrusion of internal rectal membranes (rectal prolapse) is more common, occurring in as many as 10% of children with CF, and it is caused by increased fecal volume, malnutrition, and increased intra–abdominal pressure due to coughing.

Individuals with CF also have difficulties absorbing the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K.

In addition to the pancreas problems, people with CF experience more heartburn, intestinal blockage by intussusception, and constipation. Older individuals with CF may develop distal intestinal obstruction syndrome, which occurs when feces becomes thick with mucus (inspissated) and can cause bloating, pain, and incomplete or complete bowel obstruction.

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency occurs in the majority (85–90%) of patients with CF. It is mainly associated with &quot;severe&quot; CFTR mutations, where both alleles are completely nonfunctional (e.g. ΔF508/ΔF508). It occurs in 10–15% of patients with one &quot;severe&quot; and one &quot;mild&quot; CFTR mutation where little CFTR activity still occurs, or where two &quot;mild&quot; CFTR mutations exist. In these milder cases, a sufficient pancreatic exocrine function is still present so enzyme supplementation is not required. Usually, no other GI complications occur in pancreas-sufficient phenotypes, and in general, such individuals usually have excellent growth and development. Despite this, idiopathic chronic pancreatitis can occur in a subset of pancreas-sufficient individuals with CF, and is associated with recurrent abdominal pain and life-threatening complications.

Liver diseases are another common complication in CF patients. The prevalence in studies ranged from 18% at age two to 41% at age 12, with no significant increase thereafter. Another study found that males with CF are more prone to liver diseases compared to females, and those with meconium ileus have an increased risk of liver diseases.

Thickened secretions also may cause liver problems in patients with CF. Bile secreted by the liver to aid in digestion may block the bile ducts, leading to liver damage. Impaired digestion or absorption of lipids can result in steatorrhea. Over time, this can lead to scarring and nodularity (cirrhosis). The liver fails to rid the blood of toxins and does not make important proteins, such as those responsible for blood clotting. Liver disease is the third-most common cause of death associated with CF.

Around 5–7% of people experience liver damage severe enough to cause symptoms: typically gallstones causing biliary colic.

===Endocrine===
The pancreas contains the islets of Langerhans, which are responsible for making insulin, a hormone that helps regulate blood glucose. Damage to the pancreas can lead to loss of the islet cells, leading to a type of diabetes unique to those with the disease. This cystic fibrosis-related diabetes shares characteristics of type 1 and type 2 diabetes, and is one of the principal nonpulmonary complications of CF.

Vitamin D is involved in calcium and phosphate regulation. Poor uptake of vitamin D from the diet because of malabsorption can lead to the bone disease osteoporosis in which weakened bones are more susceptible to fractures.

===Infertility===
Infertility affects both men and women. At least 97% of men with cystic fibrosis are infertile, but not sterile, and can have children with assisted reproductive techniques. The main cause of infertility in men with cystic fibrosis is congenital absence of the vas deferens (which normally connects the testes to the ejaculatory ducts of the penis), but potentially also by other mechanisms causing no sperm, abnormally shaped sperm, and few sperm with poor motility. Many men found to have congenital absence of the vas deferens during evaluation for infertility have a mild, previously undiagnosed form of CF. While females with CF are generally fertile, around 20% of women with CF have fertility difficulties due to thickened cervical mucus or malnutrition. In severe cases, malnutrition disrupts ovulation and causes a lack of menstruation.

==Causes==

CF is caused by having no functional copies (alleles) of the gene cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (&quot;CFTR&quot;). As of 2018, over 1,900 mutations leading to CF have been described, but only 5 of them have a frequency greater than 1% among patients. The most common mutant allele, ΔF508 (also termed F508del), is a deletion (Δ signifying deletion) of three nucleotides that results in a loss of the amino-acid residue phenylalanine (F) at the 508th position of the protein. This mutant allele is already present in 1 in 20 to 25 people of Northern European ancestry; it accounts for 70% of CF cases worldwide and 90% of cases in the United States; however, over 700 other mutant alleles, some of which represent new mutations, can produce CF. Although most people have two working copies (alleles) of the &quot;CFTR&quot; gene, only one is needed to prevent cystic fibrosis. CF develops when neither allele can produce a functional CFTR protein. Thus, CF is considered an autosomal recessive disease.

The &quot;CFTR&quot; gene, found at the q31.2 locus of chromosome 7, is 230,000 base pairs long, and encodes a protein that is 1,480 amino acids long. More specifically, the location is between base pair 117,120,016 and 117,308,718 on the long arm of chromosome 7, region 3, band 1, subband 2, represented as 7q31.2. Structurally, the &quot;CFTR&quot; is a type of gene known as an ABC gene. The product of this gene (the CFTR protein) is a chloride ion channel important in creating sweat, digestive juices, and mucus. This protein possesses two ATP-hydrolyzing domains, which allows the protein to use energy in the form of ATP. It also contains two domains comprising six alpha helices apiece, which allow the protein to cross the cell membrane. A regulatory binding site on the protein allows activation by phosphorylation, mainly by cAMP-dependent protein kinase. The carboxyl terminal of the protein is anchored to the cytoskeleton by a PDZ domain interaction. Most CFTR in lung passages is produced by rare ion-transporting cells that regulate mucus properties.

In addition, the evidence is increasing that genetic modifiers besides &quot;CFTR&quot; modulate the frequency and severity of the disease. One example is mannan-binding lectin, which is involved in innate immunity by facilitating phagocytosis of microorganisms. Polymorphisms in one or both mannan-binding lectin alleles that result in lower circulating levels of the protein are associated with a threefold higher risk of end-stage lung disease, as well as an increased burden of chronic bacterial infections.

===Carriers===
Up to one in 25 individuals of Northern European ancestry is considered a genetic carrier. The disease appears only when two of these carriers have children, as each pregnancy between them has a 25% chance of producing a child with the disease. Although only about one of every 3,000 newborns of the affected ancestry has CF, since the CFTR gene&#x27;s discovery in 1989, over 2,000 variants have been identified, but only about 700 of these have been recognized as responsible for causing CF. Current tests look for the most common mutations.

The mutant alleles screened by the test vary according to a person&#x27;s ethnic group or by the occurrence of CF already in the family. More than 10 million Americans, including one in 25 white Americans, are carriers of one mutant allele of the CF gene. CF is present in other races, though not as frequently as in white individuals. About one in 46 Hispanic Americans, one in 65 African Americans, and one in 90 Asian Americans carry a mutation of the CF gene.

==Pathophysiology==

The &quot;CFTR&quot; gene regulates the transport of salts and water through cell membranes, providing instructions for creating a pathway that allows the passage of chloride ions. A mutation in the CFTR gene can impair the normal function of chloride channels, leading to abnormal transport of chloride ions and water, resulting in the formation of thick and abnormal mucus.

In the pancreatic duct chloride transport occurs through the voltage-gated chloride channels influenced by CFTR (Cystic Fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator). These channels are localised in the apical membrane of epithelial cells in the pancreatic duct.

Several mutations in the &quot;CFTR&quot; gene can occur, and different mutations cause different defects in the CFTR protein, sometimes causing a milder or more severe disease. These protein defects are also targets for drugs which can sometimes restore their function. ΔF508-CFTR gene mutation, which occurs in &gt;90% of patients in the U.S., creates a protein that does not fold normally and is not appropriately transported to the cell membrane, resulting in its degradation.

Other mutations result in proteins that are too short (truncated) because production is ended prematurely. Other mutations produce proteins that do not use energy (in the form of ATP) normally, do not allow chloride, iodide, and thiocyanate to cross the membrane appropriately, and degrade faster than normal. Mutations may also lead to fewer copies of the CFTR protein being produced.

The protein created by this gene is anchored to the outer membrane of cells in the sweat glands, lungs, pancreas, and all other remaining exocrine glands in the body.
The protein spans this membrane and acts as a channel connecting the inner part of the cell (cytoplasm) to the surrounding fluid. This channel is primarily responsible for controlling the movement of halide anions from inside to outside of the cell; however, in the sweat ducts, it facilitates the movement of chloride from the sweat duct into the cytoplasm. When the CFTR protein does not resorb ions in sweat ducts, chloride, and thiocyanate released from sweat glands are trapped inside the ducts and pumped to the skin.

Additionally hypothiocyanite, OSCN, cannot be produced by the immune defense system. Because chloride is negatively charged, this modifies the electrical potential inside and outside the cell that normally causes cations to cross into the cell. Sodium is the most common cation in the extracellular space. The excess chloride within sweat ducts prevents sodium resorption by epithelial sodium channels and the combination of sodium and chloride creates the salt, which is lost in high amounts in the sweat of individuals with CF. This lost salt forms the basis for the sweat test.

Most of the damage in CF is due to blockage of the narrow passages of affected organs with thickened secretions. These blockages lead to remodeling and infection in the lung, damage by accumulated digestive enzymes in the pancreas, blockage of the intestines by thick feces, etc. Several theories have been posited on how the defects in the protein and cellular function cause the clinical effects. The current theory suggests that defective ion transport leads to dehydration in the airway epithelia, thickening mucus. In airway epithelial cells, the cilia exist in between the cell&#x27;s apical surface and mucus in a layer known as airway surface liquid (ASL). The flow of ions from the cell and into this layer is determined by ion channels such as CFTR. CFTR allows chloride ions to be drawn from the cell and into the ASL, but it also regulates another channel called ENac, which allows sodium ions to leave the ASL and enter the respiratory epithelium. CFTR normally inhibits this channel, but if the CFTR is defective, then sodium flows freely from the ASL and into the cell.

As water follows sodium, the depth of ASL will be depleted and the cilia will be left in the mucous layer. As cilia cannot effectively move in a thick, viscous environment, mucociliary clearance is deficient and a buildup of mucus occurs, clogging small airways. The accumulation of more viscous, nutrient-rich mucus in the lungs allows bacteria to hide from the body&#x27;s immune system, causing repeated respiratory infections. The presence of the same CFTR proteins in the pancreatic duct and sweat glands in the skin also causes symptoms in these systems.

===Chronic infections===
The lungs of individuals with cystic fibrosis are colonized and infected by bacteria from an early age. These bacteria, which often spread among individuals with CF, thrive in the altered mucus, which collects in the small airways of the lungs. This mucus leads to the formation of bacterial microenvironments known as biofilms that are difficult for immune cells and antibiotics to penetrate. Viscous secretions and persistent respiratory infections repeatedly damage the lungs by gradually remodeling the airways, which makes infection even more difficult to eradicate. The natural history of CF lung infections and airway remodeling is poorly understood, largely due to the immense spatial and temporal heterogeneity both within and between the microbiomes of CF patients.

Over time, the types of bacteria and their characteristics change in individuals with CF. In the initial stage, common bacteria such as &quot;S. aureus&quot; and &quot;H. influenzae&quot; colonize and infect the lungs. Eventually, &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot; (and sometimes &quot;Burkholderia cepacia&quot;) dominates. By 18 years of age, 80% of patients with classic CF harbor &quot;P. aeruginosa&quot;, and 3.5% harbor &quot;B. cepacia&quot;. Once within the lungs, these bacteria adapt to the environment and develop resistance to commonly used antibiotics. &quot;Pseudomonas&quot; can develop special characteristics that allow the formation of large colonies, known as &quot;mucoid&quot; &quot;Pseudomonas&quot;, which are rarely seen in people who do not have CF. Scientific evidence suggests the interleukin 17 pathway plays a key role in resistance and modulation of the inflammatory response during &quot;P. aeruginosa&quot; infection in CF. In particular, interleukin 17-mediated immunity plays a double-edged activity during chronic airways infection; on one side, it contributes to the control of &quot;P. aeruginosa&quot; burden, while on the other, it propagates exacerbated pulmonary neutrophilia and tissue remodeling.

Infection can spread by passing between different individuals with CF. In the past, people with CF often participated in summer &quot;CF camps&quot; and other recreational gatherings. Hospitals grouped patients with CF into common areas and routine equipment (such as nebulizers) was not sterilized between individual patients. This led to the transmission of more dangerous strains of bacteria among groups of patients. As a result, individuals with CF are now routinely isolated from one another in the healthcare setting, and healthcare providers are encouraged to wear gowns and gloves when examining patients with CF to limit the spread of virulent bacterial strains.

CF patients may also have their airways chronically colonized by filamentous fungi (such as &quot;Aspergillus fumigatus&quot;, &quot;Scedosporium apiospermum&quot;, &quot;Aspergillus terreus&quot;) and/or yeasts (such as &quot;Candida albicans&quot;); other filamentous fungi less commonly isolated include &quot;Aspergillus flavus&quot; and &quot;Aspergillus nidulans&quot; (occur transiently in CF respiratory secretions) and &quot;Exophiala dermatitidis&quot; and &quot;Scedosporium prolificans&quot; (chronic airway-colonizers); some filamentous fungi such as &quot;Penicillium emersonii&quot; and &quot;Acrophialophora fusispora&quot; are encountered in patients almost exclusively in the context of CF. Defective mucociliary clearance characterizing CF is associated with local immunological disorders. In addition, prolonged therapy with antibiotics and corticosteroid treatments may also facilitate fungal growth. Although the clinical relevance of the fungal airway colonization is still a matter of debate, filamentous fungi may contribute to the local inflammatory response and therefore to the progressive deterioration of the lung function, as often happens with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis&quot; &quot;– the most common fungal disease in the context of CF, involving a Th2-driven immune response to &quot;Aspergillus&quot; species.

==Diagnosis==
Diagnosis of CF is initially based on clinical findings indicative of respiratory diseases, various digestive problems, meconium ileus, and more. Definitive diagnosis may involve genetic testing based on family history or chloride concentration testing in sweat, which is relatively high (&gt;60mEq/L) in individuals with CF.

In many localities all newborns are screened for cystic fibrosis within the first few days of life, typically by blood test for high levels of immunoreactive trypsinogen. Newborns with positive tests or those who are otherwise suspected of having cystic fibrosis based on symptoms or family history, then undergo a sweat test. An electric current is used to drive pilocarpine into the skin, stimulating sweating. The sweat is collected and analyzed for salt levels. Having unusually high levels of chloride in the sweat suggests CFTR is dysfunctional; the person is then diagnosed with cystic fibrosis. Genetic testing is also available to identify the CFTR mutations typically associated with cystic fibrosis. Many laboratories can test for the 30–96 most common CFTR mutations, which can identify over 90% of people with cystic fibrosis.

People with CF have less thiocyanate and hypothiocyanite in their saliva and mucus (Banfi et al.). In the case of milder forms of CF, transepithelial potential difference measurements can be helpful. CF can also be diagnosed by the identification of mutations in the CFTR gene.

In many cases, a parent makes the diagnosis because the infant tastes salty. Immunoreactive trypsinogen levels can be increased in individuals who have a single mutated copy of the &quot;CFTR&quot; gene (carriers) or, in rare instances, in individuals with two normal copies of the &quot;CFTR&quot; gene. Due to these false positives, CF screening in newborns can be controversial.

By 2010 every US state had instituted newborn screening programs and 21 European countries had programs in at least some regions.

===Prenatal===
Women who are pregnant or couples planning a pregnancy can have themselves tested for the &quot;CFTR&quot; gene mutations to determine the risk that their child will be born with CF. Testing is typically performed first on one or both parents and, if the risk of CF is high, testing on the fetus is performed. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends all people thinking of becoming pregnant be tested to see if they are a carrier.

Because the development of CF in the fetus requires each parent to pass on a mutated copy of the &quot;CFTR&quot; gene and because CF testing is expensive, testing is often performed initially on one parent. If testing shows that the parent is a &quot;CFTR&quot; gene mutation carrier, the other parent is tested to calculate the risk that their children will have CF. CF can result from more than a thousand different mutations. , typically only the most common mutations are tested for, such as ΔF508. Most commercially available tests look for 32 or fewer different mutations. If a family has a known uncommon mutation, specific screening for that mutation can be performed. Because not all known mutations are found on current tests, a negative screen does not guarantee that a child will not have CF.

During pregnancy, testing can be performed on the placenta (chorionic villus sampling) or the fluid around the fetus (amniocentesis). However, chorionic villus sampling has a risk of fetal death of one in 100 and amniocentesis of one in 200; a recent study has indicated this may be much lower, about one in 1,600.

Economically, for carrier couples of cystic fibrosis, when comparing preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) with natural conception (NC) followed by prenatal testing and abortion of affected pregnancies, PGD provides net economic benefits up to a maternal age around 40 years, after which NC, prenatal testing, and abortion have a higher economic benefit.

==Management==
Treatment for CF is diverse, tailored to different symptoms, and includes various devices, inhalation medications to alleviate respiratory difficulties, oral enzyme supplements to address exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and, in some cases, surgical interventions for conditions such as meconium ileus. While treatment alleviates symptoms and prevents potential complications, there is currently no cure for the disease.

The management of CF has improved significantly over the past 70 years. While infants born with it 70 years ago would have been unlikely to live beyond their first year, infants today are likely to live well into adulthood. Advances in the treatment of cystic fibrosis have meant that people with cystic fibrosis can live a fuller life less encumbered by their condition. The cornerstones of management are the proactive treatment of airway infection, encouragement of good nutrition, and an active lifestyle. Pulmonary rehabilitation as a management of CF continues throughout a person&#x27;s life, and is aimed at maximizing organ function, and therefore the quality of life. Occupational therapists use energy conservation techniques in the rehabilitation process for patients with cystic fibrosis. Examples of energy conservation techniques are ergonomic principles, pursed lip breathing, and diaphragmatic breathing. People with CF tend to have fatigue and dyspnoea due to chronic pulmonary infections, so reducing the amount of energy spent during activities can help people feel better and gain more independence. At best, current treatments delay the decline in organ function. Because of the wide variation in disease symptoms, treatment typically occurs at specialist multidisciplinary centers and is tailored to the individual. Targets for therapy are the lungs, gastrointestinal tract (including pancreatic enzyme supplements), the reproductive organs (including assisted reproductive technology), and psychological support.

The most consistent aspect of therapy in CF is limiting and treating the lung damage caused by thick mucus and infection, with the goal of maintaining quality of life. Intravenous, inhaled, and oral antibiotics are used to treat chronic and acute infections. Mechanical devices and inhalation medications are used to alter and clear the thickened mucus. These therapies, while effective, can be extremely time-consuming. Oxygen therapy at home is recommended in those with significantly low oxygen levels. Many people with CF use probiotics, which are thought to be able to correct intestinal dysbiosis and inflammation, but the clinical trial evidence regarding the effectiveness of probiotics for reducing pulmonary exacerbations in people with CF is uncertain.

===Antibiotics===
Many people with CF are on one or more antibiotics at all times, even when healthy, to prophylactically suppress infection. The choice of antibiotics for cystic fibrosis depends on the specific bacteria that are causing the infection, as well as the patient&#x27;s age, weight, and other medical conditions. Antibiotics are necessary whenever pneumonia is suspected or a noticeable decline in lung function is seen, and are usually chosen based on the results of a sputum analysis and the person&#x27;s past response. This prolonged therapy often necessitates hospitalization and insertion of a more permanent IV such as a peripherally inserted central catheter or Port-a-Cath. Inhaled therapy with antibiotics such as tobramycin, colistin, and aztreonam is often given for months at a time to improve lung function by impeding the growth of colonized bacteria. Inhaled antibiotic therapy helps lung function by fighting infection, but also has significant drawbacks such as development of antibiotic resistance, tinnitus, and changes in the voice. Inhaled levofloxacin may be used to treat &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot; in people with cystic fibrosis who are infected.

Antibiotics by mouth such as ciprofloxacin or azithromycin are given to help prevent infection or to control ongoing infection. The aminoglycoside antibiotics (e.g. tobramycin) used can cause hearing loss, damage to the balance system in the inner ear or kidney failure with long-term use. To prevent these side-effects, the amount of antibiotics in the blood is routinely measured and adjusted accordingly.

Currently, no reliable clinical trial evidence shows the effectiveness of antibiotics for pulmonary exacerbations in people with cystic fibrosis and &quot;Burkholderia cepacia&quot; complex or for the use of antibiotics to treat nontuberculous mycobacteria in people with CF.

==== &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot; ====
The early management of &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot; infection is usually suggested using nebulised antibiotics with or without oral antibiotics to remove the bacteria from the person&#x27;s airways for some time. When choosing antibiotics to treat lung infections caused by &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot; in people with cystic fibrosis, it is still unclear whether the choice of antibiotics should be based on the results of testing antibiotics separately (one at a time) or in combination with each other. It is also unclear if these treatment approaches for the &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot; infection improve the person&#x27;s quality of life or lifespan. The negative side effects of antibiotics for this infection are also poorly studied. Intravenous antibiotic therapy to treat &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot; infections is not any better than antibiotics taken orally.

==== Methicillin-resistant &quot;Staphylococcus aureus&quot; ====
Methicillin-resistant &quot;Staphylococcus aureus&quot; (MRSA) infections can be dangerous for people with cystic fibrosis and can worsen lung damage leading to more rapid decline. Early antibiotic treatment is standard; however, further research is needed to determine longer-term effects and benefits (3–6 months after the treatment or longer) and survival rates associated with different treatment options.

==== Antibiotic adjuvant therapy ====
Factors related to antibiotic use, the chronicity of the disease, and the emergence of resistant bacteria demand more exploration for different strategies such as antibiotic adjuvant therapy. Antibiotic adjuvant therapy refers to therapeutic approaches that aim to improve the action of antibiotics such a pharmaceutical agents or supplements that impact the virulence of the bacterium or that change the susceptibility of the organism to the antibiotic so that the antibiotics are more effective. There is no strong evidence to recommend specific antibiotic adjuvant therapies such as β-carotene, nitric oxide, zinc supplements, or KB001-A.

===Other medication===

Aerosolized medications that help loosen secretions include dornase alfa and hypertonic saline. Dornase is a recombinant human deoxyribonuclease, which breaks down DNA in the sputum, thus decreasing its viscosity. Dornase alpha improves lung function and probably decreases the risk of exacerbations but there is insufficient evidence to know if it is more or less effective than other similar medications. Dornase alpha may improve lung function; however, there is no strong evidence that it is better than other hyperosmolar therapies.

Denufosol, an investigational drug, opens an alternative chloride channel, helping to liquefy mucus. Whether inhaled corticosteroids are useful is unclear, but stopping inhaled corticosteroid therapy is safe. There is weak evidence that corticosteroid treatment may cause harm by interfering with growth. Pneumococcal vaccination has not been studied . , there is no clear evidence from randomized controlled trials that the influenza vaccine is beneficial for people with cystic fibrosis.

Ivacaftor is a medication taken by mouth for the treatment of CF due to several specific mutations responsive to ivacaftor-induced CFTR protein enhancement. It improves lung function by about 10%; however, it is expensive. The first year it was on the market, the list price was over $300,000 per year in the United States. In July 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved lumacaftor/ivacaftor. In 2018, the FDA approved the combination ivacaftor/tezacaftor; the manufacturer announced a list price of $292,000 per year. Tezacaftor helps move the CFTR protein to the correct position on the cell surface, and is designed to treat people with the F508del mutation.

In 2019, the combination drug elexacaftor/ivacaftor/tezacaftor, marketed as Trikafta,was approved for CF patients over the age of 12 in the United States. In 2021, this was extended to include patients over the age of 6. In Europe this drug was approved in 2020 and marketed as Kaftrio. It is used in those that have a f508del mutation, which occurs in about 90% of patients with cystic fibrosis. According to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, &quot;this medicine represents the single greatest therapeutic advancement in the history of CF, offering a treatment for the underlying cause of the disease that could eventually bring modulator therapy to 90 percent of people with CF.&quot; In a clinical trial, participants who were administered the combination drug experienced a subsequent 63% decrease in pulmonary exacerbations and a 41.8 mmol/L decrease in sweat chloride concentration. By mitigating a repertoire of symptoms associated with cystic fibrosis, the combination drug significantly improved quality-of-life metrics among patients with the disease as well. The combination drug is also known to interact with CYP3A inducers, such as carbamazepine used in the treatment of bipolar disorder, causing elexafaftor/ivacaftor/tezacaftor to circulate in the body at decreased concentrations. As such, concurrent use is not recommended. The list price in the US is going to be $311,000 per year; however, insurance may cover much of the cost of the drug.

Ursodeoxycholic acid, a bile salt, has been used; however, there is insufficient data to show if it is effective.

The combination vanzacaftor/tezacaftor/deutivacaftor (Alyftrek) was approved for medical use in the United States in December 2024.

===Nutrient supplementation===
It is uncertain whether vitamin A or beta-carotene supplementation has any effect on eye and skin problems caused by vitamin A deficiency.

There is no strong evidence that people with cystic fibrosis can prevent osteoporosis by increasing their intake of vitamin D.

For people with vitamin E deficiency and cystic fibrosis, there is evidence that vitamin E supplementation may improve vitamin E levels, although it is still uncertain what effect supplementation has on vitamin E-specific deficiency disorders or on lung function.

Robust evidence regarding the effects of vitamin K supplementation in people with cystic fibrosis is lacking as of 2020.

Various studies have examined the effects of omega-3 fatty acid supplementation for people with cystic fibrosis but the evidence is uncertain whether it has any benefits or adverse effects.

===Procedures===
Several mechanical techniques are used to dislodge sputum and encourage its expectoration. One technique good for short-term airway clearance is chest physiotherapy where a respiratory therapist percusses an individual&#x27;s chest by hand several times a day, to loosen up secretions. This &quot;percussive effect&quot; can be administered also through specific devices that use chest wall oscillation or intrapulmonary percussive ventilator. Other methods such as biphasic cuirass ventilation, and associated clearance mode available in such devices, integrate a cough assistance phase, as well as a vibration phase for dislodging secretions. These are portable and adapted for home use.

Another technique is positive expiratory pressure physiotherapy which consists of providing back pressure to the airways during expiration. This effect is provided by devices that consist of a mask or a mouthpiece in which resistance is applied only during the expiration phase. Operating principles of this technique seem to be the increase of gas pressure behind mucus through collateral ventilation along with a temporary increase in functional residual capacity preventing the early collapse of small airways during exhalation.

As lung disease worsens, mechanical breathing support may become necessary. Individuals with CF may need to wear special masks at night to help push air into their lungs. These machines, known as bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) ventilators, help prevent low blood oxygen levels during sleep. Non-invasive ventilators may be used during physical therapy to improve sputum clearance. It is not known if this type of therapy has an impact on pulmonary exacerbations or disease progression. It is unknown what role non-invasive ventilation therapy has in improving exercise capacity in people with cystic fibrosis. However, the authors noted that &quot;non-invasive ventilation may be a useful adjunct to other airway clearance techniques, particularly in people with cystic fibrosis who have difficulty expectorating sputum&quot;. During severe illness, a tube may be placed in the throat (a procedure known as a tracheostomy) to enable breathing supported by a ventilator.

For children, preliminary studies show massage therapy may help people and their families&#x27; quality of life.

Some lung infections require surgical removal of the infected part of the lung. If this is necessary many times, lung function is severely reduced. The most effective treatment options for people with CF who have spontaneous or recurrent pneumothoraces is not clear.

===Transplantation===
Lung transplantation may become necessary for individuals with CF as lung function and exercise tolerance decline. Although single lung transplantation is possible in other diseases, individuals with CF must have both lungs replaced because the remaining lung might contain bacteria that could infect the transplanted lung. A pancreatic or liver transplant may be performed at the same time to alleviate liver disease and/or diabetes. Lung transplantation is considered when lung function declines to the point where assistance from mechanical devices is required or someone&#x27;s survival is threatened. According to &quot;Merck Manual&quot;, &quot;bilateral lung transplantation for severe lung disease is becoming more routine and more successful with experience and improved techniques. Among adults with CF, median survival posttransplant is about 9 years.&quot;

===Other aspects===
Newborns with intestinal obstruction typically require surgery, whereas adults with distal intestinal obstruction syndrome typically do not. Treatment of pancreatic insufficiency by replacement of missing digestive enzymes allows the duodenum to properly absorb nutrients and vitamins that would otherwise be lost in the feces. However, the best dosage and form of pancreatic enzyme replacement are unclear, as are the risks and long-term effectiveness of this treatment.

So far, no large-scale research involving the incidence of atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease in adults with cystic fibrosis has been conducted. This is likely because the vast majority of people with cystic fibrosis do not live long enough to develop clinically significant atherosclerosis or coronary heart disease.

Diabetes is the most common nonpulmonary complication of CF. It mixes features of type 1 and type 2 diabetes and is recognized as a distinct entity, cystic fibrosis-related diabetes. While oral antidiabetic drugs are sometimes used, the recommended treatment is the use of insulin injections or an insulin pump, and, unlike in type 1 and 2 diabetes, dietary restrictions are not recommended. While Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is relatively common in people with cystic fibrosis, the evidence about the effectiveness of antibiotics for &quot;S. maltophilia&quot; is uncertain.

Bisphosphonates taken by mouth or intravenously can be used to improve bone mineral density in people with cystic fibrosis, but there is no proof that this reduces fractures or increases survival rates. When taking bisphosphates intravenously, adverse effects such as pain and flu-like symptoms can be an issue. The adverse effects of bisphosphates taken by mouth on the gastrointestinal tract are unknown.

Poor growth may be avoided by insertion of a feeding tube for increasing food energy through supplemental feeds or by administration of injected growth hormone.

Sinus infections are treated by prolonged courses of antibiotics. The development of nasal polyps or other chronic changes within the nasal passages may severely limit airflow through the nose, and over time reduce the person&#x27;s sense of smell. Sinus surgery is often used to alleviate nasal obstruction and to limit further infections. Nasal steroids such as fluticasone propionate are used to decrease nasal inflammation.

Female infertility may be overcome by assisted reproduction technology, particularly embryo transfer techniques. Male infertility caused by the absence of the vas deferens may be overcome with testicular sperm extraction, collecting sperm cells directly from the testicles. If the collected sample contains too few sperm cells to likely have spontaneous fertilization, intracytoplasmic sperm injection can be performed. Third party reproduction is also a possibility for women with CF. Whether taking antioxidants affects outcomes is unclear.

Physical exercise is usually part of outpatient care for people with cystic fibrosis. Aerobic exercise seems to be beneficial for aerobic exercise capacity, lung function, and health-related quality of life; however, the quality of the evidence was poor.

Due to the use of aminoglycoside antibiotics, ototoxicity is common. Symptoms may include &quot;tinnitus, hearing loss, hyperacusis, aural fullness, dizziness, and vertigo&quot;.

=== Gastrointestinal ===
Problems with the gastrointestinal system including constipation and obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract including distal intestinal obstruction syndrome are frequent complications for people with cystic fibrosis. Treatment of gastrointestinal problems is required in order to prevent a complete obstruction, reduce other CF symptoms, and improve the quality of life. While stool softeners, laxatives, and prokinetics (GI-focused treatments) are often suggested, there is no clear consensus from experts as to which approach is the best and comes with the least risks. Mucolytics or systemic treatments aimed at dysfunctional CFTR are also sometimes suggested to improve symptoms. The evidence supporting these recommendations is very weak and more research is needed to understand how to prevent and treat GI problems in people with CF. In addition, there is a risk of gastrointestinal malignancy, especially in the transplanted patient, and screening procedures may be considered at an earlier age. 

==Prognosis==
The prognosis for cystic fibrosis has improved due to earlier diagnosis through screening and better treatment and access to health care. In 1959, the median age of survival of children with CF in the United States was six months.
In 2010, survival is estimated to be 37 years for women and 40 for men. In Canada, median survival increased from 24 years in 1982 to 47.7 in 2007. In the United States those born with CF in 2016 have a predicted life expectancy of 47.7 when cared for in specialty clinics. Due to the recent development of new treatments, such as CFTR modulators, life expectancy has increased rapidly during recent years. In 2020 the median predicted life expectancy was around 59 years, although there are uncertainties in the estimates due to the low number of annual deaths for persons with cystic fibrosis.

In the US, of those with CF who are more than 18 years old as of 2009, 92% had graduated from high school, 67% had at least some college education, 15% were disabled, 9% were unemployed, 56% were single, and 39% were married or living with a partner.

===Quality of life===
Chronic illnesses can be difficult to manage. CF is a chronic illness that affects the &quot;digestive and respiratory tracts resulting in generalized malnutrition and chronic respiratory infections&quot;. The thick secretions clog the airways in the lungs, which often cause inflammation and severe lung infections. If it is compromised, it affects the quality of life of someone with CF and their ability to complete such tasks as everyday chores.

According to Schmitz and Goldbeck (2006), CF significantly increases emotional stress on both the individual and the family, &quot;and the necessary time-consuming daily treatment routine may have further negative effects on quality of life&quot;. However, Havermans and colleagues (2006) have established that young outpatients with CF who have participated in the Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised &quot;rated some quality of life domains higher than did their parents&quot;. Consequently, outpatients with CF have a more positive outlook for themselves. As Merck Manual notes, &quot;with appropriate support, most patients can make an age-appropriate adjustment at home and school. Despite myriad problems, the educational, occupational, and marital successes of patients are impressive.&quot;

Furthermore, there are many ways to enhance the quality of life in CF patients. Exercise is promoted to increase lung function. Integrating an exercise regimen into the CF patient&#x27;s daily routine can significantly improve quality of life. No definitive cure for CF is known, but diverse medications are used, such as mucolytics, bronchodilators, steroids, and antibiotics, that have the purpose of loosening mucus, expanding airways, decreasing inflammation, and fighting lung infections, respectively.

==Epidemiology==
Cystic fibrosis is the most common life-limiting autosomal recessive disease among people of European heritage. In the United States, about 30,000 individuals have CF; most are diagnosed by six months of age. In Canada, about 4,000 people have CF. Around 1 in 25 people of European descent, and one in 30 of white Americans, is a carrier of a CF mutation. Although CF is less common in these groups, roughly one in 46 Hispanics, one in 65 Africans, and one in 90 Asians carry at least one abnormal &quot;CFTR&quot; gene. Ireland has the world&#x27;s highest prevalence of CF, at one in 1353; Japan&#x27;s prevalence of CF is among the lowest in the world, at one in 350,000.

Although technically a rare disease, CF is ranked as one of the most widespread life-shortening genetic diseases. It is most common among nations in the Western world. An exception is Finland, where only one in 80 people carries a CF mutation. The World Health Organization states, &quot;In the European Union, one in 2000–3000 newborns is found to be affected by CF&quot;. In the United States, one in 3,500 children is born with CF. In 1997, about one in 3,300 white children in the United States was born with CF. In contrast, only one in 15,000 African American children have it, and in Asian Americans, the rate was even lower at one in 32,000.

Cystic fibrosis is diagnosed equally in males and females. For reasons that remain unclear, data have shown that males tend to have a longer life expectancy than females, though recent studies suggest this gender gap may no longer exist, perhaps due to improvements in health care facilities. A recent study from Ireland identified a link between the female hormone estrogen and worse outcomes in CF.

The distribution of CF alleles varies among populations. The frequency of ΔF508 carriers has been estimated at one in 200 in northern Sweden, one in 143 in Lithuanians, and one in 38 in Denmark. No ΔF508 carriers were found among 171 Finns and 151 Saami people. ΔF508 does occur in Finland, but it is a minority allele there. CF is known to occur in only 20 families (pedigrees) in Finland.

===Evolution===
The ΔF508 mutation is estimated to have occurred up to 52,000 years ago. Numerous hypotheses have been advanced as to why such a lethal allele has persisted and spread in the human population. Other common autosomal recessive diseases such as sickle-cell anemia have been found to protect carriers from other diseases, an evolutionary trade-off known as heterozygote advantage. Resistance to the following have all been proposed as possible sources of heterozygote advantage:
* Cholera: With the discovery that cholera toxin requires normal host CFTR proteins to function properly, it was hypothesized that carriers of mutant &quot;CFTR&quot; alleles benefited from resistance to cholera and other causes of diarrhea. Further studies have not confirmed this hypothesis.
* Typhoid: Normal CFTR proteins are also essential for the entry of &quot;Salmonella&quot; Typhi into cells, suggesting that carriers of mutant &quot;CFTR&quot; genes might be resistant to typhoid fever. No &quot;in vivo&quot; study has yet confirmed this. In both cases, the low level of cystic fibrosis outside of Europe, in places where both cholera and typhoid fever are endemic, is not immediately explicable.
* Diarrhea: The prevalence of CF in Europe might be connected with the development of cattle domestication. In this hypothesis, carriers of a single mutant &quot;CFTR&quot; allele had some protection from diarrhea caused by lactose intolerance, before the mutations that created lactose tolerance appeared.
* Tuberculosis: Another possible explanation is that carriers of the mutant allele could have some resistance to tuberculosis. This hypothesis is based on the thesis that &quot;CFTR&quot; mutant allele carriers have insufficient action in one of their enzymes – arylsulphatase – which is necessary for &quot;Mycobacterium tuberculosis&quot; virulence. As &quot;M. tuberculosis&quot; would use its host&#x27;s sources to affect the individual, and due to the lack of enzyme it could not present its virulence, being a carrier of &quot;CFTR &quot;mutant allele could provide resistance against tuberculosis.

==History==

CF is supposed to have appeared about 3,000 BC because of the migration of people, gene mutations, and new conditions in nourishment. Although the entire clinical spectrum of CF was not recognized until the 1930s, certain aspects of CF were identified much earlier. Indeed, literature from Germany and Switzerland in the 18th century warned (&quot;Woe to the child who tastes salty from a kiss on the forehead, for he is bewitched and soon must die&quot;), recognizing the association between the salt loss in CF and illness.

In the 19th century, Carl von Rokitansky described a case of fetal death with meconium peritonitis, a complication of meconium ileus associated with CF. Meconium ileus was first described in 1905 by Karl Landsteiner. In 1936, Guido Fanconi described a connection between celiac disease, cystic fibrosis of the pancreas, and bronchiectasis.

In 1938, Dorothy Hansine Andersen published an article, &quot;Cystic Fibrosis of the Pancreas and Its Relation to Celiac Disease: a Clinical and Pathological Study&quot;, in the &quot;American Journal of Diseases of Children&quot;. She was the first to describe the characteristic cystic fibrosis of the pancreas and to correlate it with the lung and intestinal disease prominent in CF. She also first hypothesized that CF was a recessive disease and first used pancreatic enzyme replacement to treat affected children. In 1952, Paul di Sant&#x27;Agnese discovered abnormalities in sweat electrolytes; a sweat test was developed and improved over the next decade.

The first linkage between CF and another marker (paraoxonase) was found in 1985 by Hans Eiberg, indicating that only one locus exists for CF. In 1988, the first mutation for CF, ΔF508, was discovered by Francis Collins, Lap-Chee Tsui, and John R. Riordan on the seventh chromosome. Subsequent research has found over 1,000 different mutations that cause CF.

Because mutations in the &quot;CFTR&quot; gene are typically small, classical genetics techniques have been unable to accurately pinpoint the mutated gene. Using protein markers, gene-linkage studies were able to map the mutation to chromosome 7. Chromosome walking and chromosome jumping techniques were then used to identify and sequence the gene. In 1989, Lap-Chee Tsui led a team of researchers at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto that discovered the gene responsible for CF. CF represents a classic example of how a human genetic disorder was elucidated strictly by the process of forward genetics.

==Research==
People with CF may be listed in a disease registry that allows researchers and doctors to track health results and identify candidates for clinical trials.

===Gene therapy===
Gene therapy has been explored as a potential cure for CF. Results from clinical trials have shown limited success , and using gene therapy as routine therapy is not suggested. A small study published in 2015 found a small benefit.

The focus of much CF gene therapy research is aimed at trying to place a normal copy of the &quot;CFTR&quot; gene into affected cells. Transferring the normal &quot;CFTR&quot; gene into the affected epithelial cells would result in the production of functional CFTR protein in all target cells, without adverse reactions or an inflammation response; this is known as somatic cell therapy. To prevent the lung manifestations of CF, only 5–10% of the normal amount of CFTR gene expression is needed. Multiple approaches have been tested for gene transfer, such as liposomes and viral vectors in animal models and clinical trials. However, both methods were found to be relatively inefficient treatment options, mainly because very few cells take up the vector and express the gene, so the treatment has little effect. Additionally, problems have been noted in cDNA recombination, such that the gene introduced by the treatment is rendered unusable. There has been a functional repair in culture of CFTR by CRISPR/Cas9 in intestinal stem cell organoids of cystic fibrosis patients.

===Bacteriophage therapy===
Bacteriophage therapy (phage therapy) is being studied for multidrug-resistant bacteria in people with CF. Bacteriophage therapy is a treatment method that uses viruses, known as bacteriophages, to target and destroy harmful bacteria in the body. Unlike antibiotics, which can kill a wide range of bacteria and potentially disrupt the body&#x27;s normal flora, phage therapy is highly specific, targeting only the harmful bacteria while leaving the beneficial ones unharmed. As such, bacteriophage therapy is a promising alternative for treating infections caused by multidrug-resistant bacteria, such as Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa in CF patients, which are often protected by biofilms and thus resistant to conventional antibiotics.

Bacteriophage therapy uses viruses as antimicrobial agents to overcome the antibiotic resistance in bacteria with biofilms Phage therapy is used to treat the Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in the lungs, which is frequently seen in cystic fibrosis patients, as these bacteria produce biofilms which give them multi-drug resistance.

===Gene modulators===
Several small molecules that aim at compensating various mutations of the &quot;CFTR&quot; gene are under development. CFTR modulator therapies has been used instead of other types of genetic therapies. These therapies focus on the expression of a genetic mutation instead of the mutated gene itself. Modulators are split into two classes: potentiators and correctors. Potentiators act on the CFTR ion channels that are embedded in the cell membrane, and these drugs help open up the channel to allow transmembrane flow. Correctors are meant to assist in the transportation of nascent proteins, proteins that are formed by ribosomes before it is morphed into a specific shape, to the cell surface to be implemented into the cell membrane.

Most target the transcription stage of genetic expression. One approach has been to try and develop medication that get the ribosome to overcome the stop codon and produce a full-length CFTR protein. About 10% of CF results from a premature stop codon in the DNA, leading to early termination of protein synthesis and truncated proteins. These drugs target nonsense mutations such as G542X, which consists of the amino acid glycine in position 542 being replaced by a stop codon. Aminoglycoside antibiotics interfere with protein synthesis and error correction. In some cases, they can cause the cell to overcome a premature stop codon by inserting a random amino acid, thereby allowing the expression of a full-length protein. Future research for these modulators is focused on the cellular targets that can be affected by a change in a gene&#x27;s expression. Otherwise, genetic therapy will be used as a treatment when modulator therapies do not work given that 10% of people with cystic fibrosis are not affected by these drugs.

Elexacaftor/ivacaftor/tezacaftor was approved in the United States in 2019 for cystic fibrosis. This combination of previously developed medicines can treat up to 90% of people with cystic fibrosis. This medication restores some effectiveness of the CFTR protein so that it can work as an ion channel on the cell&#x27;s surface.

===Ecological therapy===
It has previously been shown that inter-species interactions are an important contributor to the pathology of CF lung infections. Examples include the production of antibiotic degrading enzymes such as β-lactamases and the production of metabolic by-products such as short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) by anaerobic species, which can enhance the pathogenicity of traditional pathogens such as &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot;. Due to this, it has been suggested that the direct alteration of CF microbial community composition and metabolic function would provide an alternative to traditional antibiotic therapies.

===Antisense therapy===
Antisense therapy is being researched to treat a subset of mutations that have limited or no response to CFTR modulators. Such mutations fall into two classes: splicing (e.g., c.3718-2477C&gt;T) and nonsense (e.g., G542X, W1282X), both of which result in very low expression of CFTR protein, although the protein itself is usually unaffected. This is contrary to the more common mutations such as ΔF508 which have normal CFTR expression but in a non-functional form. Modulators serve only to correct these aberrant proteins and are of little to no benefit in the case of insufficient expression. Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) can solve this problem through the promotion of mRNA degradation or by changing pre-mRNA splicing, nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, or translation, thus increasing CFTR expression.

==Society and culture==
* &quot;Salt in My Soul: An Unfinished Life&quot;, a posthumous memoir by Mallory Smith, a Californian with CF
* &quot;&quot;, a 1997 documentary film
* &quot;65_RedRoses&quot;, a 2009 documentary film
* &quot;Breathing for a Living&quot;, a memoir by Laura Rothenberg
* &quot;Every Breath I Take: Surviving and Thriving with Cystic Fibrosis&quot;, book by Claire Wineland
* &quot;Five Feet Apart&quot;, a 2019 romantic drama film starring Cole Sprouse and Haley Lu Richardson
* &quot;Orla Tinsley: Warrior&quot;, a 2018 documentary film about CF campaigner Orla Tinsley
* The performance art of Martin O&#x27;Brien
* &quot;Hi Nanna&quot;, 2023 Telugu-language film about a girl with CF
* &quot;Sickboy&quot;, a podcast hosted by Jeremie Saunders about cystic fibrosis and other chronic illnesses
* Continent Chasers travel and cystic fibrosis blogs informative website about a man with cystic fibrosis travelling the world 

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Search GeneCards for genes involved in cystic fibrosis
* Cystic Fibrosis Mutation Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178194" start="0" end="15" title="Cystic fibrosis" label="Cystic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178194" start="17" end="19" title="Cystic fibrosis" label="CF"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="26" end="42" title="genetic disorder" label="genetic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="59" end="78" title="autosomal recessive" label="autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q259346" start="123" end="128" title="Sputum" label="mucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="138" end="143" title="lungs" label="lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q188121" start="234" end="255" title="Staphylococcus aureus" label="Staphylococcus aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="337" end="345" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="347" end="352" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="354" end="360" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="367" end="376" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="486" end="506" title="Shortness of breath" label="difficulty breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="553" end="568" title="pneumonia" label="lung infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="586" end="593" title="symptom" label="symptom"/>
<link wikidata="Q183344" start="607" end="623" title="Sinusitis" label="sinus infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497481" start="625" end="636" title="failure to thrive" label="poor growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549428" start="638" end="649" title="Steatorrhea" label="fatty stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340669" start="651" end="659" title="Nail clubbing" label="clubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="689" end="700" title="infertility" label="infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="809" end="828" title="autosomal recessive" label="autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="911" end="915" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q420470" start="929" end="980" title="cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator" label="cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="1118" end="1127" title="digestion" label="digestive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528100" start="1267" end="1277" title="sweat test" label="sweat test"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="1282" end="1297" title="genetic testing" label="genetic testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="1614" end="1625" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q165399" start="1708" end="1720" title="azithromycin" label="azithromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q275792" start="1748" end="1765" title="hypertonic saline" label="hypertonic saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q410358" start="1770" end="1780" title="salbutamol" label="salbutamol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637912" start="1801" end="1821" title="Lung transplantation" label="Lung transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130425" start="1877" end="1906" title="Pancreatic enzyme replacement" label="Pancreatic enzyme replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="1911" end="1930" title="fat-soluble vitamin" label="fat-soluble vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357258" start="1987" end="2013" title="Airway clearance technique" label="Airway clearance technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099854" start="2023" end="2042" title="chest physiotherapy" label="chest physiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="2174" end="2189" title="developed world" label="developed world"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="2334" end="2351" title="Northern European" label="Northern European"/>
<link wikidata="Q115826663" start="2540" end="2545" title="Cystic fibrosis and race" label="races"/>
<link wikidata="Q469231" start="2596" end="2612" title="Dorothy Andersen" label="Dorothy Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q605709" start="2769" end="2777" title="fibrosis" label="fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193211" start="2782" end="2786" title="cyst" label="cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="2809" end="2817" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174392" start="2972" end="2978" title="Human feces" label="stools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442923" start="2992" end="3005" title="malabsorption" label="malabsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497481" start="3015" end="3040" title="Failure to thrive" label="underweight for their age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11090" start="3072" end="3087" title="small intestine" label="small intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q937557" start="3099" end="3107" title="meconium" label="meconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755487" start="3172" end="3189" title="neonatal jaundice" label="neonatal jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q851111" start="3213" end="3222" title="bile duct" label="bile duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="3415" end="3424" title="morbidity" label="morbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="3521" end="3540" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="3635" end="3645" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q31856" start="3754" end="3776" title="Pseudomonas aeruginosa" label="Pseudomonas aeruginosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q194309" start="3795" end="3807" title="mycobacteria" label="mycobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115038" start="3905" end="3915" title="Rhinorrhea" label="runny nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245488" start="3920" end="3937" title="Nasal congestion" label="nasal obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055111" start="3939" end="3950" title="Nasal polyp" label="Nasal polyp"/>
<link wikidata="Q188008" start="4051" end="4070" title="shortness of breath" label="shortness of breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q259346" start="4106" end="4112" title="sputum" label="sputum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340669" start="4354" end="4370" title="digital clubbing" label="digital clubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192120" start="4372" end="4380" title="cyanosis" label="cyanosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q647099" start="4382" end="4399" title="Hemoptysis" label="coughing up blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131786" start="4401" end="4424" title="pulmonary heart disease" label="pulmonary heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q754031" start="4446" end="4457" title="atelectasis" label="atelectasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="4461" end="4473" title="pneumothorax" label="pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q890200" start="4533" end="4553" title="Coagulopathy" label="coagulation disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q182338" start="4555" end="4564" title="Vitamin K" label="Vitamin K"/>
<link wikidata="Q22728" start="4591" end="4602" title="breast milk" label="breast milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q63771488" start="5344" end="5365" title="mucociliary clearance" label="mucociliary clearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="5381" end="5393" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q32778" start="5493" end="5507" title="bronchiectasis" label="bronchiectasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="5581" end="5595" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128595" start="5609" end="5631" title="pulmonary hypertension" label="pulmonary hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="5634" end="5647" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="5677" end="5683" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="5697" end="5704" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024207" start="5779" end="5811" title="bilevel positive airway pressure" label="bilevel positive airway pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766250" start="5824" end="5835" title="Mechanical ventilation" label="ventilators"/>
<link wikidata="Q188121" start="5843" end="5864" title="Staphylococcus aureus" label="Staphylococcus aureus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141979" start="5878" end="5900" title="Haemophilus influenzae" label="Haemophilus influenzae"/>
<link wikidata="Q31856" start="5918" end="5940" title="Pseudomonas aeruginosa" label="Pseudomonas aeruginosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21401468" start="6067" end="6107" title="Burkholderia cepacia complex" label="&amp;quot;Burkholderia cepacia&amp;quot; complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430844" start="6304" end="6343" title="allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis" label="allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="6393" end="6399" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134359" start="6406" end="6427" title="Aspergillus fumigatus" label="Aspergillus fumigatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311330" start="6506" end="6525" title="Mycobacterium avium complex" label="Mycobacterium avium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="6572" end="6584" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q281473" start="6674" end="6689" title="paranasal sinus" label="paranasal sinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="6837" end="6845" title="headache" label="headache"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055111" start="6912" end="6923" title="nasal polyp" label="nasal polyp"/>
<link wikidata="Q937557" start="7427" end="7441" title="meconium ileus" label="meconium ileus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9618" start="8210" end="8218" title="pancreas" label="pancreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q863089" start="8255" end="8271" title="Pancreatic juice" label="digestive juices"/>
<link wikidata="Q754845" start="8326" end="8334" title="exocrine" label="exocrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q134955" start="8378" end="8386" title="duodenum" label="duodenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527888" start="8471" end="8483" title="pancreatitis" label="pancreatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q668063" start="8490" end="8505" title="pancreatic duct" label="pancreatic duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="8704" end="8710" title="rectum" label="rectal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062483" start="8722" end="8737" title="rectal prolapse" label="rectal prolapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="8848" end="8860" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427231" start="8866" end="8900" title="Valsalva maneuver" label="increased intra–abdominal pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225" start="8997" end="8998" title="vitamin A" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="9000" end="9001" title="vitamin D" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q141180" start="9003" end="9004" title="vitamin E" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q182338" start="9010" end="9011" title="vitamin K" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="9083" end="9092" title="gastroesophageal reflux disease" label="heartburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424612" start="9117" end="9132" title="Intussusception (medical disorder)" label="intussusception"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="9138" end="9150" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282842" start="9190" end="9228" title="distal intestinal obstruction syndrome" label="distal intestinal obstruction syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11312507" start="9280" end="9291" title="inspissated" label="inspissated"/>
<link wikidata="Q641605" start="9370" end="9403" title="Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency" label="Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q420470" start="9575" end="9580" title="ΔF508" label="ΔF508"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996053" start="10087" end="10107" title="chronic pancreatitis" label="chronic pancreatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q65979" start="10672" end="10676" title="Bile" label="Bile"/>
<link wikidata="Q851111" start="10733" end="10742" title="bile duct" label="bile duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549428" start="10827" end="10838" title="steatorrhea" label="steatorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="10893" end="10902" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179217" start="11016" end="11030" title="coagulation" label="blood clotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072420" start="11140" end="11152" title="biliary cirrhosis" label="liver damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q272714" start="11196" end="11205" title="gallstone" label="gallstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727106" start="11215" end="11228" title="biliary colic" label="biliary colic"/>
<link wikidata="Q728309" start="11273" end="11293" title="islets of Langerhans" label="islets of Langerhans"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="11328" end="11335" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="11373" end="11380" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201210" start="11511" end="11543" title="cystic fibrosis-related diabetes" label="cystic fibrosis-related diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="11570" end="11576" title="Diabetes mellitus type 1" label="type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="11581" end="11587" title="Diabetes mellitus type 2" label="type 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="11686" end="11693" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="11698" end="11707" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="11813" end="11825" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q68833" start="11874" end="11882" title="bone fracture" label="fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561647" start="12139" end="12177" title="congenital absence of the vas deferens" label="congenital absence of the vas deferens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="12207" end="12213" title="Testicle" label="testes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063420" start="12221" end="12237" title="ejaculatory duct" label="ejaculatory duct"/>
<link wikidata="Q8124" start="12246" end="12251" title="Human penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q794026" start="12303" end="12311" title="azoospermia" label="no sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161625" start="12313" end="12336" title="teratospermia" label="abnormally shaped sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876491" start="12342" end="12370" title="oligoasthenospermia" label="few sperm with poor motility"/>
<link wikidata="Q187082" start="12705" end="12714" title="ovulation" label="ovulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q334655" start="12726" end="12748" title="amenorrhoea" label="a lack of menstruation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="12824" end="12828" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q420470" start="12829" end="12880" title="CFTR (gene)" label="cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q420470" start="13068" end="13073" title="ΔF508" label="ΔF508"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13112" end="13113" title="delta (letter)#Mathematics and the Sciences" label="Δ"/>
<link wikidata="Q170545" start="13205" end="13218" title="phenylalanine" label="phenylalanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13420" end="13433" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13759" end="13786" title="Autosomal recessive disorder#Dominant and recessive genetic diseases in humans" label="autosomal recessive disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="13835" end="13840" title="locus (genetics)" label="locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q657319" start="13844" end="13856" title="chromosome 7" label="chromosome 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="13869" end="13878" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="13922" end="13932" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q286958" start="14171" end="14179" title="ATP-binding cassette transporter genes" label="ABC gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654881" start="14336" end="14351" title="ATP hydrolysis" label="ATP-hydrolyzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q898273" start="14352" end="14359" title="Structural domain" label="domains"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="14415" end="14418" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q283399" start="14464" end="14477" title="Alpha helix" label="alpha helices"/>
<link wikidata="Q616005" start="14551" end="14563" title="binding site" label="binding site"/>
<link wikidata="Q242736" start="14600" end="14615" title="phosphorylation" label="phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q281417" start="14627" end="14656" title="cAMP-dependent protein kinase" label="cAMP-dependent protein kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q310425" start="14662" end="14679" title="C-terminal end" label="carboxyl terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154626" start="14714" end="14726" title="cytoskeleton" label="cytoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24721050" start="14732" end="14735" title="PDZ (biology)" label="PDZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q415443" start="15014" end="15035" title="mannan-binding lectin" label="mannan-binding lectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q428253" start="15058" end="15073" title="innate immunity" label="innate immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q184726" start="15090" end="15102" title="phagocytosis" label="phagocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="15122" end="15135" title="Polymorphism (biology)" label="Polymorphisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425030" start="15461" end="15476" title="genetic carrier" label="genetic carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q115826663" start="16188" end="16216" title="Cystic fibrosis and race" label="CF is present in other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q420470" start="17330" end="17340" title="ΔF508" label="ΔF508-CFTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q847556" start="17437" end="17441" title="Protein folding" label="fold"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="17615" end="17625" title="Translation (genetics)" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="17980" end="17994" title="cell membrane" label="outer membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q243784" start="18011" end="18022" title="sweat gland" label="sweat gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62536" start="18141" end="18148" title="Ion channel" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="18188" end="18197" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914458" start="18206" end="18223" title="extracellular fluid" label="surrounding fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144320" start="18633" end="18648" title="hypothiocyanite" label="hypothiocyanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="18725" end="18743" title="Electric charge" label="negatively charged"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="18833" end="18839" title="cation" label="cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q467410" start="21194" end="21201" title="biofilm" label="biofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q31856" start="21889" end="21911" title="Pseudomonas aeruginosa" label="Pseudomonas aeruginosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21401468" start="21939" end="21959" title="Burkholderia cepacia complex" label="Burkholderia cepacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="22179" end="22189" title="antibiotic resistance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q99486570" start="22462" end="22476" title="interleukin 17" label="interleukin 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281580" start="23163" end="23172" title="nebulizer" label="nebulizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254196" start="23702" end="23726" title="Scedosporium apiospermum" label="Scedosporium apiospermum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798237" start="23740" end="23759" title="Aspergillus terreus" label="Aspergillus terreus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310443" start="23796" end="23812" title="Candida albicans" label="Candida albicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q137096" start="23882" end="23900" title="Aspergillus flavus" label="Aspergillus flavus"/>
<link wikidata="Q683881" start="23917" end="23937" title="Aspergillus nidulans" label="Aspergillus nidulans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420632" start="24003" end="24025" title="Exophiala dermatitidis" label="Exophiala dermatitidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430684" start="24042" end="24066" title="Scedosporium prolificans" label="Scedosporium prolificans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676389" start="24177" end="24202" title="Acrophialophora fusispora" label="Acrophialophora fusispora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531016" start="25382" end="25392" title="Neonatal heel prick" label="blood test"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999627" start="25412" end="25438" title="immunoreactive trypsinogen" label="immunoreactive trypsinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528100" start="25584" end="25594" title="sweat test" label="sweat test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528394" start="25599" end="25615" title="iontophoresis" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q411461" start="25633" end="25644" title="pilocarpine" label="pilocarpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420470" start="25798" end="25802" title="CFTR" label="CFTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144320" start="26151" end="26166" title="hypothiocyanite" label="hypothiocyanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17122952" start="26244" end="26280" title="transepithelial potential difference" label="transepithelial potential difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207010" start="26707" end="26721" title="false positive" label="false positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="26932" end="26940" title="pregnant" label="pregnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q463772" start="27232" end="27283" title="American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists" label="American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076497" start="28244" end="28269" title="chorionic villus sampling" label="chorionic villus sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q473768" start="28302" end="28315" title="amniocentesis" label="amniocentesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501356" start="28569" end="28602" title="preimplantation genetic diagnosis" label="preimplantation genetic diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q754447" start="29731" end="29747" title="respiratory tract infection" label="airway infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535778" start="29807" end="29831" title="Pulmonary rehabilitation" label="Pulmonary rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="30741" end="30760" title="reproductive organs" label="reproductive organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25862" start="30772" end="30804" title="assisted reproductive technology" label="assisted reproductive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="30986" end="31001" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="31003" end="31014" title="Intravenous therapy" label="Intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q840343" start="31016" end="31023" title="inhalation" label="inhaled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988216" start="31256" end="31270" title="Oxygen therapy" label="Oxygen therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="31365" end="31375" title="probiotics" label="probiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="31705" end="31721" title="Preventive healthcare" label="prophylactically"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="32228" end="32230" title="Heparin lock" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168716" start="32241" end="32279" title="peripherally inserted central catheter" label="peripherally inserted central catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q552258" start="32283" end="32294" title="Port-a-Cath" label="Port-a-Cath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758380" start="32337" end="32347" title="tobramycin" label="tobramycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418946" start="32349" end="32357" title="colistin" label="colistin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418546" start="32363" end="32372" title="aztreonam" label="aztreonam"/>
<link wikidata="Q424193" start="32675" end="32687" title="levofloxacin" label="levofloxacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31856" start="32715" end="32737" title="Pseudomonas aeruginosa" label="Pseudomonas aeruginosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q165399" start="32840" end="32852" title="azithromycin" label="azithromycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45355603" start="32926" end="32940" title="aminoglycoside" label="aminoglycoside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351381" start="32986" end="32998" title="Ototoxicity" label="hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q596832" start="33014" end="33028" title="Vestibular system" label="balance system"/>
<link wikidata="Q212344" start="33036" end="33045" title="inner ear" label="inner ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q45959" start="33101" end="33112" title="Adverse drug reaction" label="side-effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881705" start="33432" end="33459" title="nontuberculous mycobacteria" label="nontuberculous mycobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q595158" start="34487" end="34542" title="Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus" label="Methicillin-resistant &amp;quot;Staphylococcus aureus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q357896" start="35110" end="35118" title="adjuvant" label="adjuvant"/>
<link wikidata="Q306135" start="35522" end="35532" title="Β-Carotene" label="β-carotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="35534" end="35546" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="35548" end="35564" title="zinc supplements" label="zinc supplements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067922" start="35663" end="35675" title="dornase alfa" label="dornase alfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q925744" start="35680" end="35690" title="Hypertonicity" label="hypertonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q275792" start="35691" end="35697" title="Saline (medicine)" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q285697" start="35712" end="35723" title="Recombinant DNA" label="recombinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q420690" start="35730" end="35747" title="deoxyribonuclease" label="deoxyribonuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q908026" start="36142" end="36151" title="Denufosol" label="Denufosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="36251" end="36274" title="inhaled corticosteroids" label="inhaled corticosteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q14538008" start="36447" end="36471" title="Pneumococcal vaccination" label="Pneumococcal vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q383260" start="36567" end="36584" title="influenza vaccine" label="influenza vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095693" start="36633" end="36642" title="Ivacaftor" label="Ivacaftor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661325" start="37018" end="37038" title="lumacaftor/ivacaftor" label="lumacaftor/ivacaftor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095693" start="37082" end="37102" title="ivacaftor/tezacaftor" label="ivacaftor/tezacaftor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27270940" start="37166" end="37176" title="Tezacaftor" label="Tezacaftor"/>
<link wikidata="Q420470" start="37291" end="37298" title="F508del" label="F508del"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779868" start="37323" end="37339" title="combination drug" label="combination drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q72184040" start="37340" end="37372" title="elexacaftor/ivacaftor/tezacaftor" label="elexacaftor/ivacaftor/tezacaftor"/>
<link wikidata="Q649126" start="37724" end="37750" title="Cystic Fibrosis Foundation" label="Cystic Fibrosis Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q241374" start="38769" end="38789" title="Ursodeoxycholic acid" label="Ursodeoxycholic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q413288" start="38793" end="38802" title="bile acid" label="bile salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131696584" start="38900" end="38936" title="vanzacaftor/tezacaftor/deutivacaftor" label="vanzacaftor/tezacaftor/deutivacaftor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225" start="39072" end="39081" title="vitamin A" label="vitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q306135" start="39085" end="39098" title="beta-carotene" label="beta-carotene"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="39261" end="39273" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="39304" end="39313" title="vitamin D" label="vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q141180" start="39332" end="39341" title="vitamin E" label="vitamin E"/>
<link wikidata="Q182338" start="39622" end="39631" title="vitamin K" label="vitamin K"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40056" end="40075" title="Pulmonary hygiene#Conventional Chest physiotherapy" label="chest physiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093395" start="40291" end="40313" title="chest wall oscillation" label="chest wall oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357258" start="40317" end="40353" title="intrapulmonary percussive ventilator" label="intrapulmonary percussive ventilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313477" start="40377" end="40405" title="biphasic cuirass ventilation" label="biphasic cuirass ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q108551462" start="40981" end="41003" title="collateral ventilation" label="collateral ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024207" start="41331" end="41363" title="bilevel positive airway pressure" label="bilevel positive airway pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q324921" start="42054" end="42066" title="tracheostomy" label="tracheostomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179415" start="42155" end="42170" title="massage therapy" label="massage therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="42468" end="42482" title="Pneumothorax" label="pneumothoraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637912" start="42520" end="42540" title="Lung transplantation" label="Lung transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420062" start="42607" end="42625" title="Exercise intolerance" label="exercise tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666167" start="43139" end="43163" title="Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy" label="&amp;quot;Merck Manual&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252367" start="43942" end="43957" title="atherosclerosis" label="atherosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="43962" end="43984" title="coronary heart disease" label="coronary heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="44210" end="44218" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="Diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201210" start="44359" end="44391" title="cystic fibrosis-related diabetes" label="cystic fibrosis-related diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q575062" start="44404" end="44421" title="antidiabetic drug" label="antidiabetic drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="44483" end="44490" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q941674" start="44508" end="44520" title="insulin pump" label="insulin pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q142705" start="44608" end="44636" title="Stenotrophomonas maltophilia" label="Stenotrophomonas maltophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q412205" start="44788" end="44802" title="Bisphosphonate" label="Bisphosphonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="44822" end="44835" title="Intravenous therapy" label="intravenously"/>
<link wikidata="Q45959" start="45032" end="45047" title="adverse drug reaction" label="adverse effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087035" start="45241" end="45253" title="feeding tube" label="feeding tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="45341" end="45355" title="growth hormone" label="growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8564098" start="45722" end="45744" title="fluticasone propionate" label="fluticasone propionate"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="45825" end="45846" title="in vitro fertilisation" label="assisted reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q237118" start="45872" end="45887" title="embryo transfer" label="embryo transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733593" start="45980" end="46007" title="testicular sperm extraction" label="testicular sperm extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q28700" start="46156" end="46188" title="intracytoplasmic sperm injection" label="intracytoplasmic sperm injection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46207" end="46231" title="Embryo transfer#Third party reproduction" label="Third party reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="46288" end="46299" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666167" start="49932" end="49944" title="Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy" label="Merck Manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211934" start="51114" end="51122" title="Hispanic" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51135" end="51143" title="Africa#Demographics" label="Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="51159" end="51165" title="Asian people" label="Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="51556" end="51563" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="51620" end="51645" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="52673" end="52685" title="Saami people" label="Saami people"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="53076" end="53094" title="sickle-cell anemia" label="sickle-cell anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25109742" start="53155" end="53177" title="evolutionary trade-off" label="evolutionary trade-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873354" start="53187" end="53209" title="heterozygote advantage" label="heterozygote advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="53311" end="53318" title="Cholera" label="Cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q83586" start="53344" end="53357" title="cholera toxin" label="cholera toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="53605" end="53612" title="Typhoid fever" label="Typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q21600865" start="53671" end="53699" title="Salmonella Typhi" label="&amp;quot;Salmonella&amp;quot; Typhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="53792" end="53805" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q506680" start="53978" end="53985" title="endemic (epidemiology)" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="54020" end="54028" title="Diarrhea" label="Diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q219223" start="54242" end="54261" title="lactose intolerance" label="lactose intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="54327" end="54339" title="Tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78714" start="55493" end="55512" title="Carl von Rokitansky" label="Carl von Rokitansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804859" start="55550" end="55570" title="meconium peritonitis" label="meconium peritonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q84405" start="55671" end="55687" title="Karl Landsteiner" label="Karl Landsteiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q123927" start="55698" end="55711" title="Guido Fanconi" label="Guido Fanconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="55743" end="55757" title="celiac disease" label="celiac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q32778" start="55796" end="55810" title="bronchiectasis" label="bronchiectasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q469231" start="55822" end="55846" title="Dorothy Hansine Andersen" label="Dorothy Hansine Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787306" start="55997" end="56037" title="American Journal of Diseases of Children" label="American Journal of Diseases of Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154589" start="56342" end="56366" title="Paul di Sant&amp;#x27;Agnese" label="Paul di Sant&amp;#x27;Agnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7135605" start="56527" end="56538" title="paraoxonase" label="paraoxonase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994085" start="56561" end="56572" title="Hans Eiberg" label="Hans Eiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q420470" start="56656" end="56661" title="Delta-F508" label="ΔF508"/>
<link wikidata="Q336658" start="56681" end="56696" title="Francis Collins (geneticist)" label="Francis Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458494" start="56698" end="56711" title="Lap-Chee Tsui" label="Lap-Chee Tsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550527" start="56717" end="56732" title="John R. Riordan" label="John R. Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54881" start="56905" end="56923" title="classical genetics" label="classical genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q843863" start="57016" end="57028" title="gene linkage" label="gene-linkage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817120" start="57084" end="57102" title="Chromosome walking" label="Chromosome walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747037" start="57107" end="57125" title="chromosome jumping" label="chromosome jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="57168" end="57176" title="DNA sequencing" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140964" start="57243" end="57269" title="The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto" label="Hospital for Sick Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="57273" end="57280" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123214" start="57432" end="57448" title="forward genetics" label="forward genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282128" start="57498" end="57514" title="disease registry" label="disease registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="57640" end="57652" title="Gene therapy" label="Gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q611870" start="59004" end="59017" title="phage therapy" label="phage therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165028" start="59160" end="59173" title="bacteriophage" label="bacteriophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q31856" start="59921" end="59943" title="Pseudomonas aeruginosa" label="Pseudomonas aeruginosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q411391" start="60243" end="60262" title="Gene modulation" label="modulator therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28354" start="61008" end="61018" title="stop codon" label="stop codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q518638" start="61216" end="61233" title="nonsense mutation" label="nonsense mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q620730" start="61283" end="61290" title="glycine" label="glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q72184040" start="61893" end="61925" title="Elexacaftor/ivacaftor/tezacaftor" label="Elexacaftor/ivacaftor/tezacaftor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4067124" start="62888" end="62905" title="Antisense therapy" label="Antisense therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65031263" start="63795" end="63808" title="Mallory Smith" label="Mallory Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642107" start="63880" end="63891" title="65 Redroses" label="65_RedRoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499386" start="63931" end="63953" title="Breathing for a Living" label="Breathing for a Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499386" start="63973" end="63989" title="Laura Rothenberg" label="Laura Rothenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33978290" start="64078" end="64093" title="Claire Wineland" label="Claire Wineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080312" start="64102" end="64117" title="Five Feet Apart" label="Five Feet Apart"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330972" start="64161" end="64173" title="Cole Sprouse" label="Cole Sprouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236978" start="64178" end="64197" title="Haley Lu Richardson" label="Haley Lu Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858187" start="64279" end="64291" title="Orla Tinsley" label="Orla Tinsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="64298" end="64313" title="performance art" label="performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q85784041" start="64317" end="64336" title="Martin O&amp;#x27;Brien (artist)" label="Martin O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q123169099" start="64345" end="64353" title="Hi Nanna" label="Hi Nanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q126278492" start="64451" end="64467" title="Jeremie Saunders" label="Jeremie Saunders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50603" wikidata="Q8277" url="?curid=50603" title="Multiple sclerosis">
<text>Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease resulting in damage to the insulating covers of nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord. As a demyelinating disease, MS disrupts the nervous system&#x27;s ability to transmit signals, resulting in a range of signs and symptoms, including physical, mental, and sometimes psychiatric problems. Symptoms include double vision, vision loss, eye pain, muscle weakness, and loss of sensation or coordination. MS takes several forms, with new symptoms either occurring in isolated attacks (relapsing forms) or building up over time (progressive forms). In relapsing forms of MS symptoms may disappear completely between attacks, although some permanent neurological problems often remain, especially as the disease advances. In progressive forms of MS, bodily function slowly deteriorates once symptoms manifest and will steadily worsen if left untreated.
While its cause is unclear, the underlying mechanism is thought to be due to either destruction by the immune system or inactivation of myelin-producing cells. Proposed causes for this include immune dysregulation, genetics, and environmental factors, such as viral infections. The McDonald criteria are a frequently updated set of guidelines used to establish an MS diagnosis.
There is no cure for MS. Current treatments aim to mitigate inflammation and resulting symptoms from acute flares and prevent further attacks with disease-modifying medications. Physical therapy and occupational therapy, along with patient-centered symptom management, can help with people&#x27;s ability to function. The long-term outcome is difficult to predict; better outcomes are more often seen in women, those who develop the disease early in life, those with a relapsing course, and those who initially experienced few attacks.
MS is the most common immune-mediated disorder affecting the central nervous system (CNS). In 2020, about 2.8 million people were affected by MS globally, with rates varying widely in different regions and among different populations. The disease usually begins between the ages of 20 and 50 and is twice as common in women as in men. MS was first described in 1868 by French neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot.
The name &quot;multiple sclerosis&quot; is short for multiple cerebro-spinal sclerosis, which refers to the numerous glial scars (or sclerae – essentially plaques or lesions) that develop on the white matter of the brain and spinal cord.
== Signs and symptoms ==

MS lesions can affect any part of the central nervous system so a person with MS can have almost any neurological signs or symptoms.

Fatigue is one of the most common symptoms of MS. Roughly 65% of people with MS experience fatigue. Of these, some 15–40% report fatigue as their most disabling symptom.

Autonomic, visual, motor, and sensory problems are also among the most common symptoms.

The specific symptoms depend on the locations of the lesions within the nervous system and may include loss of sensitivity or changes in sensation in the limbs, such as tingling, “pins and needles,” or numbness; limb motor weakness or pain, blurred vision, pronounced reflexes, muscle spasms, difficulty walking, or with coordination or balance (ataxia); problems with speech or swallowing, visual problems (optic neuritis manifesting as eye pain &amp; vision loss, or nystagmus manifesting as double vision), fatigue, and bladder and bowel difficulties (such as urinary or fecal incontinence or retention), among others. When MS is more advanced, walking difficulties lead to a higher risk of falling.

Difficulties in thinking and emotional problems such as depression or unstable mood are also common. The primary deficit in cognitive function that people with MS experience is slowed information-processing speed, with memory also commonly affected, and executive function less commonly. Intelligence, language, and semantic memory are usually preserved, and the level of cognitive impairment varies considerably between people with MS.

Uhthoff&#x27;s phenomenon, a worsening of symptoms due to exposure to higher-than-usual temperatures, and Lhermitte&#x27;s sign, an electrical sensation that runs down the back when bending the neck, are particularly characteristic of MS, although may not always be present. Another presenting manifestation that is rare but highly suggestive of a demyelinating process such as MS is bilateral internuclear ophthalmoplegia, where the patient experiences double vision when attempting to move their gaze to the right &amp; left.

Some 60% or more of MS patients find their symptoms, particularly including fatigue, are affected by changes in body temperature.

===Measures of disability===
The main measure of disability and severity is the expanded disability status scale (EDSS), with other measures such as the multiple sclerosis functional composite being increasingly used in research. EDSS is also correlated with falls in people with MS. While it is a popular measure, EDSS has been criticized for some of its limitations, such as overreliance on walking.

==Disease course==
=== Prodromal phase ===
MS may have a prodromal phase in the years leading up to its manifestation, characterized by psychiatric issues, cognitive impairment, and increased use of healthcare.

===Onset===
85% of cases begin as a clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) over a number of days with 45% having motor or sensory problems, 20% having optic neuritis, and 10% having symptoms related to brainstem dysfunction, while the remaining 25% have more than one of the aforementioned difficulties. With optic neuritis as the most common presenting symptom, people with MS notice sub-acute loss of vision, often associated with pain worsening on eye movement, and reduced color vision. Early diagnosis of MS-associated optic neuritis helps timely initiation of targeted treatments. However, it is crucial to adhere to established diagnostic criteria when treating optic neuritis due to the broad range of alternative causes, such as neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD), and other autoimmune or infectious conditions. The course of symptoms occurs in two main patterns initially: either as episodes of sudden worsening that last a few days to months (called relapses, exacerbations, bouts, attacks, or flare-ups) followed by improvement (85% of cases) or as a gradual worsening over time without periods of recovery (10–15% of cases). A combination of these two patterns may also occur or people may start in a relapsing and remitting course that then becomes progressive later on.

===Relapses===
Relapses are usually unpredictable, occurring without warning. Exacerbations rarely occur more frequently than twice per year. Some relapses, however, are preceded by common triggers and they occur more frequently during spring and summer. Similarly, viral infections such as the common cold, influenza, or gastroenteritis increase their risk. Stress may also trigger an attack.

Many events do not affect rates of relapse requiring hospitalization including vaccination, breast feeding, physical trauma, and Uhthoff&#x27;s phenomenon.

===Pregnancy===
Many women with MS who become pregnant experience lower symptoms during pregnancy. During the first months after delivery, the risk increases. Overall, pregnancy does not seem to influence long-term disability.

== Causes ==
MS is an autoimmune disease with a combination of genetic and environmental causes underlying it. Both T-cells and B-cells are involved, although T-cells are often considered to be the driving force of the disease. The causes of the disease are not fully understood. The Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) has been shown to be directly present in the brain of most cases of MS and the virus is transcriptionally active in infected cells. EBV nuclear antigens are believed to be involved in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis, but not all people with MS have signs of EBV infection. Dozens of human peptides have been identified in different cases of the disease, and while some have plausible links to infectious organisms or known environmental factors, others do not.

=== Immune dysregulation ===
Failure of both central and peripheral nervous system clearance of autoreactive immune cells is implicated in MS development. The thymus is responsible for the immune system&#x27;s central tolerance, where autoreactive T-cells are killed without being released into circulation. A similar mechanism kills autoreactive B-cells in the bone marrow. Some autoreactive T-cells &amp; B-cells may escape these defense mechanisms, which is where peripheral immune tolerance defenses take action by preventing them from causing disease. However, these additional lines of defense can still fail. Further detail on immune dysregulation&#x27;s contribution to MS risk is provided in the pathophysiology section of this article as well as the standalone article on the pathophysiology of MS.

=== Infectious agents ===

Early evidence suggested the association between several viruses with human demyelinating encephalomyelitis, and the occurrence of demyelination in animals caused by some viral infections. One such virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), can cause infectious mononucleosis and infects about 95% of adults, though only a small proportion of those infected later develop MS. A study of more than 10 million US military members compared 801 people who developed MS to 1,566 matched controls who did not. The study found a 32-fold increased risk of MS development following EBV infection. It did not find an increased risk after infection with other viruses, including the similar cytomegalovirus. These findings strongly suggest that EBV plays a role in MS onset, although EBV alone may be insufficient to cause it.

The nuclear antigen of EBV, which is the most consistent marker of EBV infection across all strains, has been identified as a direct source of autoreactivity in the human body. These antigens appear more likely to promote autoimmunity in vitamin D-deficient persons. The exact nature of this relationship is poorly understood.

=== Genetics ===
MS is not considered a hereditary disease, but several genetic variations have been shown to increase its risk. Some of these genes appear to have higher expression levels in microglial cells than expected by chance. The probability of developing MS is higher in relatives of an affected person, with a greater risk among those more closely related. An identical twin of an affected individual has a 30% chance of developing MS, 5% for a nonidentical twin, 2.5% for a sibling, and an even lower chance for a half-sibling. If both parents are affected, the risk in their children is 10 times that of the general population. MS is also more common in some ethnic groups than others.

Specific genes linked with MS include differences in the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system—a group of genes on chromosome 6 that serves as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). The contribution of HLA variants to MS susceptibility has been known since the 1980s, and it has also been implicated in the development of other autoimmune diseases, such as type 1 diabetes and systemic lupus erythematosus. The most consistent finding is the association between higher risk MS development and the MHC allele &quot;DR15&quot;, which is present in 30% of the U.S. and Northern European population. Other loci exhibit a protective effect, such as &quot;HLA-C554 &quot;and &quot;HLA-DRB1*11&quot;. HLA differences account for an estimated 20 to 60% of the genetic predisposition. Genome-wide association studies have revealed at least 200 MS-associated variants outside the HLA locus.

=== Geography ===
The prevalence of MS from a geographic standpoint resembles a gradient, with it being more common in people who live farther from the equator (e.g., those who live in northern regions of the world), although exceptions exist. The cause of this geographical pattern is not clear, although exposure to ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation and vitamin D levels may be a possible explanation. For example, those who live in northern regions of the world have less exposure to UVB radiation and lower levels of vitamin D, and a higher risk for developing MS. Inversely, those who live in areas of higher sun exposure and increased UVB radiation have a decreased risk of developing MS. As of 2019, the north–south gradient of incidence is still present and is increasing.

On the other hand, MS is more common in regions with northern European populations, so the geographic variation may simply reflect the distribution of these higher-risk populations.

A relationship between season of birth and MS lends support to this idea, with fewer people born in the Northern Hemisphere in winter than in spring.

Environmental factors during childhood may play a role, with several studies finding that people who move to a different region of the world before the age of 15 acquire the new region&#x27;s risk of MS. If migration takes place after age 15, the person retains the risk of their childhood region. However, some evidence indicates that the effect of moving may apply to people older than 15.

There are some exceptions to the above-mentioned geographic pattern. These include ethnic groups that are at low risk and that live far from the equator, such as the Sami, Amerindians, Canadian Hutterites, New Zealand Māori, and Canada&#x27;s Inuit, as well as groups that have a relatively high risk and that live closer to the equator such as Sardinians, inland Sicilians, Palestinians, and Parsi.

===Impact of temperature===
MS symptoms may increase if body temperature is dysregulated. Fatigue is particularly affected.

=== Other ===
Smoking may be an independent risk factor for MS. Stress may also be a risk factor, although the evidence to support this is weak. 

Environmental risk factor reviews have correlated lower sun exposure with higher MS rates though the effect does not completely align with earth&#x27;s solar irradiance latitude gradient. Regional perturbations exist indicating involvement of additional, more influential localized MS risk factors. See also: Multiple sclerosis#Geography.

A 2023 meta-analysis screened data from 4,183,166 individuals identifying environmental and occupational risks associated with MS development. High environmental risks were found from oil well fumes, pesticides and low-frequency magnetic fields, e.g., electric power transmission towers and passageways. Cleaning agents, solvents and animal contact did not appear to elevate MS risks. The highest occupational risks were observed for hairdressers, having a 8.25-fold increased risk versus the general population (GP) (OR = 8.25, 95% CI 1.02–66.52); offshore workers with a 3.56-fold risk (OR = 3.56, 95% CI 2.74–4.61); and agricultural workers with a 1.44-fold risk, (OR = 1.44, 95% CI 1.13–1.83). Occupational risks for MS development, relative to GP, were not observed for shoe and leather workers, construction and tradesmen, healthcare aides, chemical industry workers, food industry staff, cleaning company technicians or military servicepersons. 

Vaccinations were studied as causal factors; most studies, though, show no association. Several other possible risk factors, such as diet and hormone intake, have been evaluated, but evidence on their relation with the disease is &quot;sparse and unpersuasive&quot;. Gout occurs less than would be expected and lower levels of uric acid have been found in people with MS. This has led to the theory that uric acid is protective, although its exact importance remains unknown. Obesity during adolescence and young adulthood is a risk factor for MS.

== Pathophysiology ==
Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease, primarily mediated by T-cells. The three main characteristics of MS are the formation of lesions in the central nervous system (also called plaques), inflammation, and the destruction of myelin sheaths of neurons. These features interact in a complex and not yet fully understood manner to produce the breakdown of nerve tissue, and in turn, the signs and symptoms of the disease. Damage is believed to be caused, at least in part, by attack on the nervous system by a person&#x27;s own immune system.

=== Immune dysregulation ===
As briefly detailed in the causes section of this article, MS is currently thought to stem from a failure of the body&#x27;s immune system to kill off autoreactive T-cells &amp; B-cells. Currently, the T-cell subpopulations that are thought to drive the development of MS are autoreactive CD8+ T-cells, CD4+ helper T-cells, and TH17 cells. These autoreactive T-cells produce substances called cytokines that induce an inflammatory immune response in the CNS, leading to the development of the disease. More recently, however, the role of autoreactive B-cells has been elucidated. Evidence of their contribution to the development of MS is implicated through the presence of oligoclonal IgG bands (antibodies produced by B-cells) in the CSF of patients with MS. The presence of these oligoclonal bands has been used as supportive evidence in clinching a diagnosis of MS. As similarly described before, B-cells can also produce cytokines that induce an inflammatory immune response via activation of autoreactive T-cells. As such, higher levels of these autoreactive B-cells are associated with an increased number of lesions &amp; neurodegeneration as well as worse disability.

Another cell population that is becoming increasingly implicated in MS is microglia. These cells are resident to &amp; keep watch over the CNS, responding to pathogens by shifting between pro- &amp; anti-inflammatory states. Microglia are involved in the formation of MS lesions and be involved in other diseases that primarily affect the CNS white matter. However, because of their ability to switch between pro- &amp; anti-inflammatory states, microglia have also been shown to be able to assist in remyelination &amp; subsequent neuron repair. As such, microglia are thought to be participating in both acute &amp; chronic MS lesions, with 40% of phagocytic cells in early active MS lesions being proinflammatory microglia.

=== Lesions ===

The name multiple sclerosis refers to the scars (sclerae – better known as plaques or lesions) that form in the nervous system. These lesions most commonly affect the white matter in the optic nerve, brain stem, basal ganglia, and spinal cord, or white matter tracts close to the lateral ventricles. The function of white matter cells is to carry signals between grey matter areas, where the processing is done, and the rest of the body. The peripheral nervous system is rarely involved.

To be specific, MS involves the loss of oligodendrocytes, the cells responsible for creating and maintaining a fatty layer—known as the myelin sheath—which helps the neurons carry electrical signals (action potentials). This results in a thinning or complete loss of myelin, and as the disease advances, the breakdown of the axons of neurons. When the myelin is lost, a neuron can no longer effectively conduct electrical signals. A repair process, called remyelination, takes place in the early phases of the disease, but the oligodendrocytes are unable to completely rebuild the cell&#x27;s myelin sheath. Repeated attacks lead to successively less effective remyelinations, until a scar-like plaque is built up around the damaged axons. These scars are the origin of the symptoms and during an attack magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) often shows more than 10 new plaques. This could indicate that some number of lesions exist, below which the brain is capable of repairing itself without producing noticeable consequences. Another process involved in the creation of lesions is an abnormal increase in the number of astrocytes due to the destruction of nearby neurons. A number of lesion patterns have been described.

=== Inflammation ===
Apart from demyelination, the other sign of the disease is inflammation. Fitting with an immunological explanation, the inflammatory process is caused by T cells, a kind of lymphocytes that plays an important role in the body&#x27;s defenses. T cells gain entry into the brain as a result of disruptions in the blood–brain barrier. The T cells recognize myelin as foreign and attack it, explaining why these cells are also called &quot;autoreactive lymphocytes&quot;.

The attack on myelin starts inflammatory processes, which trigger other immune cells and the release of soluble factors like cytokines and antibodies. A further breakdown of the blood-brain barrier, in turn, causes many other damaging effects, such as swelling, activation of macrophages, and more activation of cytokines and other destructive proteins. Inflammation can potentially reduce transmission of information between neurons in at least three ways. The soluble factors released might stop neurotransmission by intact neurons. These factors could lead to or enhance the loss of myelin, or they may cause the axon to break down completely.

=== Blood-brain barrier ===
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is a part of the capillary system that prevents the entry of T cells into the central nervous system. It may become permeable to these types of cells secondary to an infection by a virus or bacteria. After it repairs itself, typically once the infection has cleared, T cells may remain trapped inside the brain. Gadolinium cannot cross a normal BBB, so gadolinium-enhanced MRI is used to show BBB breakdowns.

===MS fatigue===
The pathophysiology and mechanisms causing MS fatigue are not well understood. MS fatigue can be affected by body heat, and this may differentiate MS fatigue from other primary fatigue. Fatigability (loss of strength) may increase perception of fatigue, but the two measures warrant independent assessment in clinical studies.

== Diagnosis ==
Multiple sclerosis is typically diagnosed based on the presenting signs and symptoms, in combination with supporting medical imaging and laboratory testing. It can be difficult to confirm, especially early on, since the signs and symptoms may be similar to those of other medical problems.

===McDonald criteria===
The McDonald criteria, which focus on clinical, laboratory, and radiologic evidence of lesions at different times and in different areas, is the most commonly used method of diagnosis with the Schumacher and Poser criteria being of mostly historical significance. The McDonald criteria states that patients with multiple sclerosis should have lesions which are disseminated in time (DIT) and disseminated in space (DIS), i.e. lesions which have appeared in different areas in the brain and at different times. Below is an abbreviated outline of the 2017 McDonald Criteria for diagnosis of MS.
* At least 2 clinical attacks with MRI showing 2 or more lesions characteristic of MS.
* At least 2 clinical attacks with MRI showing 1 lesion characteristic of MS with clear historical evidence of a previous attack involving a lesion at a distinct location in the CNS.
* At least 2 clinical attacks with MRI showing 1 lesion characteristic of MS, with DIT established by an additional clinical attack at a distinct CNS site or by MRI showing an old MS lesion.
* 1 clinical attack with MRI showing at least 2 lesions characteristic of MS, with DIT established by an additional attack, by MRI showing old MS lesion(s), or presence of oligoclonal bands in CSF.
* 1 clinical attack with MRI showing 1 lesion characteristic of MS, with DIS established by an additional attack at a different CNS site or by MRI showing old MS lesion(s), and DIT established by an additional attack, by MRI showing old MS lesion(s), or presence of oligoclonal bands in CSF.

, no single test (including biopsy) can provide a definitive diagnosis.

===MRI===
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine may show areas of demyelination (lesions or plaques). Gadolinium can be administered intravenously as a contrast agent to highlight active plaques, and by elimination, demonstrate the existence of historical lesions not associated with symptoms at the moment of the evaluation.

Central vein signs (CVSs) have been proposed as a good indicator of MS in comparison with other conditions causing white lesions. One small study found fewer CVSs in older and hypertensive people. Further research on CVS as a biomarker for MS is ongoing.

====In vivo vs postmortem lesion visibility in MRI scans====
Only postmortem MRI allows visualization of sub-millimetric lesions in cortical layers and in the cerebellar cortex.

===Cerebrospinal fluid (lumbar puncture)===
Testing of cerebrospinal fluid obtained from a lumbar puncture can provide evidence of chronic inflammation in the central nervous system. The cerebrospinal fluid is tested for oligoclonal bands of IgG on electrophoresis, which are inflammation markers found in 75–85% of people with MS.

=== Differential diagnosis ===
Several diseases present similarly to MS. Medical professionals use a patient&#x27;s specific presentation, history, and exam findings to make an individualized differential. Red flags are findings that suggest an alternate diagnosis, although they do not rule out MS. Red flags include a patient younger than 15 or older than 60, less than 24 hours of symptoms, involvement of multiple cranial nerves, involvement of organs outside of the nervous system, and atypical lab and exam findings.

In an emergency setting, it is important to rule out a stroke or bleeding in the brain. Intractable vomiting, severe optic neuritis, or bilateral optic neuritis raises suspicion for neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD). Infectious diseases that may look similar to multiple sclerosis include HIV, Lyme disease, and syphilis. Autoimmune diseases include neurosarcoidosis, lupus, Guillain-Barré syndrome, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, and Behçet&#x27;s disease. Psychiatric conditions such as anxiety or conversion disorder may also present in a similar way. Other rare diseases on the differential include CNS lymphoma, congenital leukodystrophies, and anti-MOG-associated myelitis.

== Types and variants ==

Several phenotypes (commonly termed &quot;types&quot;), or patterns of progression, have been described. Phenotypes use the past course of the disease in an attempt to predict the future course. They are important not only for prognosis but also for treatment decisions.

The International Advisory Committee on Clinical Trials of MS describes four types of MS (revised in 2013) in what is known as the Lublin classification:

# Clinically isolated syndrome (CIS)
# Relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS)
# Primary progressive MS (PPMS)
# Secondary progressive MS (SPMS)
CIS can be characterised as a single lesion seen on MRI which is associated with signs or symptoms found in MS. Due to the McDonald criteria, it does not completely fit the criteria to be diagnosed as MS, hence being named &quot;clinically isolated syndrome&quot;. CIS can be seen as the first episode of demyelination in the central nervous system. To be classified as CIS, the attack must last at least 24 hours and be caused by inflammation or demyelination of the central nervous system. Patients who suffer from CIS may or may not go on to develop MS, but 30 to 70% of persons who experience CIS will later develop MS.

RRMS is characterized by unpredictable relapses followed by periods of months to years of relative quiet (remission) with no new signs of disease activity. Deficits that occur during attacks may either resolve or leave problems, the latter in about 40% of attacks and being more common the longer a person has had the disease. This describes the initial course of 80% of individuals with MS.

PPMS occurs in roughly 10–20% of individuals with the disease, with no remission after the initial symptoms. It is characterized by progression of disability from onset, with no, or only occasional and minor, remissions and improvements. The usual age of onset for the primary progressive subtype is later than that of the relapsing-remitting subtype. It is similar to the age that secondary progressive usually begins in RRMS, around 40 years of age.

SPMS occurs in around 65% of those with initial RRMS, who eventually have progressive neurologic decline between acute attacks without any definite periods of remission. Occasional relapses and minor remissions may appear. The most common length of time between disease onset and conversion from RRMS to SPMS is 19 years.

=== Special courses ===
Independently of the types published by the MS associations, regulatory agencies such as the FDA often consider special courses, trying to reflect some clinical trial results on their approval documents. Some examples could be &quot;highly active MS&quot; (HAMS), &quot;active secondary MS&quot; (similar to the old progressive-relapsing) and &quot;rapidly progressing PPMS&quot;.

Also, deficits always resolving between attacks is sometimes referred to as &quot;benign&quot; MS, although people still build up some degree of disability in the long term. On the other hand, the term malignant multiple sclerosis is used to describe people with MS having reached a significant level of disability in a short period.

An international panel has published a standardized definition for the course HAMS.

=== Variants ===
Atypical variants of MS have been described; these include tumefactive multiple sclerosis, Balo concentric sclerosis, Schilder&#x27;s diffuse sclerosis, and Marburg multiple sclerosis. Debate remains on whether they are MS variants or different diseases. Some diseases previously considered MS variants, such as Devic&#x27;s disease, are now considered outside the MS spectrum.

== Management ==
Although no cure for multiple sclerosis has been found, several therapies have proven helpful. Several effective treatments can decrease the number of attacks and the rate of progression. The primary aims of therapy are returning function after an attack, preventing new attacks, and preventing disability. Starting medications is generally recommended in people after the first attack when more than two lesions are seen on MRI.

The first approved medications used to treat MS were modestly effective, though were poorly tolerated and had many adverse effects. Several treatment options with better safety and tolerability profiles have been introduced, improving the prognosis of MS.

As with any medical treatment, medications used in the management of MS have several adverse effects. Alternative treatments are pursued by some people, despite the shortage of supporting evidence of efficacy.

=== Initial management of acute flare ===
During symptomatic attacks, administration of high doses of intravenous corticosteroids, such as methylprednisolone, is the usual therapy, with oral corticosteroids seeming to have a similar efficacy and safety profile. Although effective in the short term for relieving symptoms, corticosteroid treatments do not appear to have a significant impact on long-term recovery. The long-term benefit is unclear in optic neuritis as of 2020. The consequences of severe attacks that do not respond to corticosteroids might be treatable by plasmapheresis.

=== Chronic management ===
==== Relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis ====
Multiple disease-modifying medications were approved by regulatory agencies for RRMS; they are modestly effective at decreasing the number of attacks. Interferons and glatiramer acetate are first-line treatments and are roughly equivalent, reducing relapses by approximately 30%. Early-initiated long-term therapy is safe and improves outcomes.

Treatment of CIS with interferons decreases the chance of progressing to clinical MS. Efficacy of interferons and glatiramer acetate in children has been estimated to be roughly equivalent to that of adults. The role of some newer agents such as fingolimod, teriflunomide, and dimethyl fumarate, is not yet entirely clear. Making firm conclusions about the best treatment is difficult, especially regarding the long‐term benefit and safety of early treatment, given the lack of studies directly comparing disease-modifying therapies or long-term monitoring of patient outcomes.

The relative effectiveness of different treatments is unclear, as most have only been compared to placebo or a small number of other therapies. Direct comparisons of interferons and glatiramer acetate indicate similar effects or only small differences in effects on relapse rate, disease progression, and MRI measures. There is high confidence that natalizumab, cladribine, or alemtuzumab are decreasing relapses over two years for people with RRMS. Natalizumab and interferon beta-1a (Rebif) may reduce relapses compared to both placebo and interferon beta-1a (Avonex) while Interferon beta-1b (Betaseron), glatiramer acetate, and mitoxantrone may also prevent relapses. Evidence on relative effectiveness in reducing disability progression is unclear. There is moderate confidence that a two-year treatment with natalizumab slows disability progression for people with RRMS. All medications are associated with adverse effects that may influence their risk-to-benefit profiles.

Ublituximab was approved for medical use in the United States in December 2022.

=== Medications ===

Overview of medications available for MS.

==== Progressive multiple sclerosis ====
In 2011, mitoxantrone was the first medication approved for secondary progressive MS. In this population, tentative evidence supports mitoxantrone moderately slowing the progression of the disease and decreasing rates of relapses over two years.

New approved medications continue to emerge. In March 2017, the FDA approved ocrelizumab as a treatment for primary progressive MS in adults, the first drug to gain that approval, with requirements for several Phase IV clinical trials. It is also used for the treatment of relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis, to include clinically isolated syndrome, relapsing-remitting disease, and active secondary progressive disease in adults. According to a 2021 Cochrane review, ocrelizumab may reduce worsening of symptoms for primary progressive MS and probably increases unwanted effects but makes little or no difference to the number of serious unwanted effects.

In 2019, siponimod and cladribine were approved in the United States for the treatment of secondary progressive multiple sclerosis (SPMS). Subsequently, ozanimod was approved in 2020, and ponesimod was approved in 2021, which were both approved for management of CIS, relapsing MS, and SPMS in the U.S., and RRMS in Europe.

Ocrelizumab/hyaluronidase was approved for medical use in the United States in September 2024.

==== Adverse effects ====

The disease-modifying treatments have several adverse effects. One of the most common is irritation at the injection site for glatiramer acetate and the interferons (up to 90% with subcutaneous injections and 33% with intramuscular injections). Over time, a visible dent at the injection site, due to the local destruction of fat tissue, known as lipoatrophy, may develop. Interferons may produce flu-like symptoms; some people taking glatiramer experience a post-injection reaction with flushing, chest tightness, heart palpitations, and anxiety, which usually lasts less than thirty minutes. More dangerous but much less common are liver damage from interferons, systolic dysfunction (12%), infertility, and acute myeloid leukemia (0.8%) from mitoxantrone, and progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy occurring with natalizumab (occurring in 1 in 600 people treated).

Fingolimod may give rise to hypertension and slowed heart rate, macular edema, elevated liver enzymes, or a reduction in lymphocyte levels. Tentative evidence supports the short-term safety of teriflunomide, with common side effects including headaches, fatigue, nausea, hair loss, and limb pain. There have also been reports of liver failure and PML with its use and it is dangerous for fetal development. Most common side effects of dimethyl fumarate are flushing and gastrointestinal problems. While dimethyl fumarate may lead to a reduction in the white blood cell count there were no reported cases of opportunistic infections during trials.

=== Associated symptoms ===
Both medications and neurorehabilitation have been shown to improve some symptoms, though neither changes the course of the disease. Some symptoms have a good response to medication, such as bladder spasticity, while others are little changed. Equipment such as catheters for neurogenic bladder dysfunction or mobility aids can help improve functional status.

A multidisciplinary approach is important for improving quality of life; however, it is difficult to specify a &#x27;core team&#x27; as many health services may be needed at different points in time. Multidisciplinary rehabilitation programs increase activity and participation of people with MS but do not influence impairment level. Studies investigating information provision in support of patient understanding and participation suggest that while interventions (written information, decision aids, coaching, educational programmes) may increase knowledge, the evidence of an effect on decision making and quality of life is mixed and low certainty. There is limited evidence for the overall efficacy of individual therapeutic disciplines, though there is good evidence that specific approaches, such as exercise, and psychological therapies are effective. Cognitive training, alone or combined with other neuropsychological interventions, may show positive effects for memory and attention though firm conclusions are not possible given small sample numbers, variable methodology, interventions and outcome measures. The effectiveness of palliative approaches in addition to standard care is uncertain, due to lack of evidence. The effectiveness of interventions, including exercise, specifically for the prevention of falls in people with MS is uncertain, while there is some evidence of an effect on balance function and mobility. Cognitive behavioral therapy has shown to be moderately effective for reducing MS fatigue. The evidence for the effectiveness of non-pharmacological interventions for chronic pain is insufficient to recommend such interventions alone, however their use in combination with medications may be reasonable.

=== Non-pharmaceutical ===

There is some evidence that aquatic therapy is a beneficial intervention.

The spasticity associated with MS can be difficult to manage because of the progressive and fluctuating course of the disease. Although there is no firm conclusion on the efficacy in reducing spasticity, PT interventions can be a safe and beneficial option for patients with multiple sclerosis. Physical therapy including vibration interventions, electrical stimulation, exercise therapy, standing therapy, and radial shock wave therapy (RSWT), were beneficial for limiting spasticity, helping limit excitability, or increasing range of motion.

=== Alternative treatments ===
Over 50% of people with MS may use complementary and alternative medicine, although percentages vary depending on how alternative medicine is defined. Regarding the characteristics of users, they are more frequently women, have had MS for a longer time, tend to be more disabled and have lower levels of satisfaction with conventional healthcare. The evidence for the effectiveness for such treatments in most cases is weak or absent. Treatments of unproven benefit used by people with MS include dietary supplementation and regimens, vitamin D, relaxation techniques such as yoga, herbal medicine (including medical cannabis), hyperbaric oxygen therapy, self-infection with hookworms, reflexology, acupuncture, and mindfulness. Evidence suggests vitamin D supplementation, irrespective of the form and dose, provides no benefit for people with MS; this includes for measures such as relapse recurrence, disability, and MRI lesions while effects on health‐related quality of life and fatigue are unclear. There is insufficient evidence supporting high-dose biotin and some evidence for increased disease activity and higher risk of relapse with its use. A recent review of the effectiveness of Cannabis and Cannabinoids (2022) found that compared with placebo nabiximols probably reduce the severity of spasticity in the short term.

== Prognosis ==
The availability of treatments that modify the course of multiple sclerosis beginning in the 1990s, known as disease-modifying therapies (DMTs), has improved prognosis. These treatments can reduce relapses and slow progression, but there is no cure.

The prognosis of MS depends on the subtype of the disease, and there is considerable individual variation in the progression of the disease. In relapsing MS, the most common subtype, a 2016 cohort study found that after a median of 16.8 years from onset, one in ten needed a walking aid, and almost two in ten transitioned to secondary progressive MS, a form characterized by more progressive decline. With treatments available in the 2020s, relapses can be eliminated or substantially reduced. However, &quot;silent progression&quot; of the disease still occurs.

In addition to secondary progressive MS (SPMS), a small proportion of people with MS (10–15%) experience progressive decline from the onset, known as primary progressive MS (PPMS). Most treatments have been approved for use in relapsing MS; there are fewer treatments with lower efficacy for progressive forms of MS. The prognosis for progressive MS is worse, with faster accumulation of disability, though with considerable individual variation. In untreated PPMS, the median time from onset to requiring a walking aid is estimated as seven years. In SPMS, a 2014 cohort study reported that people required a walking aid after an average of five years from the onset of SPMS, and were chair or bed-bound after an average of fifteen years.

After diagnosis of MS, characteristics that predict a worse course are male sex, older age, and greater disability at the time of diagnosis; female sex is associated with a higher relapse rate. Currently, no biomarker can accurately predict disease progression in every patient. Spinal cord lesions, abnormalities on MRI, and more brain atrophy are predictive of a worse course, though brain atrophy as a predictor of disease course is experimental and not used in clinical practice. Early treatment leads to a better prognosis, but a higher relapse frequency when treated with DMTs is associated with a poorer prognosis. A 60-year longitudinal population study conducted in Norway found that those with MS had a life expectancy seven years shorter than the general population. Median life expectancy for RRMS patients was 77.8 years and 71.4 years for PPMS, compared to 81.8 years for the general population. Life expectancy for men was five years shorter than for women.

== Epidemiology ==

MS is the most common autoimmune disorder of the central nervous system. The latest estimation of the total number of people with MS was 2.8 million globally, with a prevalence of 36 per 100,000 people. Moreover, prevalence varies widely in different regions around the world. In Africa, there are five people per 100,000 diagnosed with MS, compared to South East Asia where the prevalence is nine per 100,000, 112 per 100,000 in the Americas, and 133 per 100,000 in Europe. Nearly one million people in the United States had MS in 2022.

Increasing rates of MS may be explained simply by better diagnosis. Studies on populational and geographical patterns have been common and have led to a number of theories about the cause.

MS usually appears in adults in their late twenties or early thirties but it can rarely start in childhood and after 50 years of age. The primary progressive subtype is more common in people in their fifties. Similarly to many autoimmune disorders, the disease is more common in women, and the trend may be increasing. As of 2020, globally it is about two times more common in women than in men, and the ratio of women to men with MS is as high as 4:1 in some countries. In children, it is even more common in females than males, while in people over fifty, it affects males and females almost equally.

== History ==
=== Medical discovery ===

Robert Carswell (1793–1857), a British professor of pathology, and Jean Cruveilhier (1791–1873), a French professor of pathologic anatomy, described and illustrated many of the disease&#x27;s clinical details, but did not identify it as a separate disease. Specifically, Carswell described the injuries he found as &quot;a remarkable lesion of the spinal cord accompanied with atrophy&quot;. Under the microscope, Swiss pathologist Georg Eduard Rindfleisch (1836–1908) noted in 1863 that the inflammation-associated lesions were distributed around blood vessels.

The French neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot (1825–1893) was the first person to recognize multiple sclerosis as a distinct disease in 1868. Summarizing previous reports and adding his own clinical and pathological observations, Charcot called the disease &quot;sclerose en plaques&quot;.

=== Diagnosis history ===
The first attempt to establish a set of diagnostic criteria was also due to Charcot in 1868. He published what now is known as the &quot;Charcot triad&quot;, consisting of nystagmus, intention tremor, and telegraphic speech (scanning speech). Charcot also observed cognition changes, describing his patients as having a &quot;marked enfeeblement of the memory&quot; and &quot;conceptions that formed slowly&quot;.

The diagnosis was based on Charcot triad and clinical observation until Schumacher made the first attempt to standardize criteria in 1965 by introducing some fundamental requirements: Dissemination of the lesions in time (DIT) and space (DIS), and that &quot;signs and symptoms cannot be explained better by another disease process&quot;. The DIT and DIS requirement was later inherited by the Poser and McDonald criteria, whose 2017 revision is in use.

During the 20th century, theories about the cause and pathogenesis were developed and effective treatments began to appear in the 1990s. Since the beginning of the 21st century, refinements of the concepts have taken place. The 2010 revision of the McDonald criteria allowed for the diagnosis of MS with only one proved lesion (CIS).

In 1996, the US National Multiple Sclerosis Society (NMSS) (Advisory Committee on Clinical Trials) defined the first version of the clinical phenotypes that is in use. In this first version, they provided standardized definitions for four MS clinical courses: relapsing-remitting (RR), secondary progressive (SP), primary progressive (PP), and progressive relapsing (PR). In 2010, PR was dropped and CIS was incorporated. Three years later, the 2013 revision of the &quot;phenotypes for the disease course&quot; were forced to consider CIS as one of the phenotypes of MS, making obsolete some expressions like &quot;conversion from CIS to MS&quot;. Other organizations have proposed later new clinical phenotypes, like HAMS (Highly Active MS).

=== Historical cases ===
There are several historical accounts of people who probably had MS and lived before or shortly after the disease was described by Charcot.

A young woman called Halldora who lived in Iceland around 1200 suddenly lost her vision and mobility but recovered them seven days after. Saint Lidwina of Schiedam (1380–1433), a Dutch nun, may be one of the first clearly identifiable people with MS. From the age of 16 until her death at 53, she had intermittent pain, weakness of the legs and vision loss: symptoms typical of MS. Both cases have led to the proposal of a &quot;Viking gene&quot; hypothesis for the dissemination of the disease.

Augustus Frederick d&#x27;Este (1794–1848), son of Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex and Lady Augusta Murray and a grandson of George III of the United Kingdom, almost certainly had MS. D&#x27;Este left a detailed diary describing his 22 years living with the disease. His diary began in 1822 and ended in 1846, although it remained unknown until 1948. His symptoms began at age 28 with a sudden transient visual loss (amaurosis fugax) after the funeral of a friend. During his disease, he developed weakness in the legs, clumsiness of the hands, numbness, dizziness, bladder disturbance and erectile dysfunction. In 1844, he began to use a wheelchair. Despite his illness, he kept an optimistic view of life. Another early account of MS was kept by the British diarist W. N. P. Barbellion, pen name of Bruce Frederick Cummings (1889–1919), who maintained a detailed log of his diagnosis and struggle. His diary was published in 1919 as &quot;The Journal of a Disappointed Man&quot;. Charles Dickens, a keen observer, described possible bilateral optic neuritis with reduced contrast vision and Uhthoff&#x27;s phenomenon in the main female character of &quot;Bleak House&quot; (1852–1853), Esther Summerville.

== Research ==
=== Epstein-Barr virus ===
As of 2022, the pathogenesis of MS, as it relates to Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), is actively investigated, as are disease-modifying therapies; understanding of how risk factors combine with EBV to initiate MS is sought. Whether EBV is the only cause of MS might be better understood if an EBV vaccine is developed and shown to prevent MS as well.

Even though a variety of studies showed the connection between an EBV infection and a later development of multiple sclerosis, the mechanisms behind this correlation are not completely clear, and several theories have been proposed to explain the relationship between the two diseases. It is thought that the involvement of EBV-infected B-cells (B lymphocytes) and the involvement of anti-EBNA antibodies, which appear to be significantly higher in multiple sclerosis patients, play a crucial role in the development of the disease. This is supported by the fact that treatment against B-cells, e.g. ocrelizumab, reduces the symptoms of multiple sclerosis: annual relapses appear less frequently and the disability progression is slower. A 2022 Stanford University study has shown that during an EBV infection, molecular mimicry can occur, where the immune system will produce antibodies against the EBNA1 protein, which at the same time is able to bind to GlialCAM in the myelin. Additionally, they observed a phenomenon which is uncommon in healthy individuals but often detected in multiple sclerosis patients – B-cells are trafficking to the brain and spinal cord, where they are producing oligoclonal antibody bands. A majority of these oligoclonal bands do have an affinity to the viral protein EBNA1, which is cross-reactive to GlialCAM. These antibodies are abundant in approximately 20–25% of multiple sclerosis patients and worsen the autoimmune demyelination which leads consequently to a pathophysiological exacerbation of the disease. Furthermore, the intrathecal oligoclonal expansion with a constant somatic hypermutation is unique in multiple sclerosis when compared to other neuroinflammatory diseases. In the study, there was also the abundance of antibodies with IGHV 3–7 genes measured, which appears to be connected to the disease progress. Antibodies which are IGHV3–7-based are binding with a high affinity to EBNA1 and GlialCAM. This process is actively thriving the demyelination. It is probable that B-cells, expressing IGHV 3–7 genes entered the CSF and underwent affinity maturation after facing GlialCAM, which led consequently to the production of high-affinity anti-GlialCAM antibodies. This was additionally shown in the EAE mouse model where immunization with EBNA1 lead to a strong B-cell response against GlialCAM, which worsened the EAE.

=== Human endogenous retroviruses ===
Two members of the human endogenous retroviruses-W (HERV-W) family, namely, ERVWE1 and MS-associated retrovirus (MSRV), may be co-factors in MS immunopathogenesis. HERVs constitute up to 8% of the human genome; most are epigenetically silent, but can be reactivated by exogenous viruses, proinflammatory conditions or oxidative stress.

=== Medications ===
Medications that influence voltage-gated sodium ion channels are under investigation as a potential neuroprotective strategy because of hypothesized role of sodium in the pathological process leading to axonal injury and accumulating disability. There is insufficient evidence of an effect of sodium channel blockers for people with MS.

=== Pathogenesis ===
MS is a clinically defined entity with several atypical presentations. Some auto-antibodies have been found in atypical MS cases, giving birth to separate disease families and restricting the previously wider concept of MS.

Anti-AQP4 autoantibodies were found in neuromyelitis optica (NMO), which was previously considered a MS variant. A spectrum of diseases named NMOSD (NMO spectrum diseases) or anti-AQP4 diseases has been accepted. Some cases of MS were presenting anti-MOG autoantibodies, mainly overlapping with the Marburg variant. Anti-MOG autoantibodies were found to be also present in ADEM, and a second spectrum of separated diseases is being considered. This spectrum is named inconsistently across different authors, but it is normally something similar to anti-MOG demyelinating diseases.

A third kind of auto-antibodies is accepted. There are several anti-neurofascin auto-antibodies that damage the Ranvier nodes of the neurons. These antibodies are more related to the peripheral nervous demyelination, but they were also found in chronic progressive PPMS and combined central and peripheral demyelination (CCPD, which is considered another atypical MS presentation).

In addition to the significance of auto-antibodies in MS, four different patterns of demyelination have been reported, opening the door to consider MS as a heterogeneous disease.

=== Biomarkers ===

Since disease progression is the result of degeneration of neurons, the roles of proteins showing loss of nerve tissue such as neurofilaments, tau, and N-acetylaspartate are under investigation.

Improvement in neuroimaging techniques such as positron emission tomography (PET) or MRI carry a promise for better diagnosis and prognosis predictions. Regarding MRI, there are several techniques that have already shown some usefulness in research settings and could be introduced into clinical practice, such as double-inversion recovery sequences, magnetization transfer, diffusion tensor, and functional magnetic resonance imaging. These techniques are more specific for the disease than existing ones, but still lack some standardization of acquisition protocols and the creation of normative values. This is particularly the case for proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy, for which a number of methodological variations observed in the literature may underlie continued inconsistencies in central nervous system metabolic abnormalities, particularly in N-acetyl aspartate, myoinositol, choline, glutamate, GABA, and GSH, observed for multiple sclerosis and its subtypes. There are other techniques under development that include contrast agents capable of measuring levels of peripheral macrophages, inflammation, or neuronal dysfunction, and techniques that measure iron deposition that could serve to determine the role of this feature in MS, or that of cerebral perfusion.

=== COVID-19 ===
The hospitalization rate was found to be higher among individuals with MS and COVID-19 infection, at 10%, while the pooled infection rate is estimated at 4%. The pooled prevalence of death in hospitalized individuals with MS is estimated as 4%.

=== Metformin ===
A 2019 study on rats and a 2024 study on mice showed that a first-line medication for the treatment of type 2 diabetes, metformin, could promote remyelination. The promising drug is currently being researched on humans in the Octopus trials, a multi-arm, multi-stage trial, focussed on testing existing drugs for other conditions on patients with MS. Currently, clinical trials on humans are ongoing in Belgium, for patients with non-active progressive MS, in the U.K., in combination with clemastine for the treatment of relapsing-remitting MS, and Canada, for MS patients up to 25 years old.

=== Other emerging theories ===
One emerging hypothesis, referred to as the hygiene hypothesis, suggests that early-life exposure to infectious agents helps to develop the immune system and reduces susceptibility to allergies and autoimmune disorders. The hygiene hypothesis has been linked with MS and microbiome hypotheses.

It has also been proposed that certain bacteria found in the gut use molecular mimicry to infiltrate the brain via the gut–brain axis, initiating an inflammatory response and increasing blood-brain barrier permeability. Vitamin D levels have also been correlated with MS; lower levels of vitamin D correspond to an increased risk of MS, suggesting a reduced prevalence in the tropics – an area with more Vitamin D-rich sunlight – strengthening the impact of geographical location on MS development. MS mechanisms begin when peripheral autoreactive effector CD4+ T cells get activated and move into the CNS. Antigen-presenting cells localize the reactivation of autoreactive effector CD4-T cells once they have entered the CNS, attracting more T cells and macrophages to form the inflammatory lesion. In MS patients, macrophages and microglia assemble at locations where demyelination and neurodegeneration are actively occurring, and microglial activation is more apparent in the normal-appearing white matter of MS patients. Astrocytes generate neurotoxic chemicals like nitric oxide and TNFα, attract neurotoxic inflammatory monocytes to the CNS, and are responsible for astrogliosis, the scarring that prevents the spread of neuroinflammation and kills neurons inside the scarred area.

In 2024, scientists shared research on their findings of ancient migration to northern Europe from the Yamnaya area of culture, tracing MS-risk gene variants dating back around 5,000 years. The MS-risk gene variants protected ancient cattle herders from animal diseases, but modern lifestyles, diets and better hygiene, have allowed the gene to develop, resulting in the higher risk of MS today.

== See also ==

* List of multiple sclerosis organizations
* List of people with multiple sclerosis

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="0" end="18" title="Multiple sclerosis" label="Multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="20" end="22" title="Multiple sclerosis" label="MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="30" end="48" title="autoimmune disease" label="autoimmune disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="76" end="93" title="Myelin" label="insulating covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="97" end="108" title="nerve cells" label="nerve cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="126" end="137" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186703" start="144" end="165" title="demyelinating disease" label="demyelinating disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="216" end="232" title="Action potential" label="transmit signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="258" end="276" title="signs and symptoms" label="signs and symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317827" start="298" end="304" title="cognitive disability" label="mental"/>
<link wikidata="Q775940" start="359" end="372" title="double vision" label="double vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="426" end="435" title="Sensation (psychology)" label="sensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="983" end="1015" title="Autoimmune disease" label="destruction by the immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="1114" end="1122" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928978" start="1159" end="1174" title="viral infection" label="viral infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208166" start="1181" end="1198" title="McDonald criteria" label="McDonald criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="1455" end="1471" title="Physical therapy" label="Physical therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380141" start="1476" end="1496" title="occupational therapy" label="occupational therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843811" start="1835" end="1859" title="immune disorder" label="immune-mediated disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="1874" end="1896" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710" start="2201" end="2220" title="Jean-Martin Charcot" label="Jean-Martin Charcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q140067" start="2246" end="2255" title="Sclerosis (medicine)" label="sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="2275" end="2308" title="Multiple sclerosis" label="multiple cerebro-spinal sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569540" start="2339" end="2349" title="glial scar" label="glial scar"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="2417" end="2429" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="2524" end="2546" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="2587" end="2599" title="neurological" label="neurological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="2620" end="2627" title="Fatigue" label="Fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="2791" end="2800" title="Autonomic nervous system" label="Autonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641556" start="2983" end="3002" title="Hypoesthesia" label="loss of sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q769220" start="3006" end="3026" title="Paresthesia" label="changes in sensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930803" start="3121" end="3135" title="blurred vision" label="blurred vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424895" start="3137" end="3156" title="Clonus" label="pronounced reflexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q574360" start="3158" end="3171" title="muscle spasms" label="muscle spasms"/>
<link wikidata="Q213373" start="3226" end="3232" title="ataxia" label="ataxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225957" start="3235" end="3255" title="Dysarthria" label="problems with speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q623289" start="3259" end="3269" title="Dysphagia" label="swallowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q972514" start="3288" end="3302" title="optic neuritis" label="optic neuritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q220989" start="3349" end="3358" title="nystagmus" label="nystagmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q775940" start="3374" end="3387" title="Diplopia" label="double vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q60744379" start="3415" end="3433" title="neurogenic bowel dysfunction" label="bowel difficulties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508789" start="3654" end="3667" title="labile affect" label="unstable mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="3838" end="3856" title="Executive functions" label="executive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q18650" start="3900" end="3915" title="semantic memory" label="semantic memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066143" start="4022" end="4047" title="Uhthoff&amp;#x27;s phenomenon" label="Uhthoff&amp;#x27;s phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822504" start="4128" end="4149" title="Lhermitte&amp;#x27;s sign" label="Lhermitte&amp;#x27;s sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q929518" start="4762" end="4794" title="expanded disability status scale" label="expanded disability status scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939352" start="4835" end="4874" title="multiple sclerosis functional composite" label="multiple sclerosis functional composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140331" start="5142" end="5151" title="prodromal" label="prodromal"/>
<link wikidata="Q338802" start="5333" end="5361" title="clinically isolated syndrome" label="clinically isolated syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q972514" start="5444" end="5458" title="optic neuritis" label="optic neuritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="5495" end="5504" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q611458" start="6031" end="6051" title="neuromyelitis optica" label="neuromyelitis optica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292472" start="6266" end="6273" title="relapse" label="relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125" start="6886" end="6897" title="common cold" label="common cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="6899" end="6908" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q156103" start="6913" end="6928" title="gastroenteritis" label="gastroenteritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="6950" end="6956" title="Stress (medicine)" label="Stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="7065" end="7076" title="vaccination" label="vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="7078" end="7092" title="breast feeding" label="breast feeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066143" start="7115" end="7140" title="Uhthoff&amp;#x27;s phenomenon" label="Uhthoff&amp;#x27;s phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154420" start="7178" end="7197" title="pre-existing disease in pregnancy" label="who become pregnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900" start="7655" end="7673" title="Epstein–Barr virus" label="Epstein-Barr Virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="7976" end="7983" title="peptide" label="peptide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8854" end="8869" title="Multiple sclerosis#Pathophysiology" label="pathophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12290062" start="8935" end="8956" title="Pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis" label="pathophysiology of MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634879" start="9076" end="9093" title="encephalomyelitis" label="encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900" start="9191" end="9203" title="Epstein–Barr virus" label="Epstein-Barr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9204" end="9209" title="Herpesviridae#Human herpesvirus types" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207367" start="9227" end="9251" title="infectious mononucleosis" label="infectious mononucleosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946" start="9656" end="9671" title="cytomegalovirus" label="cytomegalovirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83136430" start="9797" end="9819" title="Epstein–Barr virus nuclear antigen 1" label="nuclear antigen of EBV"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="10161" end="10179" title="hereditary disease" label="hereditary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="10193" end="10211" title="genetics" label="genetic variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622829" start="10313" end="10329" title="microglia" label="microglial cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="10491" end="10505" title="identical twin" label="identical twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="10829" end="10833" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q911125" start="10877" end="10900" title="human leukocyte antigen" label="human leukocyte antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q540857" start="10934" end="10946" title="chromosome 6 (human)" label="chromosome 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q423163" start="10966" end="10998" title="major histocompatibility complex" label="major histocompatibility complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="11181" end="11196" title="diabetes type I" label="type 1 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="11201" end="11229" title="systemic lupus erythematosus" label="systemic lupus erythematosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="11325" end="11331" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q15996534" start="11338" end="11342" title="HLA-DR15" label="DR15"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="11426" end="11430" title="Locus (genetics)" label="loci"/>
<link wikidata="Q14906978" start="11474" end="11482" title="HLA-C554" label="HLA-C554"/>
<link wikidata="Q20771631" start="11499" end="11507" title="HLA-DRB1" label="HLA-DRB1"/>
<link wikidata="Q784237" start="11576" end="11598" title="genetic predisposition" label="genetic predisposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098876" start="11600" end="11631" title="Genome-wide association study" label="Genome-wide association studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="11858" end="11865" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="12024" end="12037" title="Ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet B"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="12058" end="12067" title="vitamin D" label="vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="13377" end="13381" title="Sami people" label="Sami"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="13383" end="13394" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q258344" start="13405" end="13414" title="Hutterite" label="Hutterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="13429" end="13434" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="13454" end="13459" title="Inuit" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140968" start="13556" end="13566" title="Sardinian people" label="Sardinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="13575" end="13584" title="Sicily" label="Sicilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="13586" end="13598" title="Palestinians" label="Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q200263" start="13604" end="13609" title="Parsi" label="Parsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="13751" end="13758" title="Tobacco smoking" label="Smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="13801" end="13807" title="Stress (biological)" label="Stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="14036" end="14052" title="solar irradiance" label="solar irradiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="14053" end="14061" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14193" end="14221" title="Multiple sclerosis#Geography" label="Multiple sclerosis#Geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q741979" start="14439" end="14468" title="Extremely low frequency" label="low-frequency magnetic fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q200928" start="14476" end="14503" title="electric power transmission" label="electric power transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862216" start="14742" end="14744" title="Odds ratio" label="OR"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="14757" end="14759" title="Confidence interval" label="CI"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="15178" end="15190" title="vaccine" label="Vaccinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q474191" start="15311" end="15315" title="Diet (nutrition)" label="diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="15320" end="15327" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="15445" end="15449" title="Gout" label="Gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q105522" start="15505" end="15514" title="uric acid" label="uric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="15898" end="15920" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="15981" end="15994" title="myelin sheath" label="myelin sheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="15999" end="16005" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16353" end="16367" title="Multiple sclerosis#Immune dysregulation" label="causes section"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="16719" end="16727" title="cytokine" label="cytokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019827" start="17000" end="17021" title="oligoclonal bands" label="oligoclonal IgG bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="17062" end="17065" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="CSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622829" start="17578" end="17587" title="microglia" label="microglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107647" start="18154" end="18169" title="phagocytic cell" label="phagocytic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="18416" end="18428" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q186029" start="18436" end="18447" title="optic nerve" label="optic nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="18449" end="18459" title="brain stem" label="brain stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="18461" end="18474" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="18480" end="18491" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q105402" start="18537" end="18547" title="Ventricular system" label="ventricles"/>
<link wikidata="Q646150" start="18612" end="18623" title="grey matter" label="grey matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="18691" end="18716" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q916698" start="18778" end="18793" title="oligodendrocyte" label="oligodendrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q105790271" start="18874" end="18880" title="myelin" label="myelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194277" start="18918" end="18936" title="Action potential" label="electrical signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q178999" start="19063" end="19068" title="axons" label="axons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312279" start="19194" end="19207" title="remyelination" label="remyelination"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="19542" end="19568" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811564" start="19831" end="19867" title="astrocytosis" label="increase in the number of astrocytes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19922" end="19937" title="pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis#Demyelination patterns" label="lesion patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="20040" end="20052" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101929" start="20070" end="20083" title="immunological" label="immunological"/>
<link wikidata="Q193529" start="20135" end="20141" title="T cell" label="T cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q715347" start="20154" end="20164" title="lymphocyte" label="lymphocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="20292" end="20311" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q212354" start="20575" end="20583" title="cytokine" label="cytokine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="20589" end="20599" title="antibodies" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="20702" end="20710" title="oedema" label="swelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="20726" end="20737" title="macrophages" label="macrophages"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="21173" end="21182" title="capillary" label="capillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832" start="21468" end="21478" title="Gadolinium" label="Gadolinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="21629" end="21636" title="fatigue" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="22044" end="22059" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208166" start="22246" end="22263" title="McDonald criteria" label="McDonald criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433012" start="22435" end="22445" title="Schumacher criteria" label="Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233025" start="22450" end="22464" title="Poser criteria" label="Poser criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="24011" end="24022" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6849688" start="24030" end="24044" title="contrast agent" label="contrast agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q719444" start="24731" end="24746" title="lumbar puncture" label="lumbar puncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019827" start="24861" end="24877" title="oligoclonal band" label="oligoclonal band"/>
<link wikidata="Q185098" start="24889" end="24904" title="electrophoresis" label="electrophoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q837512" start="25165" end="25177" title="Differential diagnosis" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q180454" start="25391" end="25405" title="cranial nerves" label="cranial nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="25444" end="25458" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q426199" start="25562" end="25570" title="Intracranial hemorrhage" label="bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q611458" start="25679" end="25717" title="neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder" label="neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="25804" end="25816" title="Lyme disease" label="Lyme disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888578" start="25822" end="25830" title="Neurosyphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859178" start="25860" end="25876" title="neurosarcoidosis" label="neurosarcoidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485" start="25878" end="25883" title="lupus" label="lupus"/>
<link wikidata="Q205214" start="25885" end="25908" title="Guillain–Barré syndrome" label="Guillain-Barré syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q424242" start="25910" end="25946" title="acute disseminated encephalomyelitis" label="acute disseminated encephalomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q911427" start="25952" end="25973" title="Behçet&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Behçet&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q845224" start="26006" end="26013" title="Generalized anxiety disorder" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051355" start="26017" end="26036" title="conversion disorder" label="conversion disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246818" start="26120" end="26132" title="Primary central nervous system lymphoma" label="CNS lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821559" start="26134" end="26161" title="Leukodystrophy" label="congenital leukodystrophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339739" start="26167" end="26195" title="MOG antibody disease" label="anti-MOG-associated myelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203551" start="26232" end="26242" title="Phenotype (clinical medicine)" label="phenotypes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26627" end="26648" title="Multiple sclerosis research#Lublin classification" label="Lublin classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q338802" start="26653" end="26681" title="Clinically isolated syndrome" label="Clinically isolated syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417392" start="26690" end="26709" title="Relapsing–remitting" label="Relapsing-remitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="27217" end="27229" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186703" start="27233" end="27246" title="Demyelinating disease" label="demyelination"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="27254" end="27276" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571900" start="27517" end="27526" title="remission (medicine)" label="remission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089469" start="27630" end="27638" title="sequelae" label="problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q8578518" start="29188" end="29216" title="malignant multiple sclerosis" label="malignant multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988897" start="29432" end="29440" title="Idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating diseases" label="variants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852611" start="29482" end="29512" title="tumefactive multiple sclerosis" label="tumefactive multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783645" start="29514" end="29539" title="Balo concentric sclerosis" label="Balo concentric sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909420" start="29541" end="29574" title="Diffuse myelinoclastic sclerosis" label="Schilder&amp;#x27;s diffuse sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493792" start="29580" end="29606" title="Marburg multiple sclerosis" label="Marburg multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q611458" start="29735" end="29755" title="Devic&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Devic&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047938" start="30592" end="30607" title="adverse effect (medicine)" label="adverse effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="30609" end="30631" title="Alternative medicine" label="Alternative treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="30820" end="30831" title="intravenous therapy" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="30832" end="30846" title="corticosteroid" label="corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q417222" start="30857" end="30875" title="methylprednisolone" label="methylprednisolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q603502" start="31292" end="31306" title="plasmapheresis" label="plasmapheresis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31394" end="31411" title="Management of multiple sclerosis#Disease-modifying treatments" label="disease-modifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q188269" start="31536" end="31547" title="Interferons" label="Interferons"/>
<link wikidata="Q418274" start="31552" end="31570" title="glatiramer acetate" label="glatiramer acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q425137" start="31977" end="31987" title="fingolimod" label="fingolimod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077133" start="31989" end="32002" title="teriflunomide" label="teriflunomide"/>
<link wikidata="Q418123" start="32008" end="32025" title="dimethyl fumarate" label="dimethyl fumarate"/>
<link wikidata="Q386119" start="32659" end="32670" title="natalizumab" label="natalizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q414030" start="32672" end="32682" title="cladribine" label="cladribine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420164" start="32687" end="32698" title="alemtuzumab" label="alemtuzumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450337" start="32776" end="32794" title="interferon beta-1a" label="interferon beta-1a"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32796" end="32801" title="Interferon beta-1a#Brand names" label="Rebif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851162" start="32886" end="32904" title="Interferon beta-1b" label="Interferon beta-1b"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32906" end="32915" title="Interferon beta-1b#Commercial formulations" label="Betaseron"/>
<link wikidata="Q239426" start="32942" end="32954" title="mitoxantrone" label="mitoxantrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876570" start="33291" end="33302" title="Ublituximab" label="Ublituximab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33934" end="33942" title="Phases of clinical research#Phase IV" label="Phase IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105187" start="34178" end="34193" title="Cochrane review" label="Cochrane review"/>
<link wikidata="Q25100876" start="34394" end="34403" title="siponimod" label="siponimod"/>
<link wikidata="Q414030" start="34408" end="34418" title="cladribine" label="cladribine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21098986" start="34538" end="34546" title="ozanimod" label="ozanimod"/>
<link wikidata="Q18604129" start="34573" end="34582" title="ponesimod" label="ponesimod"/>
<link wikidata="Q130377417" start="34710" end="34735" title="Ocrelizumab/hyaluronidase" label="Ocrelizumab/hyaluronidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q114231575" start="34837" end="34864" title="disease-modifying treatment" label="disease-modifying treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500973" start="35180" end="35191" title="lipoatrophy" label="lipoatrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508755" start="35230" end="35247" title="flu-like symptoms" label="flu-like symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349821" start="35467" end="35479" title="hepatotoxicity" label="liver damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="35498" end="35518" title="systolic dysfunction" label="systolic dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="35526" end="35537" title="infertility" label="infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q264118" start="35543" end="35565" title="acute myeloid leukemia" label="acute myeloid leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q704930" start="35596" end="35638" title="progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy" label="progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="35735" end="35747" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q217111" start="35752" end="35769" title="bradycardia" label="slowed heart rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813737" start="35771" end="35784" title="macular edema" label="macular edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q485831" start="35815" end="35845" title="lymphopenia" label="reduction in lymphocyte levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q631521" start="36081" end="36112" title="Teratology" label="dangerous for fetal development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435822" start="36242" end="36281" title="neutropenia" label="reduction in the white blood cell count"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510101" start="36404" end="36423" title="neurorehabilitation" label="neurorehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q117060" start="36582" end="36592" title="spasticity" label="spasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="36645" end="36653" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339038" start="36659" end="36689" title="neurogenic bladder dysfunction" label="neurogenic bladder dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="36746" end="36763" title="multidisciplinary" label="multidisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q29483" start="37887" end="37908" title="Palliative care" label="palliative approaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="38182" end="38210" title="Cognitive behavioral therapy" label="Cognitive behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791974" start="38543" end="38558" title="aquatic therapy" label="aquatic therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="39202" end="39240" title="complementary and alternative medicine" label="complementary and alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="39702" end="39711" title="vitamin D" label="vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q955260" start="39713" end="39733" title="relaxation technique" label="relaxation technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091595" start="39743" end="39747" title="yoga as exercise" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="39749" end="39764" title="herbal medicine" label="herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033379" start="39776" end="39792" title="medical cannabis" label="medical cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q731615" start="39795" end="39820" title="hyperbaric oxygen therapy" label="hyperbaric oxygen therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135101" start="39822" end="39851" title="helminthic therapy" label="self-infection with hookworms"/>
<link wikidata="Q449058" start="39853" end="39864" title="reflexology" label="reflexology"/>
<link wikidata="Q121713" start="39866" end="39877" title="acupuncture" label="acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q341045" start="39883" end="39894" title="mindfulness" label="mindfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q181354" start="40224" end="40230" title="biotin" label="biotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="40361" end="40369" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="Cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q422936" start="40374" end="40385" title="Cannabinoid" label="Cannabinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q891968" start="40427" end="40437" title="nabiximols" label="nabiximols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620193" start="42405" end="42418" title="Cerebral atrophy" label="brain atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="42787" end="42802" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="43234" end="43244" title="prevalence" label="prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43703" end="43724" title="#Geography" label="geographical patterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938227" start="44442" end="44457" title="Robert Carswell (pathologist)" label="Robert Carswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="44494" end="44503" title="pathology" label="pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296327" start="44509" end="44525" title="Jean Cruveilhier" label="Jean Cruveilhier"/>
<link wikidata="Q72028" start="44874" end="44898" title="Georg Eduard Rindfleisch" label="Georg Eduard Rindfleisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="45017" end="45028" title="neurologist" label="neurologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710" start="45029" end="45048" title="Jean-Martin Charcot" label="Jean-Martin Charcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063091" start="45457" end="45470" title="Charcot&amp;#x27;s neurologic triad" label="Charcot triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149420" start="45503" end="45519" title="intention tremor" label="intention tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399182" start="45525" end="45543" title="telegraphic speech" label="telegraphic speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="47479" end="47486" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q264499" start="47574" end="47587" title="Saint Lidwina" label="Saint Lidwina"/>
<link wikidata="Q204709" start="47591" end="47599" title="Schiedam" label="Schiedam"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="47621" end="47624" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q464281" start="47933" end="47963" title="Augustus d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Augustus Frederick d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q375467" start="47984" end="48025" title="Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex" label="Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q434358" start="48030" end="48049" title="Lady Augusta Murray" label="Lady Augusta Murray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48068" end="48100" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146228" start="48360" end="48375" title="amaurosis fugax" label="amaurosis fugax"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="48533" end="48553" title="erectile dysfunction" label="erectile dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214198" start="48711" end="48730" title="W. N. P. Barbellion" label="W. N. P. Barbellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60072157" start="48884" end="48917" title="The Journal of a Disappointed Man" label="The Journal of a Disappointed Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="48925" end="48940" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q972514" start="48988" end="49002" title="optic neuritis" label="optic neuritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066143" start="49036" end="49061" title="Uhthoff&amp;#x27;s phenomenon" label="Uhthoff&amp;#x27;s phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q883305" start="49100" end="49111" title="Bleak House" label="Bleak House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900" start="49247" end="49271" title="Epstein–Barr virus" label="Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384030" start="49481" end="49492" title="Epstein–Barr virus vaccine" label="EBV vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188930" start="49877" end="49884" title="B cell" label="B-cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900" start="49929" end="49933" title="EBNA" label="EBNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013780" start="50140" end="50151" title="ocrelizumab" label="ocrelizumab"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="50285" end="50304" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900" start="50440" end="50444" title="EBNA" label="EBNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340715" start="52005" end="52009" title="HERV" label="HERV"/>
<link wikidata="Q14902502" start="52894" end="52918" title="Aquaporin 4" label="Anti-AQP4 autoantibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q611458" start="52933" end="52953" title="neuromyelitis optica" label="neuromyelitis optica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947292" start="53140" end="53163" title="myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein" label="anti-MOG autoantibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339739" start="53442" end="53473" title="Anti-MOG associated encephalomyelitis" label="anti-MOG demyelinating diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q18036734" start="53539" end="53555" title="neurofascin" label="anti-neurofascin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088030" start="53750" end="53795" title="combined central and peripheral demyelination" label="combined central and peripheral demyelination"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135821" start="54015" end="54036" title="heterogeneous disease" label="heterogeneous disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q962115" start="54186" end="54199" title="neurofilament" label="neurofilament"/>
<link wikidata="Q419507" start="54202" end="54205" title="Tau protein" label="tau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629377" start="54211" end="54228" title="N-acetylaspartate" label="N-acetylaspartate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="54302" end="54330" title="positron emission tomography" label="positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731637" start="54606" end="54628" title="magnetization transfer" label="magnetization transfer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54630" end="54646" title="Diffusion MRI#Diffusion tensor imaging" label="diffusion tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="54652" end="54689" title="functional magnetic resonance imaging" label="functional magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359898" start="54895" end="54933" title="proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy" label="proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629377" start="55116" end="55134" title="N-acetyl aspartate" label="N-acetyl aspartate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407997" start="55136" end="55147" title="myoinositol" label="myoinositol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193166" start="55149" end="55156" title="choline" label="choline"/>
<link wikidata="Q120785193" start="55158" end="55167" title="Glutamate (neurotransmitter)" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="55169" end="55173" title="GABA" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q116907" start="55179" end="55182" title="Glutathione" label="GSH"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="55350" end="55360" title="macrophage" label="macrophage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="55924" end="55939" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19484" start="55941" end="55950" title="metformin" label="metformin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312279" start="55966" end="55979" title="remyelination" label="remyelination"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="56224" end="56231" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="56285" end="56289" title="United Kingdom" label="U.K."/>
<link wikidata="Q418145" start="56311" end="56321" title="clemastine" label="clemastine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="56371" end="56377" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330402" start="56719" end="56729" title="microbiome" label="microbiome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077315" start="56862" end="56876" title="gut–brain axis" label="gut–brain axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175621" start="56963" end="56972" title="Vitamin D" label="Vitamin D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944044" start="57278" end="57290" title="Autoreactive lymphocyte" label="autoreactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q632518" start="57300" end="57312" title="CD4+ T cells" label="CD4+ T cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047791" start="57350" end="57373" title="Antigen-presenting cell" label="Antigen-presenting cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q502961" start="57769" end="57778" title="Astrocyte" label="Astrocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="57815" end="57827" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173843" start="57832" end="57836" title="TNFα" label="TNFα"/>
<link wikidata="Q107244" start="57870" end="57878" title="monocyte" label="monocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811564" start="57916" end="57928" title="astrogliosis" label="astrogliosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q426737" start="58136" end="58159" title="Yamnaya culture" label="Yamnaya area of culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629555" start="58448" end="58488" title="List of multiple sclerosis organizations" label="List of multiple sclerosis organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348395" start="58491" end="58529" title="List of people with multiple sclerosis" label="List of people with multiple sclerosis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50604" wikidata="Q1665844" url="?curid=50604" title="Interacting boson model">
<text>The interacting boson model (IBM) is a model in nuclear physics in which
nucleons (protons or neutrons) pair up, essentially
acting as a single particle with boson properties, with
integral spin of either 2 (d-boson) or 0 (s-boson). They correspond to a quintuplet and singlet, i.e. 6 states.

It is sometimes known as the Interacting boson approximation (IBA).

The IBM1/IBM-I model treats both types of nucleons the same and considers only pairs of nucleons coupled to
total angular momentum 0 and 2, called respectively, s and d bosons.

The IBM2/IBM-II model treats protons and neutrons separately.

Both models are restricted to nuclei with even numbers of protons and neutrons.
The model can be used to predict vibrational and rotational modes of non-spherical nuclei.

==History==
This model was invented by Akito Arima and Francesco Iachello in 1974. while working at the Kernfysisch Versneller Instituut(KVI) in Groningen, Netherlands. KVI is now property of Universitair Medisch Centrum Groningen (https://umcgresearch.org/).

==See also==
*Liquid drop model
*Nuclear shell model

==References==
*
*
* 
*
==Further reading==
* Evolution of shapes in even–even nuclei using the standard interacting boson model</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1665844" start="4" end="33" title="Interacting boson model" label="interacting boson model (IBM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="39" end="47" title="nuclear model" label="model in"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="48" end="63" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="83" end="89" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="94" end="101" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q177013" start="144" end="152" title="Subatomic particle" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="158" end="163" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="190" end="194" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102165" start="405" end="412" title="nucleon" label="nucleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="532" end="537" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="570" end="576" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="582" end="589" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q419369" start="815" end="826" title="Akito Arima" label="Akito Arima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441080" start="831" end="849" title="Francesco Iachello" label="Francesco Iachello"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="880" end="912" title="Kernfysisch Versneller Instituut" label="Kernfysisch Versneller Instituut"/>
<link wikidata="Q749" start="921" end="930" title="Groningen" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="932" end="943" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q206451" start="1051" end="1068" title="Liquid drop model" label="Liquid drop model"/>
<link wikidata="Q600617" start="1070" end="1089" title="Nuclear shell model" label="Nuclear shell model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50605" wikidata="Q210427" url="?curid=50605" title="Cerebral palsy">
<text>Cerebral palsy (CP) is a group of movement disorders that appear in early childhood. Signs and symptoms vary among people and over time, but include poor coordination, stiff muscles, weak muscles, and tremors. There may be problems with sensation, vision, hearing, and speech. Often, babies with cerebral palsy do not roll over, sit, crawl or walk as early as other children. Other symptoms may include seizures and problems with thinking or reasoning. While symptoms may get more noticeable over the first years of life, underlying problems do not worsen over time.
Cerebral palsy is caused by abnormal development or damage to the parts of the brain that control movement, balance, and posture. Most often, the problems occur during pregnancy, but may occur during childbirth or shortly afterwards. Often, the cause is unknown. Risk factors include preterm birth, being a twin, certain infections or exposure to methylmercury during pregnancy, a difficult delivery, and head trauma during the first few years of life. New studies suggest that inherited genetic causes play a role in 25% of cases, where formerly it was believed that 2% of cases were genetically determined.

Sub-types are classified, based on the specific problems present. For example, those with stiff muscles have spastic cerebral palsy, poor coordination in locomotion have ataxic cerebral palsy, and writhing movements have dyskinetic cerebral palsy. Diagnosis is based on the child&#x27;s development. Blood tests and medical imaging may be used to rule out other possible causes.
Some causes of CP are preventable through immunization of the mother, and efforts to prevent head injuries in children such as improved safety. There is no known cure for CP, but supportive treatments, medication and surgery may help individuals. This may include physical therapy, occupational therapy and speech therapy. Mouse NGF has been shown to improve outcomes and has been available in China since 2003. Medications such as diazepam, baclofen and botulinum toxin may help relax stiff muscles. Surgery may include lengthening muscles and cutting overly active nerves. Often, external braces and Lycra splints and other assistive technology are helpful with mobility. Some affected children can achieve near normal adult lives with appropriate treatment. While alternative medicines are frequently used, there is no evidence to support their use. Potential treatments are being examined, including stem cell therapy. However, more research is required to determine if it is effective and safe.
Cerebral palsy is the most common movement disorder in children, occurring in about 2.1 per 1,000 live births. It has been documented throughout history, with the first known descriptions occurring in the work of Hippocrates in the 5th century BCE. Extensive study began in the 19th century by William John Little, after whom spastic diplegia was called &quot;Little&#x27;s disease&quot;. William Osler first named it &quot;cerebral palsy&quot; from the German (cerebral child-paralysis).
==Signs and symptoms==
Cerebral palsy is defined as &quot;a group of permanent disorders of the development of movement and posture, causing activity limitation, that are attributed to non-progressive disturbances that occurred in the developing fetal or infant brain.&quot; While movement problems are the central feature of CP, difficulties with thinking, learning, feeling, communication and behavior often co-occur, with 28% having epilepsy, 58% having difficulties with communication, at least 42% having problems with their vision, and 2356% having learning disabilities. Muscle contractions in people with cerebral palsy-related high muscle tone are commonly thought to arise from overactivation. Although most people with CP have problems with increased muscle tone, some have low muscle tone instead. High muscle tone can either be due to spasticity or dystonia.

Cerebral palsy is characterized by abnormal muscle tone, reflexes, or motor development and coordination. The neurological lesion is primary and permanent while orthopedic manifestations are secondary to high muscle tone and progressive. In cerebral palsy with high muscle tone, unequal growth between muscle-tendon units and bone eventually leads to bone and joint deformities. At first, deformities are dynamic. Over time, deformities tend to become static, and joint contractures develop. Deformities in general and static deformities in specific (joint contractures) cause increasing gait difficulties in the form of tip-toeing gait, due to tightness of the Achilles tendon, and scissoring gait, due to tightness of the hip adductors. These gait patterns are among the most common gait abnormalities in children with cerebral palsy. However, orthopaedic manifestations of cerebral palsy are diverse. Additionally, crouch gait (also described as knee flexion gait) is prevalent among children who possess the ability to walk. The effects of cerebral palsy fall on a continuum of motor dysfunction, which may range from slight clumsiness at the mild end of the spectrum to impairments so severe that they render coordinated movement virtually impossible at the other end of the spectrum.

Babies born with severe cerebral palsy often have irregular posture; their bodies may be either very floppy or very stiff. Birth defects, such as spinal curvature, a small jawbone, or a small head sometimes occur along with CP. Symptoms may appear or change as a child gets older. Babies born with cerebral palsy do not immediately present with symptoms. Classically, CP becomes evident when the baby reaches the developmental stage at 6 to 9 months and is starting to mobilise, where preferential use of limbs, asymmetry, or gross motor developmental delay is seen.

Drooling is common among children with cerebral palsy, which can have a variety of impacts including social rejection, impaired speaking, damage to clothing and books, and mouth infections. It can additionally cause choking.

An average of 55.5% of people with cerebral palsy experience lower urinary tract symptoms, more commonly excessive storage issues than voiding issues. Those with voiding issues and pelvic floor overactivity can deteriorate as adults and experience upper urinary tract dysfunction.

Children with CP may also have sensory processing issues. Adults with cerebral palsy have a higher risk of respiratory failure.

===Skeleton===
For bones to attain their normal shape and size, they require the stresses from normal musculature. People with cerebral palsy are at risk of low bone mineral density. The shafts of the bones are often thin (gracile), and become thinner during growth. When compared to these thin shafts (diaphyses), the centres (metaphyses) often appear quite enlarged (ballooning). Due to more than normal joint compression caused by muscular imbalances, articular cartilage may atrophy, leading to narrowed joint spaces. Depending on the degree of spasticity, a person with the spastic form of CP may exhibit a variety of angular joint deformities. Because vertebral bodies need vertical gravitational loading forces to develop properly, spasticity and an abnormal gait can hinder proper or full bone and skeletal development. People with CP tend to be shorter in height than the average person because their bones are not allowed to grow to their full potential. Sometimes bones grow to different lengths, so the person may have one leg longer than the other.

Children with CP are prone to low trauma fractures, particularly children with higher Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) levels who cannot walk. This further affects a child&#x27;s mobility, strength, and experience of pain, and can lead to missed schooling or child abuse suspicions. These children generally have fractures in the legs, whereas non-affected children mostly fracture their arms in the context of sporting activities.

Hip dislocation and ankle equinus or plantar flexion deformity are the two most common deformities among children with cerebral palsy. Additionally, flexion deformity of the hip and knee can occur. Torsional deformities of long bones such as the femur and tibia are also encountered, among others. Children may develop scoliosis before the age of 10 – estimated prevalence of scoliosis in children with CP is between 21% and 64%. Higher levels of impairment on the GMFCS are associated with scoliosis and hip dislocation. Scoliosis can be corrected with surgery, but CP makes surgical complications more likely, even with improved techniques. Hip migration can be managed by soft tissue procedures such as adductor musculature release. Advanced degrees of hip migration or dislocation can be managed by more extensive procedures such as femoral and pelvic corrective osteotomies. Both soft tissue and bony procedures aim at prevention of hip dislocation in the early phases or aim at hip containment and restoration of anatomy in the late phases of disease. Equinus deformity is managed by conservative methods especially when dynamic. If fixed/static deformity ensues surgery may become mandatory.

Growth spurts during puberty can make walking more difficult for people with CP and high muscle tone.

===Eating===
Due to sensory and motor impairments, those with CP may have difficulty preparing food, holding utensils, or chewing and swallowing. An infant with CP may not be able to suck, swallow or chew. Gastro-oesophageal reflux is common in children with CP. Children with CP may have too little or too much sensitivity around and in the mouth. Poor balance when sitting, lack of control of the head, mouth, and trunk, not being able to bend the hips enough to allow the arms to stretch forward to reach and grasp food or utensils, and lack of hand-eye coordination can make self-feeding difficult. Feeding difficulties are related to higher GMFCS levels. Dental problems can also contribute to difficulties with eating. Pneumonia is also common where eating difficulties exist, caused by undetected aspiration of food or liquids. Fine finger dexterity, like that needed for picking up a utensil, is more frequently impaired than gross manual dexterity, like that needed for spooning food onto a plate. Grip strength impairments are less common.

Children with severe cerebral palsy, particularly with oropharyngeal issues, are at risk of undernutrition. Triceps skin fold tests have been found to be a very reliable indicator of malnutrition in children with cerebral palsy. Due to challenges in feeding, evidence has shown that children with cerebral palsy are at a greater risk of malnutrition.

===Language===
Speech and language disorders are common in people with cerebral palsy. The incidence of dysarthria is estimated to range from 31% to 88%, and around a quarter of people with CP are non-verbal. Speech problems are associated with poor respiratory control, laryngeal and velopharyngeal dysfunction, and oral articulation disorders that are due to restricted movement in the oral-facial muscles. There are three major types of dysarthria in cerebral palsy: spastic, dyskinetic (athetotic), and ataxic.

Early use of augmentative and alternative communication systems may assist the child in developing spoken language skills. Overall language delay is associated with problems of cognition, deafness, and learned helplessness. Children with cerebral palsy are at risk of learned helplessness and becoming passive communicators, initiating little communication. Early intervention with this clientele, and their parents, often targets situations in which children communicate with others so that they learn that they can control people and objects in their environment through this communication, including making choices, decisions, and mistakes.

===Pain and sleep===
Pain is common and may result from the inherent deficits associated with the condition, along with the numerous procedures children typically face. When children with cerebral palsy are in pain, they experience worse muscle spasms. Pain is associated with tight or shortened muscles, abnormal posture, stiff joints, unsuitable orthosis, etc. Hip migration or dislocation is a recognizable source of pain in CP children and especially in the adolescent population. Nevertheless, the adequate scoring and scaling of pain in CP children remains challenging. Pain in CP has a number of different causes, and different pains respond to different treatments.

There is also a high likelihood of chronic sleep disorders secondary to both physical and environmental factors. Children with cerebral palsy have significantly higher rates of sleep disturbance than typically developing children. Babies with cerebral palsy who have stiffness issues might cry more and be harder to put to sleep than non-disabled babies, or &quot;floppy&quot; babies might be lethargic. Chronic pain is under-recognized in children with cerebral palsy, even though three out of four children with cerebral palsy experience pain. Adults with CP also experience more pain than the general population.

===Associated disorders===
Associated disorders include intellectual disabilities, seizures, muscle contractures, abnormal gait, osteoporosis, communication disorders, malnutrition, sleep disorders, and mental health disorders, such as depression and anxiety. Epilepsy is often found in the child before they are 1 year old, or also before they are four or five. In addition to these, functional gastrointestinal abnormalities contributing to bowel obstruction, vomiting, and constipation may also arise. Adults with cerebral palsy may have ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, cancer, and trauma more often. Obesity in people with cerebral palsy or a more severe Gross Motor Function Classification System assessment in particular are considered risk factors for multimorbidity. Other medical issues can be mistaken for being symptoms of cerebral palsy, and so may not be treated correctly.

Related conditions can include apraxia, sensory impairments, urinary incontinence, fecal incontinence, or behavioural disorders.

Seizure management is more difficult in people with CP as seizures often last longer. Epilepsy and asthma are common co-occurring diseases in adults with CP. The associated disorders that co-occur with cerebral palsy may be more disabling than the motor function problems.

Managing respiratory illnesses in children with severe CP is considered complex due to the need to manage oropharyngeal dysphagia of both food/drink and saliva, gastroesophageal reflux, motor disorders, upper airway obstruction during sleep, malnutrition, among other factors.

==Causes==

Cerebral palsy is due to abnormal development or damage occurring to the developing brain. This damage can occur during pregnancy, delivery, the first month of life, or less commonly in early childhood. Structural problems in the brain are seen in 80% of cases, most commonly within the white matter.
More than three-quarters of cases are believed to result from issues that occur during pregnancy. Most children who are born with cerebral palsy have more than one risk factor associated with CP. Cerebral palsy is not contagious and cannot be contracted in adulthood. CP is almost always developed in utero, or prior to birth.

While in certain cases there is no identifiable cause, typical causes include problems in intrauterine development (e.g. exposure to radiation, infection, fetal growth restriction), hypoxia of the brain (thrombotic events, placental insufficiency, umbilical cord prolapse), birth trauma during labor and delivery, and complications around birth or during childhood.

In Africa birth asphyxia, high bilirubin levels, and infections in newborns of the central nervous system are main cause. Many cases of CP in Africa could be prevented with better resources available.

===Preterm birth===
Between 40% and 50% of all children who develop cerebral palsy were born prematurely. Most of these cases (75–90%) are believed to be due to issues that occur around the time of birth, often just after birth. Multiple-birth infants are also more likely than single-birth infants to have CP. They are also more likely to be born with a low birth weight.

In those who are born with a weight between 1 kg (2.2 lbs) and 1.5 kg (3.3 lbs) CP occurs in 6%. Among those born before 28 weeks of gestation it occurs in 8%. Genetic factors are believed to play an important role in prematurity and cerebral palsy generally. In those who are born between 34 and 37 weeks the risk is 0.4% (three times normal).

===Term infants===
In babies who are born at term risk factors include problems with the placenta, birth defects, low birth weight, breathing meconium into the lungs, a delivery requiring either the use of instruments or an emergency Caesarean section, birth asphyxia, seizures just after birth, respiratory distress syndrome, low blood sugar, and infections in the baby.

, it was unclear how much of a role birth asphyxia plays as a cause. It is unclear if the size of the placenta plays a role. it is evident that in advanced countries, most cases of cerebral palsy in term or near-term neonates have explanations other than asphyxia.

===Genetics===

Cerebral palsy is not commonly considered a genetic disease. About 2% of all CP cases are expected to be inherited, with glutamate decarboxylase-1 being one of the possible enzymes involved. Most inherited cases are autosomal recessive. However, the vast majority of CP cases are connected to brain damage during birth and in infancy. There is a small percentage of CP cases caused by brain damage that stemmed from the prenatal period, which is estimated to be less than 5% of CP cases overall. Moreover, there is no one reason why some CP cases come from prenatal brain damage, and it is not known if those cases have a genetic basis.

Cerebellar hypoplasia is sometimes genetic and can cause ataxic cerebral palsy.

===Early childhood===
After birth, other causes include toxins, severe jaundice, lead poisoning, physical brain injury, stroke, abusive head trauma, incidents involving hypoxia to the brain (such as near drowning), and encephalitis or meningitis.

===Others===
Infections in the mother, even those not easily detected, can triple the risk of the child developing cerebral palsy. Infection of the fetal membranes known as chorioamnionitis increases the risk.

Intrauterine and neonatal insults (many of which are infectious) increase the risk.

Rh blood type incompatibility can cause the mother&#x27;s immune system to attack the baby&#x27;s red blood cells.

It has been hypothesised that some cases of cerebral palsy are caused by the death in very early pregnancy of an identical twin.

==Diagnosis==
The diagnosis of cerebral palsy has historically rested on the person&#x27;s history and physical examination and is generally assessed at a young age. A general movements assessment, which involves measuring movements that occur spontaneously among those less than four months of age, appears most accurate. Children who are more severely affected are more likely to be noticed and diagnosed earlier. Abnormal muscle tone, delayed motor development and persistence of primitive reflexes are the main early symptoms of CP. Symptoms and diagnosis typically occur by the age of two, although depending on factors like malformations and congenital issues, persons with milder forms of cerebral palsy may be over the age of five, if not in adulthood, when finally diagnosed.

Cognitive assessments and medical observations are also useful to help confirm a diagnosis. Additionally, evaluations of the child&#x27;s mobility, speech and language, hearing, vision, gait, feeding and digestion are also useful to determine the extent of the disorder. Early diagnosis and intervention are seen as being a key part of managing cerebral palsy. Machine learning algorithms facilitate automatic early diagnosis, with methods such as deep neural network and geometric feature fusion producing high accuracy in predicting cerebral palsy from short videos. It is a developmental disability.

Once a person is diagnosed with cerebral palsy, further diagnostic tests are optional. Neuroimaging with CT or MRI is warranted when the cause of a person&#x27;s cerebral palsy has not been established. An MRI is preferred over CT, due to diagnostic yield and safety. When abnormal, evidence from neuroimaging may suggest the timing of the initial damage. The CT or MRI is also capable of revealing treatable conditions, such as hydrocephalus, porencephaly, arteriovenous malformation, subdural hematomas and hygromas, and a vermian tumour (which a few studies suggest are present 5–22% of the time). Furthermore, abnormalities detected by neuroimaging may indicate a high likelihood of associated conditions, such as epilepsy and intellectual disability. There is a small risk associated with sedating children to facilitate a clear MRI.
The age when CP is diagnosed is important, but medical professionals disagree over the best age to make the diagnosis. The earlier CP is diagnosed correctly, the better the opportunities are to provide the child with physical and educational help, but there might be a greater chance of confusing CP with another problem, especially if the child is 18 months of age or younger. Infants may have temporary problems with muscle tone or control that can be confused with CP, which is permanent. A metabolism disorder or tumors in the nervous system may appear to be CP; metabolic disorders, in particular, can produce brain problems that look like CP on an MRI. Disorders that deteriorate the white matter in the brain and problems that cause spasms and weakness in the legs, may be mistaken for CP if they first appear early in life. However, these disorders get worse over time, and CP does not (although it may change in character). In infancy it may not be possible to tell the difference between them. In the UK, not being able to sit independently by the age of 8 months is regarded as a clinical sign for further monitoring. Fragile X syndrome (a cause of autism and intellectual disability) and general intellectual disability must also be ruled out. Cerebral palsy specialist John McLaughlin recommends waiting until the child is 36 months of age before making a diagnosis because, by that age, motor capacity is easier to assess.

===Classification===
CP is classified by the types of motor impairment of the limbs or organs, and by restrictions to the activities an affected person may perform. The Gross Motor Function Classification System-Expanded and Revised and the Manual Ability Classification System are used to describe mobility and manual dexterity in people with cerebral palsy, and recently the Communication Function Classification System, and the Eating and Drinking Ability Classification System have been proposed to describe those functions. There are three main CP classifications by motor impairment: spastic, ataxic, and dyskinetic. Additionally, there is a mixed type that shows a combination of features of the other types. These classifications reflect the areas of the brain that are damaged.

Cerebral palsy is also classified according to the topographic distribution of muscle spasticity. This method classifies children as diplegic, (bilateral involvement with leg involvement greater than arm involvement), hemiplegic (unilateral involvement), or quadriplegic (bilateral involvement with arm involvement equal to or greater than leg involvement).

====Spastic====

Spastic cerebral palsy is the type of cerebral palsy characterized by spasticity or high muscle tone often resulting in stiff, jerky movements. Itself an umbrella term encompassing spastic hemiplegia, spastic diplegia, spastic quadriplegia and – where solely one limb or one specific area of the body is affected – spastic monoplegia. Spastic cerebral palsy affects the motor cortex of the brain, a specific portion of the cerebral cortex responsible for the planning and completion of voluntary movement. Spastic CP is the most common type of overall cerebral palsy, representing about 80% of cases. Botulinum toxin is effective in decreasing spasticity. It can help increase range of motion which could help mitigate CP&#x27;s effects on the growing bones of children. There may be an improvement in motor functions in the children and ability to walk. However, the main benefit derived from botulinum toxin A comes from its ability to reduce muscle tone and spasticity and thus prevent or delay the development of fixed muscle contractures.

====Ataxic====

Ataxic cerebral palsy is observed in approximately 5–10% of all cases of cerebral palsy, making it the least frequent form of cerebral palsy. Ataxic cerebral palsy is caused by damage to cerebellar structures. Because of the damage to the cerebellum, which is essential for coordinating muscle movements and balance, patients with ataxic cerebral palsy experience problems in coordination, specifically in their arms, legs, and trunk. Ataxic cerebral palsy is known to decrease muscle tone. The most common manifestation of ataxic cerebral palsy is intention (action) tremor, which is especially apparent when carrying out precise movements, such as tying shoe laces or writing with a pencil. This symptom gets progressively worse as the movement persists, making the hand shake. As the hand gets closer to accomplishing the intended task, the trembling intensifies, which makes it even more difficult to complete.

====Dyskinetic====

Dyskinetic cerebral palsy (sometimes abbreviated DCP) is primarily associated with damage to the basal ganglia and the substantia nigra in the form of lesions that occur during brain development due to bilirubin encephalopathy and hypoxic-ischemic brain injury. DCP is characterized by both hypertonia and hypotonia, due to the affected individual&#x27;s inability to control muscle tone. Clinical diagnosis of DCP typically occurs within 18 months of birth and is primarily based upon motor function and neuroimaging techniques.
Dyskinetic cerebral palsy is an extrapyramidal form of cerebral palsy. Dyskinetic cerebral palsy can be divided into two different groups; choreoathetosis and dystonia. Choreo-athetotic CP is characterized by involuntary movements, whereas dystonic CP is characterized by slow, strong contractions, which may occur locally or encompass the whole body.

====Mixed====
Mixed cerebral palsy has symptoms of dyskinetic, ataxic and spastic CP appearing simultaneously, each to varying degrees, and both with and without symptoms of each. Mixed CP is the most difficult to treat as it is extremely heterogeneous and sometimes unpredictable in its symptoms and development over the lifespan.

=== Gait classification ===

In patients with spastic hemiplegia or diplegia, various gait patterns can be observed, the exact form of which can only be described with the help of complex gait analysis systems. In order to facilitate interdisciplinary communication in the interdisciplinary team between those affected, doctors, physiotherapists and orthotists, a simple description of the gait pattern is useful. J. Rodda and H. K. Graham already described in 2001 how gait patterns of CP patients can be more easily recognized and defined gait types which they compared in a classification. They also described that gait patterns can vary with age. Building on this, the Amsterdam Gait Classification was developed at the free university in Amsterdam, the VU medisch centrum.

A special feature of this classification is that it makes different gait patterns very easy to recognize and can be used in CP patients in whom only one leg and both legs are affected. According to the Amsterdam Gait Classification, five gait types are described. To assess the gait pattern, the patient is viewed visually or via a video recording from the side of the leg to be assessed. At the point in time at which the leg to be viewed is in mid stance and the leg not to be viewed is in mid swing, the knee angle and the contact of the foot with the ground are assessed on the one hand.

Classification of the gait pattern according to the Amsterdam Gait Classification: In gait type 1, the knee angle is normal and the foot contact is complete. In gait type 2, the knee angle is hyperextended and the foot contact is complete. In gait type 3, the knee angle is hyperextended and foot contact is incomplete (only on the forefoot). In gait type 4, the knee angle is bent and foot contact is incomplete (only on the forefoot). With gait type 5, the knee angle is bent and the foot contact is complete.

Gait types 5 is also known as crouch gait.

==Prevention==
Because the causes of CP are varied, a broad range of preventive interventions have been investigated.

Electronic fetal monitoring has not helped to prevent CP, and in 2014 the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, and the Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada have acknowledged that there are no long-term benefits of electronic fetal monitoring. Before this, electronic fetal monitoring was widely used to prop up obstetric litigation.

In those at risk of an early delivery, magnesium sulphate appears to decrease the risk of cerebral palsy. It is unclear if it helps those who are born at term. In those at high risk of preterm labor a review found that moderate to severe CP was reduced by the administration of magnesium sulphate, and that adverse effects on the babies from the magnesium sulphate were not significant. Mothers who received magnesium sulphate could experience side effects such as respiratory depression and nausea. However, guidelines for the use of magnesium sulfate in mothers at risk of preterm labour are not strongly adhered to; in 2017 only 2 in 3 eligible women in the UK received the medication despite it being recommended by NICE guidelines. An NHS quality improvement programme increased its usage in England from 71% in 2018 to 83% in 2020.

Caffeine is used to treat apnea of prematurity and reduces the risk of cerebral palsy in premature babies, but there are also concerns of long term negative effects. A moderate quality level of evidence indicates that giving women antibiotics during preterm labor before her membranes have ruptured (water is not yet not broken) may increase the risk of cerebral palsy for the child. Additionally, for preterm babies for whom there is a chance of fetal compromise, allowing the birth to proceed rather than trying to delay the birth may lead to an increased risk of cerebral palsy in the child. Corticosteroids are sometimes taken by pregnant women expecting a preterm birth to provide neuroprotection to their baby. Taking corticosteroids during pregnancy is shown to have no significant correlation with developing cerebral palsy in preterm births.

Cooling high-risk full-term babies shortly after birth may reduce disability, but this may only be useful for some forms of the brain damage that causes CP.

==Management==
Over time, the approach to CP management has shifted away from narrow attempts to fix individual physical problems such as spasticity in a particular limb to making such treatments part of a larger goal of maximizing the person&#x27;s independence and community engagement. However, the evidence base for the effectiveness of intervention programs reflecting the philosophy of independence has not yet caught up: effective interventions for body structures and functions have a strong evidence base, but evidence is lacking for effective interventions targeted toward participation, environment, or personal factors. There is also no good evidence to show that an intervention that is effective at the body-specific level will result in an improvement at the activity level or vice versa. Although such cross-over benefit might happen, not enough high-quality studies have been done to demonstrate it.

Because cerebral palsy has &quot;varying severity and complexity&quot; across the lifespan, it can be considered a collection of conditions for management purposes. A multidisciplinary approach for cerebral palsy management is recommended, focusing on &quot;maximising individual function, choice and independence&quot; in line with the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health&#x27;s goals. The team may include a paediatrician, a health visitor, a social worker, a physiotherapist, an orthotist, a speech and language therapist, an occupational therapist, a teacher specialising in helping children with visual impairment, an educational psychologist, an orthopaedic surgeon, a neurologist and a neurosurgeon.

Various forms of therapy are available to people living with cerebral palsy as well as caregivers and parents. Treatment may include one or more of the following: physical therapy; occupational therapy; speech therapy; water therapy; drugs to control seizures, alleviate pain, or relax muscle spasms (e.g. benzodiazepines); surgery to correct anatomical abnormalities or release tight muscles; braces and other orthotic devices; rolling walkers; and communication aids such as computers with attached voice synthesisers. Intensive rehabilitation is practiced in certain countries, but obtaining reliable data on its medium and long-term effectiveness is challenging.

Surgical intervention in CP children may include various orthopaedic or neurological surgeries to improve quality of life, such as tendon releases, hip rotation, spinal fusion, (selective dorsal rhizotomy) or placement of an intrathecal baclofen pump.

A Cochrane review published in 2004 found a trend toward the benefit of speech and language therapy for children with cerebral palsy but noted the need for high-quality research. A 2013 systematic review found that many of the therapies used to treat CP have no good evidence base; the treatments with the best evidence are medications (anticonvulsants, botulinum toxin, bisphosphonates, diazepam), therapy (bimanual training, casting, constraint-induced movement therapy, context-focused therapy, fitness training, goal-directed training, hip surveillance, home programmes, occupational therapy after botulinum toxin, pressure care) and surgery. There is also research on whether the sleeping position might improve hip migration, but there are not yet high-quality evidence studies to support that theory. Research papers also call for an agreed consensus on outcome measures which will allow researchers to cross-reference research. Also, the terminology used to describe orthoses needs to be standardised to ensure studies can be reproduced and readily compared and evaluated.

== Orthotics in the concept of therapy ==

To improve the gait pattern, orthotics can be included in the therapy concept. An orthosis can support physiotherapeutic treatment in setting the right motor impulses in order to create new cerebral connections. The orthosis must meet the requirements of the medical prescription. In addition, the orthosis must be designed by the orthotist in such a way that it achieves the effectiveness of the necessary levers, matching the gait pattern, in order to support the proprioceptive approaches of physiotherapy. The characteristics of the stiffness of the orthosis shells and the adjustable dynamics in the ankle joint are important elements of the orthosis to be considered.

Due to these requirements, the development of orthoses has changed significantly in recent years, especially since around 2010. At about the same time, care concepts were developed that deal intensively with the orthotic treatment of the lower extremities in cerebral palsy. Modern materials and new functional elements enable the rigidity to be specifically adapted to the requirements that fits to the gait pattern of the CP patient. The adjustment of the stiffness has a decisive influence on the gait pattern and on the energy cost of walking. It is of great advantage if the stiffness of the orthosis can be adjusted separately from one another via resistances of the two functional elements in the two directions of movement, dorsiflexion and plantar flexion.

==Prognosis==
CP is not a progressive disorder (meaning the brain damage does not worsen), but the symptoms can become more severe over time. A person with the disorder may improve somewhat during childhood if he or she receives extensive care, but once bones and musculature become more established, orthopedic surgery may be required. People with CP can have varying degrees of cognitive impairment or none whatsoever. The full intellectual potential of a child born with CP is often not known until the child starts school. People with CP are more likely to have learning disorders but have normal intelligence. Intellectual level among people with CP varies from genius to intellectually disabled, as it does in the general population, and experts have stated that it is important not to underestimate the capabilities of a person with CP and to give them every opportunity to learn.

The ability to live independently with CP varies widely, depending partly on the severity of each person&#x27;s impairment and partly on the capability of each person to self-manage the logistics of life. Some individuals with CP require personal assistant services for all activities of daily living. Others only need assistance with certain activities, and still others do not require any physical assistance. But regardless of the severity of a person&#x27;s physical impairment, a person&#x27;s ability to live independently often depends primarily on the person&#x27;s capacity to manage the physical realities of his or her life autonomously. In some cases, people with CP recruit, hire, and manage a staff of personal care assistants (PCAs). PCAs facilitate the independence of their employers by assisting them with their daily personal needs in a way that allows them to maintain control over their lives.

Puberty in young adults with cerebral palsy may be precocious or delayed. Delayed puberty is thought to be a consequence of nutritional deficiencies. There is currently no evidence that CP affects fertility, although some of the secondary symptoms have been shown to affect sexual desire and performance. Adults with CP were less likely to get routine reproductive health screening as of 2005. Gynecological examinations may have to be performed under anesthesia due to spasticity, and equipment is often not accessible. Breast self-examination may be difficult, so partners or carers may have to perform it. Men with CP have higher levels of cryptorchidism at the age of 21.

CP can significantly reduce a person&#x27;s life expectancy, depending on the severity of their condition and the quality of care they receive. 5–10% of children with CP die in childhood, particularly where seizures and intellectual disability also affect the child. The ability to ambulate, roll, and self-feed has been associated with increased life expectancy. While there is a lot of variation in how CP affects people, it has been found that &quot;independent gross motor functional ability is a very strong determinant of life expectancy&quot;. According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, in 2014, 104 Australians died of cerebral palsy. The most common causes of death in CP are related to respiratory causes, but in middle age cardiovascular issues and neoplastic disorders become more prominent.

===Self-care===
For many children with CP, parents are heavily involved in self-care activities. Self-care activities, such as bathing, dressing, and grooming, can be difficult for children with CP, as self-care depends primarily on the use of the upper limbs. For those living with CP, impaired upper limb function affects almost 50% of children and is considered the main factor contributing to decreased activity and participation. As the hands are used for many self-care tasks, sensory and motor impairments of the hands make daily self-care more difficult. Motor impairments cause more problems than sensory impairments. The most common impairment is that of finger dexterity, which is the ability to manipulate small objects with the fingers. Compared to other disabilities, people with cerebral palsy generally need more help in performing daily tasks. Occupational therapists are healthcare professionals that help individuals with disabilities gain or regain their independence through the use of meaningful activities.

===Productivity===
The effects of sensory, motor, and cognitive impairments affect self-care occupations in children with CP and productivity occupations. Productivity can include but is not limited to, school, work, household chores, or contributing to the community.

Play is included as a productive occupation as it is often the primary activity for children. If play becomes difficult due to a disability, like CP, this can cause problems for the child. These difficulties can affect a child&#x27;s self-esteem. In addition, the sensory and motor problems experienced by children with CP affect how the child interacts with their surroundings, including the environment and other people. Not only do physical limitations affect a child&#x27;s ability to play, the limitations perceived by the child&#x27;s caregivers and playmates also affect the child&#x27;s play activities. Some children with disabilities spend more time playing by themselves. When a disability prevents a child from playing, there may be social, emotional and psychological problems, which can lead to increased dependence on others, less motivation, and poor social skills.

In school, students are asked to complete many tasks and activities, many of which involve handwriting. Many children with CP have the capacity to learn and write in the school environment. However, students with CP may find it difficult to keep up with the handwriting demands of school and their writing may be difficult to read. In addition, writing may take longer and require greater effort on the student&#x27;s part. Factors linked to handwriting include postural stability, sensory and perceptual abilities of the hand, and writing tool pressure.

Speech impairments may be seen in children with CP depending on the severity of brain damage. Communication in a school setting is important because communicating with peers and teachers is very much a part of the &quot;school experience&quot; and enhances social interaction. Problems with language or motor dysfunction can lead to underestimating a student&#x27;s intelligence. In summary, children with CP may experience difficulties in school, such as difficulty with handwriting, carrying out school activities, communicating verbally, and interacting socially.

===Leisure===
Leisure activities can have several positive effects on physical health, mental health, life satisfaction, and psychological growth for people with physical disabilities like CP. Common benefits identified are stress reduction, development of coping skills, companionship, enjoyment, relaxation and a positive effect on life satisfaction. In addition, for children with CP, leisure appears to enhance adjustment to living with a disability.

Leisure can be divided into structured (formal) and unstructured (informal) activities. Children and teens with CP engage in less habitual physical activity than their peers. Children with CP primarily engage in physical activity through therapies aimed at managing their CP, or through organized sport for people with disabilities. It is difficult to sustain behavioural change in terms of increasing physical activity of children with CP. Gender, manual dexterity, the child&#x27;s preferences, cognitive impairment and epilepsy were found to affect children&#x27;s leisure activities, with manual dexterity associated with more leisure activity. Although leisure is important for children with CP, they may have difficulties carrying out leisure activities due to social and physical barriers.

Children with cerebral palsy may face challenges when it comes to participating in sports. This comes with being discouraged from physical activity because of these perceived limitations imposed by their medical condition.

===Participation and barriers===
Participation is involvement in life situations and everyday activities. Participation includes self-care, productivity, and leisure. In fact, communication, mobility, education, home life, leisure, and social relationships require participation, and indicate the extent to which children function in their environment. Barriers can exist on three levels: micro, meso, and macro. First, the barriers at the micro level involve the person. Barriers at the micro level include the child&#x27;s physical limitations (motor, sensory and cognitive impairments) or their subjective feelings regarding their ability to participate. For example, the child may not participate in group activities due to lack of confidence. Second, barriers at the meso level include the family and community. These may include negative attitudes of people toward disability or lack of support within the family or in the community.

One of the main reasons for this limited support appears to be the result of a lack of awareness and knowledge regarding the child&#x27;s ability to engage in activities despite his or her disability. Third, barriers at the macro level incorporate the systems and policies that are not in place or hinder children with CP. These may be environmental barriers to participation such as architectural barriers, lack of relevant assistive technology, and transportation difficulties due to limited wheelchair access or public transit that can accommodate children with CP. For example, a building without an elevator can prevent the child from accessing higher floors.

A 2013 review stated that outcomes for adults with cerebral palsy without intellectual disability in the 2000s were that &quot;60–80% completed high school, 14–25% completed college, up to 61% were living independently in the community, 25–55% were competitively employed, and 14–28% were involved in long term relationships with partners or had established families&quot;. Adults with cerebral palsy may not seek physical therapy due to transport issues, financial restrictions and practitioners not feeling like they know enough about cerebral palsy to take people with CP on as clients.

===Aging===
Children with CP may not successfully transition into using adult services because they are not referred to one upon turning 18, and may decrease their use of services. Quality of life outcomes tend to decline for adults with cerebral palsy. Because children with cerebral palsy are often told that it is a non-progressive disease, they may be unprepared for the greater effects of the aging process as they head into their 30s. Young adults with cerebral palsy experience problems with aging that non-disabled adults experience &quot;much later in life&quot;. 25% or more adults with cerebral palsy who can walk experience increasing difficulties walking with age. Hand function does not seem to have similar declines. Chronic disease risk, such as obesity, is also higher among adults with cerebral palsy than the general population. Common problems include increased pain, reduced flexibility, increased spasms and contractures, post-impairment syndrome and increasing problems with balance. Increased fatigue is also a problem. When adulthood and cerebral palsy is discussed, , it is not discussed in terms of the different stages of adulthood. About half of people with CP report some loss of function as of their 40s.

Like they did in childhood, adults with cerebral palsy experience psychosocial issues related to their CP, chiefly the need for social support, self-acceptance, and acceptance by others. Workplace accommodations may be needed to enhance continued employment for adults with CP as they age. Rehabilitation or social programs that include salutogenesis may improve the coping potential of adults with CP as they age.

==Epidemiology==
Cerebral palsy occurs in about 2.1 per 1000 live births. In those born at term rates are lower at 1 per 1000 live births. Within a population it may occur more often in poorer people. The rate is higher in males than in females; in Europe it is 1.3 times more common in males.

There was a &quot;moderate, but significant&quot; rise in the prevalence of CP between the 1970s and 1990s. This is thought to be due to a rise in low birth weight of infants and the increased survival rate of these infants. The increased survival rate of infants with CP in the 1970s and 80s may be indirectly due to the disability rights movement challenging perspectives around the worth of infants with a disability, as well as the Baby Doe Law. Between 1990 and 2003, rates of cerebral palsy remained the same.

As of 2005, advances in the care of pregnant mothers and their babies did not result in a noticeable decrease in CP. This is generally attributed to medical advances in areas related to the care of premature babies (which results in a greater survival rate). Only the introduction of quality medical care to locations with less-than-adequate medical care has shown any decreases. The incidence of CP increases with premature or very low-weight babies regardless of the quality of care. , there is a suggestion that both incidence and severity are slightly decreasing – more research is needed to find out if this is significant, and if so, which interventions are effective. It has been found that high-income countries have lower rates of children born with cerebral palsy than low or middle-income countries.

Prevalence of cerebral palsy is best calculated around the school entry age of about six years; the prevalence in the U.S. is estimated to be 2.4 out of 1000 children.

==History==
Cerebral palsy has affected humans since antiquity. A decorated grave marker dating from around the 15th to 14th century BCE shows a figure with one small leg and using a crutch, possibly due to cerebral palsy. The oldest likely physical evidence of the condition comes from the mummy of Siptah, an Egyptian Pharaoh who ruled from about 1196 to 1190 BCE and died at about 20 years of age. The presence of cerebral palsy has been suspected due to his deformed foot and hands.

The medical literature of the ancient Greeks discusses paralysis and weakness of the arms and legs; the modern word &quot;palsy&quot; comes from the Ancient Greek words &quot;παράλυση&quot; or &quot;πάρεση&quot;, meaning paralysis or paresis respectively. The works of the school of Hippocrates (460c. 370 BCE), and the manuscript &quot;On the Sacred Disease&quot; in particular, describe a group of problems that matches up very well with the modern understanding of cerebral palsy. The Roman Emperor Claudius (10 BCE54 CE) is suspected of having CP, as historical records describe him as having several physical problems in line with the condition. Medical historians have begun to suspect and find depictions of CP in much later art. Several paintings from the 16th century and later show individuals with problems consistent with it, such as Jusepe de Ribera&#x27;s 1642 painting &quot;The Clubfoot&quot;.

The modern understanding of CP as resulting from problems within the brain began in the early decades of the 1800s with a number of publications on brain abnormalities by Johann Christian Reil, Claude François Lallemand and Philippe Pinel. Later physicians used this research to connect problems in the brain with specific symptoms. The English surgeon William John Little (18101894) was the first person to study CP extensively. In his doctoral thesis he stated that CP was a result of a problem around the time of birth. He later identified a difficult delivery, a preterm birth and perinatal asphyxia in particular as risk factors. The spastic diplegia form of CP came to be known as Little&#x27;s disease. At around this time, a German surgeon was also working on cerebral palsy, and distinguished it from polio. In the 1880s British neurologist William Gowers built on Little&#x27;s work by linking paralysis in newborns to difficult births. He named the problem &quot;birth palsy&quot; and classified birth palsies into two types: peripheral and cerebral.

Working in the US in the 1880s, Canadian-born physician William Osler (18491919) reviewed dozens of CP cases to further classify the disorders by the site of the problems on the body and by the underlying cause. Osler made further observations tying problems around the time of delivery with CP, and concluded that problems causing bleeding inside the brain were likely the root cause. Osler also suspected polioencephalitis as an infectious cause. Through the 1890s, scientists commonly confused CP with polio.

Before moving to psychiatry, Austrian neurologist Sigmund Freud (18561939) made further refinements to the classification of the disorder. He produced the system still being used today. Freud&#x27;s system divides the causes of the disorder into problems present at birth, problems that develop during birth, and problems after birth. Freud also made a rough correlation between the location of the problem inside the brain and the location of the affected limbs on the body and documented the many kinds of movement disorders.

In the early 20th century, the attention of the medical community generally turned away from CP until orthopedic surgeon Winthrop Phelps became the first physician to treat the disorder. He viewed CP from a musculoskeletal perspective instead of a neurological one. Phelps developed surgical techniques for operating on the muscles to address issues such as spasticity and muscle rigidity. Hungarian physical rehabilitation practitioner András Pető developed a system to teach children with CP how to walk and perform other basic movements. Pető&#x27;s system became the foundation for conductive education, widely used for children with CP today. Through the remaining decades, physical therapy for CP has evolved, and has become a core component of the CP management program.

In 1997, Robert Palisano &quot;et al.&quot; introduced the Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) as an improvement over the previous rough assessment of limitation as either mild, moderate, or severe. The GMFCS grades limitation based on observed proficiency in specific basic mobility skills such as sitting, standing, and walking, and takes into account the level of dependency on aids such as wheelchairs or walkers. The GMFCS was further revised and expanded in 2007.

==Society and culture==

===Economic impact===
It is difficult to directly compare the cost and cost-effectiveness of interventions to prevent cerebral palsy or the cost of interventions to manage CP. Access Economics has released a report on the economic impact of cerebral palsy in Australia. The report found that, in 2007, the financial cost of cerebral palsy (CP) in Australia was A$1.47 billion or 0.14% of GDP. Of this:
* A$1.03 billion (69.9%) was productivity lost due to lower employment, absenteeism, and premature death of Australians with CP
* A$141 million (9.6%) was the DWL from transfers including welfare payments and taxation forgone
* A$131 million (9.0%) was other indirect costs such as direct program services, aides and home modifications, and the bringing-forward of funeral costs
* A$129 million (8.8%) was the value of the informal care for people with CP
* A$40 million (2.8%) was direct health system expenditure

The value of lost well-being (disability and premature death) was a further A$2.4 billion.

In per capita terms, this amounts to a financial cost of A$43,431 per person with CP per annum. Including the value of lost well-being, the cost is over $115,000 per person per annum.

Individuals with CP bear 37% of the financial costs, and their families and friends bear a further 6%. The federal government bears around one-third (33%) of the financial costs (mainly through taxation revenues forgone and welfare payments). State governments bear under 1% of the costs, while employers bear 5% and the rest of society bears the remaining 19%. If the burden of disease (lost well-being) is included, individuals bear 76% of the costs.

The average lifetime cost for people with CP in the US is US$921,000 per individual, including lost income.

In the United States, many states allow Medicaid beneficiaries to use their Medicaid funds to hire their own PCAs, instead of forcing them to use institutional or managed care.

In India, the government-sponsored program called &quot;NIRAMAYA&quot; for the medical care of children with neurological and muscular deformities has proved to be an ameliorating economic measure for persons with such disabilities. It has shown that persons with mental or physically debilitating congenital disabilities can lead better lives if they have financial independence.

===Use of the term===
&quot;Cerebral&quot; means &quot;of, or pertaining to, the cerebrum or the brain&quot; and &quot;palsy&quot; means &quot;paralysis, generally partial, whereby a local body area is incapable of voluntary movement&quot;. It has been proposed to change the name to &quot;cerebral palsy spectrum disorder&quot; to reflect the diversity of presentations of CP.

Many people would rather be referred to as a person with a disability (people-first language) instead of as &quot;handicapped&quot;. &quot;Cerebral Palsy: A Guide for Care&quot; at the University of Delaware offers the following guidelines:

The term &quot;spastic&quot; denotes the attribute of spasticity in types of spastic CP. In 1952 a UK charity called The Spastics Society was formed. The term &quot;spastics&quot; was used by the charity as a term for people with CP. The word &quot;spastic&quot; has since been used extensively as a general insult to disabled people, which some see as extremely offensive. They are also frequently used to insult non-disabled people when they seem overly uncoordinated, anxious, or unskilled in sports. The charity changed its name to Scope in 1994. In the United States the word spaz has the same usage as an insult but is not generally associated with CP.

===Media===
Maverick documentary filmmaker Kazuo Hara criticises the mores and customs of Japanese society in an unsentimental portrait of adults with cerebral palsy in his 1972 film . Focusing on how people with cerebral palsy are generally ignored or disregarded in Japan, Hara challenges his society&#x27;s taboos about physical handicaps. Using a deliberately harsh style, with grainy black-and-white photography and out-of-sync sound, Hara brings a stark realism to his subject.

&quot;Spandan&quot; (2012), a film by Vegitha Reddy and Aman Tripathi, delves into the dilemma of parents whose child has cerebral palsy. While films made with children with special needs as central characters have been attempted before, the predicament of parents dealing with the stigma associated with the condition and beyond is dealt in &quot;Spandan&quot;. In one of the songs of &quot;Spandan&quot; &quot;Chal chaal chaal tu bala&quot; more than 50 CP kids have acted. The famous classical singer Devaki Pandit has given her voice to the song penned by Prof. Jayant Dhupkar and composed by National Film Awards winner Isaac Thomas Kottukapally.

&quot;My Left Foot&quot; (1989) is a drama film directed by Jim Sheridan and starring Daniel Day-Lewis. It tells the true story of Christy Brown, an Irishman born with cerebral palsy, who could control only his left foot. Christy Brown grew up in a poor, working-class family, and became a writer and artist. It won the Academy Award for Best Actor (Daniel Day-Lewis) and Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Brenda Fricker). It was also nominated for Best Director, Best Picture and Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium. It also won the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film for 1989.

&quot;Call the Midwife&quot; (2012–) has featured two episodes with actor Colin Young, who himself has cerebral palsy, playing a character with the same disability. His storylines have focused on the segregation of those with disabilities in the UK in the 1950s, and also romantic relationships between people with disabilities.

Micah Fowler, an American actor with CP, stars in the ABC sitcom &quot;Speechless&quot; (2016–2019), which explores both the serious and humorous challenges a family faces with a teenager with CP.

&quot;9-1-1&quot; (2018–) is a procedural drama series on Fox. From season 2 onwards, it features Gavin McHugh (who himself has cerebral palsy) in the recurring role as Christopher Diaz – a young child who has cerebral palsy.

&quot;Special&quot; (2019) is a comedy series that premiered on Netflix on 12 April 2019. It was written, produced and stars Ryan O&#x27;Connell as a young gay man with mild cerebral palsy. It is based on O&#x27;Connell&#x27;s book &quot;I&#x27;m Special: And Other Lies We Tell Ourselves&quot;.

Australian drama serial &quot;The Heights&quot; (2019–) features a character with mild cerebral palsy, teenage girl Sabine Rosso, depicted by an actor who herself has mild cerebral palsy, Bridie McKim.

&quot;6,000 Waiting&quot; (2021) is a documentary by Michael Joseph McDonald. It is the first film to depict a person with cerebral palsy parachuting. It tells the story of three men with cerebral palsy seeking to live in their communities instead of institutions. Upon seeing the film, American politician Stacey Abrams interviewed one of the film&#x27;s protagonists and publicly stated that her top priority was deinstitutionalization through Medicaid expansion.

===Notable cases===
* Christy Brown was the basis for the Academy Award-winning film, &quot;My Left Foot&quot;.
* Two sons of Canadian rock musician Neil Young, Zeke and Ben. In 1986, Young helped found the Bridge School, an educational organization for children with severe verbal and physical disabilities, and its annual supporting Bridge School Benefit concerts, together with his wife Pegi.
* Nicolas Hamilton, a British racing driver competing in BTCC. He is the half-brother of Formula 1 driver Lewis Hamilton.

* Geri Jewell, who had a regular role in the prime-time series &quot;The Facts of Life&quot;.
* Josh Blue, winner of the fourth season of NBC&#x27;s &quot;Last Comic Standing&quot;, whose act revolves around his CP. Blue was also on the 2004 U.S. Paralympic soccer team.
* Jason Benetti, play-by-play broadcaster for ESPN, Fox Sports, Westwood One, and Time Warner covering football, baseball, lacrosse, hockey, and basketball. From 2016 until 2023, he was the television play-by-play announcer for Chicago White Sox home games. Since 2024, Benetti has been the play-by-play announcer for the Detroit Tigers.
* Jack Carroll, British comedian and runner-up in the seventh season of &quot;Britain&#x27;s Got Talent&quot;, and winner of a BAFTA Award for his BBC Comedy, Mobility.
* Jamie Beddard, Producer and Stage Actor, known for Extraordinary Bodies.
* Abbey Curran, an American beauty queen who represented Iowa at Miss USA 2008 and was the first contestant with a disability to compete.
* Laurence Clarke, British comedian, writer and activist.
* Robert Griswold, swimmer
* Francesca Martinez, British stand-up comedian and actress.
* Robert Softley Gale, British actor and theatre practitioner, and artistic director of the Birds of Paradise theatre company.
* Zak Ford-Williams, British stage and screen actor, known for Lord Remington in Bridgerton, Owen Davies in Better and Harry Hardacre in The Hardacres, as well as Richard III and Joseph Merrick on stage
* Evan O&#x27;Hanlon, Australian Paralympian, the fastest athlete with cerebral palsy in the world.
* Arun Shourie&#x27;s son Aditya, about whom he has written a book &quot;Does He Know a Mother&#x27;s Heart&quot;
* Phoebe-Rae Taylor, British actress known for her role as Melody Brookes in Out of My Mind.
* Maysoon Zayid, the self-described &quot;Palestinian Muslim virgin with cerebral palsy, from New Jersey&quot;, who is an actress, stand-up comedian, and activist. Zayid has been a resident of Cliffside Park, New Jersey. She is considered one of America&#x27;s first Muslim women comedians and the first person to perform standup in Palestine and Jordan.

* RJ Mitte, an American actor best known for his role as Walter White Jr. in &quot;Breaking Bad&quot;. He is also a celebrity ambassador for United Cerebral Palsy.
* Zach Anner, an American comedian, actor, and writer. He had a television series on Oprah Winfrey&#x27;s OWN called &quot;Rollin&#x27; With Zach&quot; and is the author of &quot;If at Birth You Don&#x27;t Succeed.&quot;
* Kaine, a member of the American hip-hop duo The Ying Yang Twins, has a mild form of cerebral palsy that causes him to limp.
* Hannah Cockroft, is a British wheelchair athlete specialising in sprint distances in the T34 classification. She holds the Paralympic and world records for the 100 metres, 200 metres and 400 metres in her classification.
* Keah Brown, American disability rights activist, author and journalist.
* Kuli Kohli, Indian-British writer, poet, activist.
* Simon James Stevens, a British disability issues consultant and activist, who starred in &quot;I&#x27;m Spazticus&quot; and founded Wheelies virtual nightclub 
* The Roman Emperor Claudius is hypothesized to have had cerebral palsy on the basis of his reported symptoms.
* Tim Renkow, American comedian, comic actor and writer of the BBC comedy series, Jerk.
* Rosie Jones, a British comedian and actress, is incorporating her cerebral palsy into her comedic style.
* Christopher Nolan, an Irish Poet and Author, he wrote Damn-Burst of Dreams, The Banyan Tree, and Under The Eye Of The Clock. He died in 2009.
* Lost Voice Guy British Comedian

===Litigation===
Because of the perception that cerebral palsy is mostly caused by trauma during birth, as of 2005, 60% of obstetric litigation was about cerebral palsy, which Alastair MacLennan, Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at the University of Adelaide, regards as causing an exodus from the profession. In the latter half of the 20th century, obstetric litigation about the cause of cerebral palsy became more common, leading to the practice of defensive medicine.

== See also ==
* Cerebral palsy sport classification – describes the disability sport classification for cerebral palsy.
* Inclusive recreation
* World Cerebral Palsy Day

==Notes==
== References ==
== External links ==


* Cerebral Palsy Information Page at NINDS</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q210427" start="0" end="14" title="Cerebral palsy" label="Cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210427" start="16" end="18" title="Cerebral palsy" label="CP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608695" start="34" end="51" title="movement disorder" label="movement disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q117060" start="168" end="181" title="spasticity" label="stiff muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126769" start="183" end="195" title="Paresis" label="weak muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="201" end="207" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="237" end="246" title="sense" label="sensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162668" start="248" end="254" title="visual perception" label="vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="256" end="263" title="hearing" label="hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="269" end="275" title="speech" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="403" end="410" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="430" end="451" title="cognition" label="thinking or reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="851" end="864" title="preterm birth" label="preterm birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="874" end="878" title="twin" label="twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q414075" start="914" end="927" title="methylmercury" label="methylmercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="1045" end="1069" title="heredity" label="inherited genetic causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573995" start="1286" end="1308" title="spastic cerebral palsy" label="spastic cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812914" start="1347" end="1368" title="ataxic cerebral palsy" label="ataxic cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813631" start="1398" end="1423" title="athetoid cerebral palsy" label="dyskinetic cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="1493" end="1508" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="1820" end="1836" title="physical therapy" label="physical therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380141" start="1838" end="1858" title="occupational therapy" label="occupational therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33226" start="1863" end="1877" title="speech therapy" label="speech therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q417782" start="1885" end="1888" title="Nerve growth factor" label="NGF"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="1988" end="1996" title="diazepam" label="diazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q413717" start="1998" end="2006" title="baclofen" label="baclofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="2011" end="2026" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320788" start="2101" end="2129" title="selective dorsal rhizotomy" label="cutting overly active nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q59744853" start="2138" end="2153" title="brace (orthopaedic)" label="external braces"/>
<link wikidata="Q688498" start="2182" end="2202" title="assistive technology" label="assistive technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="2323" end="2343" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533033" start="2460" end="2477" title="stem cell therapy" label="stem cell therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="2769" end="2780" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168038" start="2850" end="2869" title="William John Little" label="William John Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q369668" start="2945" end="2958" title="William Osler" label="William Osler"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="3481" end="3489" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q860740" start="3600" end="3621" title="learning disabilities" label="learning disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q127006" start="3623" end="3642" title="Muscle contractions" label="Muscle contractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q117060" start="3893" end="3903" title="spasticity" label="spasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="3907" end="3915" title="dystonia" label="dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147377" start="3962" end="3973" title="muscle tone" label="muscle tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480291" start="4469" end="4487" title="joint contractures" label="joint contractures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097541" start="4539" end="4554" title="Toe walking" label="tip-toeing gait"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434062" start="4601" end="4616" title="Scissor gait" label="scissoring gait"/>
<link wikidata="Q446372" start="6064" end="6092" title="lower urinary tract symptoms" label="lower urinary tract symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q813683" start="6184" end="6196" title="pelvic floor" label="pelvic floor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6251" end="6282" title="upper urinary tract dysfunction" label="upper urinary tract dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q241849" start="6316" end="6334" title="sensory processing" label="sensory processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q767485" start="6392" end="6411" title="respiratory failure" label="respiratory failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304401" start="6575" end="6595" title="bone mineral density" label="bone mineral density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353265" start="6717" end="6726" title="diaphyses" label="diaphyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q427157" start="6742" end="6752" title="metaphyses" label="metaphyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014564" start="6869" end="6888" title="articular cartilage" label="articular cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7507" end="7527" title="low trauma fractures" label="low trauma fractures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610509" start="7563" end="7605" title="Gross Motor Function Classification System" label="Gross Motor Function Classification System"/>
<link wikidata="Q634638" start="7928" end="7943" title="Hip dislocation" label="Hip dislocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097541" start="7948" end="7961" title="toe walking" label="ankle equinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624054" start="7965" end="7990" title="pes cavus" label="plantar flexion deformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q176503" start="8174" end="8179" title="femur" label="femur"/>
<link wikidata="Q178366" start="8184" end="8189" title="tibia" label="tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174857" start="8247" end="8256" title="scoliosis" label="scoliosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="8290" end="8300" title="prevalence" label="prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167748" start="8795" end="8806" title="osteotomy" label="osteotomies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9128" end="9141" title="Adolescence#Growth spurt" label="Growth spurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q101065" start="9149" end="9156" title="puberty" label="puberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="9437" end="9462" title="Gastro-oesophageal reflux" label="Gastro-oesophageal reflux"/>
<link wikidata="Q565578" start="9779" end="9800" title="hand-eye coordination" label="hand-eye coordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="9956" end="9965" title="Pneumonia" label="Pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174778" start="10337" end="10350" title="oropharyngeal" label="oropharyngeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25051684" start="10374" end="10388" title="Undernutrition in children" label="undernutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773915" start="10390" end="10407" title="Triceps skin fold" label="Triceps skin fold"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="10465" end="10477" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q225957" start="10738" end="10748" title="dysarthria" label="dysarthria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891" start="10884" end="10895" title="respiratory" label="respiratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9637" start="10905" end="10914" title="larynx" label="laryngeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163451" start="10919" end="10933" title="velopharyngeal insufficiency" label="velopharyngeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210847" start="10956" end="10968" title="manner of articulation" label="articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q781083" start="11163" end="11205" title="augmentative and alternative communication" label="augmentative and alternative communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q997841" start="11281" end="11295" title="language delay" label="language delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="11338" end="11346" title="hearing loss" label="deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q618018" start="11352" end="11372" title="learned helplessness" label="learned helplessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q59744853" start="12143" end="12151" title="orthotics" label="orthosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="12513" end="12528" title="sleep disorders" label="sleep disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088113" start="12874" end="12886" title="Chronic pain" label="Chronic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="13143" end="13168" title="intellectual disability" label="intellectual disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11602751" start="13180" end="13198" title="muscle contracture" label="muscle contracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="13216" end="13228" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="13563" end="13575" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="13628" end="13650" title="coronary artery disease" label="ischemic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010352" start="13652" end="13675" title="cerebrovascular disease" label="cerebrovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="13677" end="13683" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064904" start="13689" end="13695" title="major trauma" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="13708" end="13715" title="Obesity" label="Obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610509" start="13763" end="13805" title="Gross Motor Function Classification System" label="Gross Motor Function Classification System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952420" start="13863" end="13877" title="multimorbidity" label="multimorbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q498916" start="14023" end="14030" title="apraxia" label="apraxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q281490" start="14053" end="14073" title="urinary incontinence" label="urinary incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="14075" end="14093" title="fecal incontinence" label="fecal incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="14221" end="14227" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533214" start="14502" end="14525" title="oropharyngeal dysphagia" label="oropharyngeal dysphagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="14557" end="14580" title="gastroesophageal reflux" label="gastroesophageal reflux"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330029" start="14599" end="14623" title="upper airway obstruction" label="upper airway obstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="14973" end="14985" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671598" start="15470" end="15494" title="Intrauterine growth restriction" label="fetal growth restriction"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="15497" end="15504" title="hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2099138" start="15538" end="15561" title="placental insufficiency" label="placental insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q779374" start="15563" end="15586" title="umbilical cord prolapse" label="umbilical cord prolapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694437" start="15692" end="15706" title="birth asphyxia" label="birth asphyxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861845" start="15708" end="15729" title="kernicterus" label="high bilirubin levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692979" start="16239" end="16255" title="low birth weight" label="low birth weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="16391" end="16400" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="16703" end="16715" title="birth defect" label="birth defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918881" start="16736" end="16769" title="meconium aspiration" label="breathing meconium into the lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="16838" end="16855" title="Caesarean section" label="Caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="16873" end="16880" title="seizure" label="seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q754348" start="16900" end="16929" title="Infant respiratory distress syndrome" label="respiratory distress syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="16931" end="16946" title="hypoglycaemia" label="low blood sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18025214" start="17380" end="17405" title="GAD1" label="glutamate decarboxylase-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="17475" end="17494" title="autosomal recessive" label="autosomal recessive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214869" start="17897" end="17918" title="Cerebellar hypoplasia" label="Cerebellar hypoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812914" start="17954" end="17975" title="ataxic cerebral palsy" label="ataxic cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="18049" end="18057" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="18059" end="18073" title="lead poisoning" label="lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="18098" end="18104" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304399" start="18106" end="18125" title="abusive head trauma" label="abusive head trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q506616" start="18177" end="18190" title="near drowning" label="near drowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q199615" start="18197" end="18209" title="encephalitis" label="encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="18213" end="18223" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q473739" start="18399" end="18415" title="chorioamnionitis" label="chorioamnionitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712331" start="18522" end="18551" title="Rh disease" label="Rh blood type incompatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q16946074" start="18936" end="18964" title="general movements assessment" label="general movements assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472071" start="19251" end="19269" title="primitive reflexes" label="primitive reflexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142806" start="20131" end="20155" title="developmental disability" label="developmental disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="20245" end="20257" title="Neuroimaging" label="Neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="20263" end="20265" title="CT scan" label="CT"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="20269" end="20272" title="MRI" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="20587" end="20600" title="hydrocephalus" label="hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q492129" start="20602" end="20614" title="porencephaly" label="porencephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584110" start="20616" end="20642" title="arteriovenous malformation" label="arteriovenous malformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144926" start="20644" end="20661" title="subdural hematoma" label="subdural hematoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792460" start="20667" end="20675" title="subdural hygroma" label="hygromas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="20876" end="20884" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q822050" start="21687" end="21699" title="white matter" label="white matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q221472" start="22126" end="22144" title="Fragile X syndrome" label="Fragile X syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610509" start="22604" end="22646" title="Gross Motor Function Classification System" label="Gross Motor Function Classification System"/>
<link wikidata="Q28343142" start="22676" end="22712" title="Manual Ability Classification System" label="Manual Ability Classification System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154098" start="22812" end="22856" title="Communication Function Classification System" label="Communication Function Classification System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029045" start="23356" end="23364" title="spastic diplegia" label="diplegic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573994" start="23441" end="23451" title="spastic hemiplegia" label="hemiplegic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985306" start="23481" end="23493" title="spastic quadriplegia" label="quadriplegic"/>
<link wikidata="Q117060" start="23669" end="23679" title="spasticity" label="spasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="23753" end="23766" title="umbrella term" label="umbrella term"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573994" start="23780" end="23798" title="spastic hemiplegia" label="spastic hemiplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029045" start="23800" end="23816" title="spastic diplegia" label="spastic diplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985306" start="23818" end="23838" title="spastic quadriplegia" label="spastic quadriplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18696" start="23969" end="23981" title="motor cortex" label="motor cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="24022" end="24037" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="24200" end="24215" title="Botulinum toxin" label="Botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q117060" start="24243" end="24253" title="spasticity" label="spasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q130983" start="24899" end="24909" title="cerebellum" label="cerebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="25228" end="25234" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="25693" end="25706" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q753278" start="25715" end="25731" title="substantia nigra" label="substantia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q827023" start="25747" end="25754" title="lesions" label="lesions"/>
<link wikidata="Q104219" start="25798" end="25807" title="bilirubin" label="bilirubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q576349" start="25808" end="25822" title="encephalopathy" label="encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073" start="25844" end="25849" title="brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q574942" start="25887" end="25897" title="hypertonia" label="hypertonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753547" start="25902" end="25911" title="hypotonia" label="hypotonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="26101" end="26113" title="neuroimaging" label="neuroimaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385425" start="26158" end="26172" title="extrapyramidal system" label="extrapyramidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693493" start="26265" end="26280" title="choreoathetosis" label="choreoathetosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="26285" end="26293" title="dystonia" label="dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27485" end="27514" title="Orthotics#Definition of the orthotic functions in cases of paralysis caused by cerebral palsy and traumatic brain injury" label="Amsterdam Gait Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q886292" start="28860" end="28887" title="Electronic fetal monitoring" label="Electronic fetal monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q463772" start="28934" end="28985" title="American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists" label="American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373767" start="28991" end="29067" title="Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists" label="Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552577" start="29077" end="29130" title="Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada" label="Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q288266" start="29348" end="29366" title="magnesium sulphate" label="magnesium sulphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641494" start="29774" end="29796" title="respiratory depression" label="respiratory depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="30029" end="30044" title="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence" label="NICE guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="30049" end="30052" title="National Health Service" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="30148" end="30156" title="Caffeine" label="Caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780036" start="30174" end="30194" title="apnea of prematurity" label="apnea of prematurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="30379" end="30389" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q545234" start="30665" end="30680" title="Tocolytic" label="delay the birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="30743" end="30758" title="Corticosteroids" label="Corticosteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="32243" end="32260" title="multidisciplinary" label="multidisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q917426" start="32413" end="32479" title="International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health" label="International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462404" start="32534" end="32548" title="health visitor" label="health visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q631193" start="32636" end="32658" title="occupational therapist" label="occupational therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q216685" start="32759" end="32778" title="orthopaedic surgeon" label="orthopaedic surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="33121" end="33135" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q59744853" start="33209" end="33242" title="orthotics" label="braces and other orthotic devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q216685" start="33540" end="33551" title="orthopaedic surgery" label="orthopaedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188449" start="33555" end="33577" title="neurosurgery" label="neurological surgeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q770609" start="33645" end="33658" title="spinal fusion" label="spinal fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320788" start="33661" end="33687" title="selective dorsal rhizotomy" label="selective dorsal rhizotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320251" start="33708" end="33719" title="intrathecal" label="intrathecal"/>
<link wikidata="Q576618" start="34073" end="34087" title="anticonvulsant" label="anticonvulsant"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="34090" end="34105" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q412205" start="34107" end="34121" title="bisphosphonate" label="bisphosphonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210402" start="34124" end="34132" title="diazepam" label="diazepam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526584" start="34163" end="34170" title="Orthopedic cast" label="casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527305" start="34172" end="34207" title="constraint-induced movement therapy" label="constraint-induced movement therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59744853" start="34890" end="34899" title="orthotics" label="orthotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q264251" start="36268" end="36280" title="dorsiflexion" label="dorsiflexion"/>
<link wikidata="Q264251" start="36285" end="36300" title="plantar flexion" label="plantar flexion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755122" start="36329" end="36349" title="neurodegenerative disorder" label="progressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141203" start="36683" end="36703" title="cognitive impairment" label="cognitive impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q860740" start="36869" end="36887" title="learning disorders" label="learning disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q185030" start="36970" end="36976" title="genius" label="genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="36980" end="37003" title="intellectually disabled" label="intellectually disabled"/>
<link wikidata="Q423243" start="37466" end="37492" title="activities of daily living" label="activities of daily living"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078096" start="37908" end="37931" title="personal care assistant" label="personal care assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q224513" start="38159" end="38169" title="Precocious puberty" label="precocious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516012" start="38173" end="38180" title="Delayed puberty" label="delayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q763803" start="38502" end="38527" title="Gynecological examination" label="Gynecological examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525533" start="38629" end="38652" title="Breast self-examination" label="Breast self-examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q966052" start="38751" end="38765" title="cryptorchidism" label="cryptorchidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347" start="39353" end="39384" title="Australian Bureau of Statistics" label="Australian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318423" start="39399" end="39410" title="Australian people" label="Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="39552" end="39572" title="neoplastic disorders" label="neoplastic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q747883" start="43500" end="43517" title="physical activity" label="physical activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="43648" end="43663" title="organized sport" label="organized sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q332154" start="46979" end="46984" title="aging" label="aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="47343" end="47350" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47525" end="47549" title="post-impairment syndrome" label="post-impairment syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="47598" end="47605" title="fatigue (medical)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752840" start="48155" end="48168" title="salutogenesis" label="salutogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692979" start="48676" end="48692" title="low birth weight" label="low birth weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q814493" start="48851" end="48877" title="disability rights movement" label="disability rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838255" start="48965" end="48977" title="Baby Doe Law" label="Baby Doe Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q158059" start="50327" end="50333" title="Siptah" label="Siptah"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="50347" end="50354" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="50545" end="50559" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="50664" end="50677" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135155" start="50775" end="50809" title="Hippocratic Corpus" label="works of the school of Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="51017" end="51025" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q297838" start="51361" end="51377" title="Jusepe de Ribera" label="Jusepe de Ribera"/>
<link wikidata="Q24118" start="51405" end="51417" title="The Clubfoot" label="The Clubfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q215005" start="51597" end="51618" title="Johann Christian Reil" label="Johann Christian Reil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363511" start="51620" end="51645" title="Claude François Lallemand" label="Claude François Lallemand"/>
<link wikidata="Q311594" start="51650" end="51664" title="Philippe Pinel" label="Philippe Pinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168038" start="51779" end="51798" title="William John Little" label="William John Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="51993" end="52006" title="preterm birth" label="preterm birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694437" start="52011" end="52029" title="perinatal asphyxia" label="perinatal asphyxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029045" start="52065" end="52081" title="spastic diplegia" label="spastic diplegia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164702" start="52276" end="52290" title="William Gowers (neurologist)" label="William Gowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q369668" start="52545" end="52558" title="William Osler" label="William Osler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="52994" end="52999" title="Poliomyelitis" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="53052" end="53065" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q726543" start="53738" end="53753" title="musculoskeletal system" label="musculoskeletal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="53931" end="53954" title="physical rehabilitation" label="physical rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q516063" start="53968" end="53979" title="András Pető" label="András Pető"/>
<link wikidata="Q836532" start="54117" end="54137" title="conductive education" label="conductive education"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610509" start="54369" end="54411" title="Gross Motor Function Classification System" label="Gross Motor Function Classification System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="56619" end="56627" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351557" start="57589" end="57610" title="people-first language" label="people-first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068072" start="57703" end="57725" title="University of Delaware" label="University of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573993" start="57775" end="57782" title="spastic (word)" label="spastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434435" start="57877" end="57897" title="The Spastics Society" label="The Spastics Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434435" start="58296" end="58301" title="Scope (charity)" label="Scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495668" start="58463" end="58473" title="Kazuo Hara" label="Kazuo Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266447" start="59409" end="59422" title="Devaki Pandit" label="Devaki Pandit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350697" start="59502" end="59522" title="National Film Awards" label="National Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q746574" start="59564" end="59576" title="My Left Foot (film)" label="My Left Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q55429" start="59618" end="59630" title="Jim Sheridan" label="Jim Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="59644" end="59660" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q529336" start="59689" end="59702" title="Christy Brown" label="Christy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="59878" end="59891" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983066" start="60120" end="60168" title="New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film" label="New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q172230" start="60186" end="60202" title="Call the Midwife" label="Call the Midwife"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656677" start="60510" end="60522" title="Micah Fowler" label="Micah Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="60564" end="60567" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q24128123" start="60581" end="60591" title="Speechless (TV series)" label="Speechless"/>
<link wikidata="Q30611820" start="60708" end="60725" title="9-1-1 (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;9-1-1&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="60766" end="60769" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q62500926" start="60941" end="60948" title="Special (TV series)" label="Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696995" start="60967" end="60980" title="Television comedy" label="comedy series"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="60999" end="61006" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q65056294" start="61060" end="61079" title="Ryan O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Ryan O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="61091" end="61094" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747832" start="61262" end="61273" title="The Heights (Australian TV series)" label="The Heights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61488" end="61511" title="Michael Joseph McDonald" label="Michael Joseph McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595813" start="61742" end="61755" title="Stacey Abrams" label="Stacey Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q529336" start="61924" end="61937" title="Christy Brown" label="Christy Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q746574" start="61994" end="62006" title="My Left Foot" label="My Left Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="62051" end="62061" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q913634" start="62109" end="62122" title="Bridge School (California)" label="Bridge School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090897" start="62237" end="62258" title="Bridge School Benefit" label="Bridge School Benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7029674" start="62300" end="62316" title="Nicolas Hamilton" label="Nicolas Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q849783" start="62355" end="62359" title="BTCC" label="BTCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="62387" end="62396" title="Formula 1" label="Formula 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q9673" start="62404" end="62418" title="Lewis Hamilton" label="Lewis Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550818" start="62423" end="62434" title="Geri Jewell" label="Geri Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517403" start="62490" end="62507" title="The Facts of Life (TV series)" label="The Facts of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309477" start="62517" end="62526" title="Josh Blue" label="Josh Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205962" start="62694" end="62707" title="Jason Benetti" label="Jason Benetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202365" start="63032" end="63044" title="Jack Carroll (comedian)" label="Jack Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969220" start="63108" end="63133" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent (series 7)" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="63157" end="63162" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="63177" end="63180" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583110" start="63201" end="63214" title="Jamie Beddard" label="Jamie Beddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663990" start="63276" end="63288" title="Abbey Curran" label="Abbey Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480946" start="63339" end="63352" title="Miss USA 2008" label="Miss USA 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500540" start="63414" end="63429" title="Laurence Clark (comedian)" label="Laurence Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q26405249" start="63472" end="63487" title="Robert Griswold" label="Robert Griswold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479124" start="63499" end="63517" title="Francesca Martinez" label="Francesca Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q129431166" start="63687" end="63704" title="Zak Ford-Williams" label="Zak Ford-Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q85748936" start="63766" end="63776" title="Bridgerton" label="Bridgerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q116938942" start="63793" end="63799" title="Better (British TV series)" label="Better"/>
<link wikidata="Q133028" start="63848" end="63859" title="Richard III of England" label="Richard III"/>
<link wikidata="Q215762" start="63864" end="63878" title="Joseph Merrick" label="Joseph Merrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415506" start="63890" end="63908" title="Evan O&amp;#x27;Hanlon" label="Evan O&amp;#x27;Hanlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518399" start="63990" end="64002" title="Arun Shourie" label="Arun Shourie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64050" end="64054" title="Arun Shourie#Publications" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q116873269" start="64179" end="64193" title="Out of My Mind (film)" label="Out of My Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797978" start="64197" end="64210" title="Maysoon Zayid" label="Maysoon Zayid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087360" start="64388" end="64414" title="Cliffside Park, New Jersey" label="Cliffside Park, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118568" start="64553" end="64561" title="RJ Mitte" label="RJ Mitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q18184257" start="64608" end="64624" title="Walter White Jr." label="Walter White Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1079" start="64634" end="64646" title="Breaking Bad" label="Breaking Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887566" start="64692" end="64713" title="United Cerebral Palsy" label="United Cerebral Palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063777" start="64717" end="64727" title="Zach Anner" label="Zach Anner"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="64800" end="64813" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573619" start="64821" end="64824" title="Oprah Winfrey Network (U.S. TV channel)" label="OWN"/>
<link wikidata="Q942668" start="64982" end="65001" title="The Ying Yang Twins" label="The Ying Yang Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q478589" start="65064" end="65079" title="Hannah Cockroft" label="Hannah Cockroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021503" start="65094" end="65112" title="Wheelchair racing" label="wheelchair athlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669050" start="65153" end="65171" title="T34 (classification)" label="T34 classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q73633" start="65187" end="65197" title="Paralympic Games" label="Paralympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="65202" end="65214" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q164761" start="65224" end="65234" title="100 metres" label="100 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q211155" start="65236" end="65246" title="200 metres" label="200 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q334734" start="65251" end="65261" title="400 metres" label="400 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q75732869" start="65287" end="65297" title="Keah Brown" label="Keah Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q814493" start="65308" end="65325" title="disability rights" label="disability rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q101088407" start="65361" end="65371" title="Kuli Kohli" label="Kuli Kohli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519826" start="65414" end="65433" title="Simon James Stevens" label="Simon James Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965656" start="65509" end="65527" title="I&amp;#x27;m Spazticus" label="I&amp;#x27;m Spazticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049671" start="65546" end="65554" title="Wheelies (virtual nightclub)" label="Wheelies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="65580" end="65585" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="65594" end="65602" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q81650715" start="65687" end="65697" title="Tim Renkow" label="Tim Renkow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="65748" end="65751" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q85771103" start="65767" end="65771" title="Jerk (TV series)" label="Jerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q56192255" start="65775" end="65786" title="Rosie Jones (comedian)" label="Rosie Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q224912" start="65882" end="65899" title="Christopher Nolan (author)" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709483" start="66026" end="66040" title="Lost Voice Guy" label="Lost Voice Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="66192" end="66202" title="litigation" label="litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q59773433" start="66235" end="66253" title="Alastair MacLennan (medicine)" label="Alastair MacLennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15574" start="66302" end="66324" title="University of Adelaide" label="University of Adelaide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853769" start="66518" end="66536" title="defensive medicine" label="defensive medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134034" start="66556" end="66591" title="Cerebral palsy sport classification" label="Cerebral palsy sport classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3663344" start="66608" end="66639" title="disability sport classification" label="disability sport classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014923" start="66662" end="66682" title="Inclusive recreation" label="Inclusive recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102547" start="66685" end="66709" title="World Cerebral Palsy Day" label="World Cerebral Palsy Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q645285" start="66798" end="66803" title="NINDS" label="NINDS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50608" wikidata="Q1531991" url="?curid=50608" title="Parkinsonism">
<text>Parkinsonism is a clinical syndrome characterized by tremor, bradykinesia (slowed movements), rigidity, and postural instability. Both hypokinetic (bradykinesia and akinesia) as well as hyperkinetic (cogwheel rigidity and tremors at rest) features are displayed by Parkinsonism. These are the four motor symptoms found in Parkinson&#x27;s disease (PD)after which it is nameddementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), Parkinson&#x27;s disease dementia (PDD), and many other conditions. This set of symptoms occurs in a wide range of conditions and may have many causes, including neurodegenerative conditions, drugs, toxins, metabolic diseases, and neurological conditions other than PD.

== Signs and symptoms ==
Parkinsonism is a clinical syndrome characterized by the four motor symptoms found in Parkinson&#x27;s disease: tremor, bradykinesia (slowed movements), rigidity, and postural instability.

Parkinsonism gait problems can lead to falls and serious physical injuries. Other common symptoms include:
* Tremors, as rest tremor (when resting, mostly in the hands) and/or postular tremor
* Short, shuffling gait
* Slow movements (bradykinesia)
* Loss of sound perception leading to soft speech, hypophonia
* Difficulty sleeping
* Dry skin
* Apathy
* Lack of facial expressions
* Balance problems
* Frequent falls
* Very small handwriting
* Rigid, stiff muscles
* Cogwheeling (jerky feeling in arm or leg)
* Upgaze impairment
* Plastic, dead feeling resistance known as &quot;lead-pipe rigidity&quot;.

== Conditions==
Parkinsonism occurs in many conditions.

=== Neurological ===
Neurodegenerative conditions and Parkinson-plus syndromes that can cause parkinsonism include:
* Corticobasal degeneration
* Dementia with Lewy bodies
* The relationship (if any) with essential tremor is not clear.
* Frontotemporal dementia (Pick&#x27;s disease)
* Gerstmann–Sträussler–Scheinker syndrome
* Huntington&#x27;s disease
* Lytico-bodig disease (ALS complex of Guam)
* Multiple system atrophy (Shy–Drager syndrome)
* Neuroacanthocytosis
* Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
* Olivopontocerebellar atrophy
* Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration, also known as neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
* Parkin mutation causing hereditary juvenile dystonia
* Parkinson&#x27;s disease
* Parkinson&#x27;s disease dementia
* Progressive supranuclear palsy
* Wilson&#x27;s disease
* X-linked dystonia parkinsonism (Lubag syndrome)

=== Infectious ===
* Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
* Encephalitis lethargica
* HIV infection and AIDS

=== Toxins ===
Evidence exists to show a link between exposure to pesticides and herbicides and PD; a two-fold increase in risk was seen with paraquat or maneb/mancozeb exposure.

Chronic manganese (Mn) exposure has been shown to produce a parkinsonism-like illness characterized by movement abnormalities. This condition is not responsive to typical therapies used in the treatment of PD, suggesting an alternative pathway than the typical dopaminergic loss within the substantia nigra. Manganese may accumulate in the basal ganglia, leading to the abnormal movements that characterize parkinsonism. A mutation of the SLC30A10 gene, a manganese efflux transporter necessary for decreasing intracellular Mn, has been linked with the development of this parkinsonism-like disease. The Lewy bodies typical to PD are not seen in Mn-induced parkinsonism.

Agent Orange may be a cause of parkinsonism, although evidence is inconclusive and further research is needed.

Other toxins that have been associated with parkinsonism are:
* Annonaceae
* Carbon monoxide
* Carbon disulfide
* Cyanide
* Ethanol
* Hexane
* Mercury
* Methanol
* MPTP
* Rotenone
* Toluene (inhalant abuse: &quot;huffing&quot;)

=== Vascular ===
* Binswanger&#x27;s disease (subcortical leukoencephalopathy)
* Vascular dementia (multi-infarct)
* Dural arteriovenous fistula / dAVF (reversible parkinsonism through fistula treatment) 
* Dural arteriovenous malformation / dAVM (reversible through dAVM treatment) 

=== Other ===
* Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (boxer&#x27;s dementia or pugilistic encephalopathy)
* Damage to the brain stem (especially dopaminergic nuclei of the substantia nigra),basal ganglia (especially globus pallidus) and the thalamus.
* Hypothyroidism
* Orthostatic tremor
* Paraneoplastic syndrome: neurological symptoms caused by antibodies associated with cancers
* Rapid onset dystonia parkinsonism
* Autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism

==Differential diagnosis ==
Secondary parkinsonism, including vascular parkinsonism and drug-induced parkinsonism.

=== Drug-induced parkinsonism ===
About 7% of people with parkinsonism developed symptoms as a result of side effects of medication, mainly neuroleptic antipsychotics especially the phenothiazines (such as perphenazine and chlorpromazine), thioxanthenes (such as flupentixol and zuclopenthixol) and butyrophenones (such as haloperidol), and rarely, antidepressants. Yet another drug that can induce parkinsonism is the antihistaminic medication cinnarizine, usually prescribed for motion sickness; this is because besides antagonizing histamine receptors this drug antagonizes the dopamine D2 receptors. The incidence of drug-induced parkinsonism increases with age. Drug-induced parkinsonism tends to remain at its presenting level and does not worsen like Parkinson&#x27;s disease.

Implicated medications include:
* Antipsychotics
* Lithium
* Metoclopramide
* MDMA (addiction and frequent use)
* Tetrabenazine
* Cinnarizine
== Society and culture ==
In the United States, the 2021 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) added parkinsonism to the list of presumptive conditions associated with Agent Orange exposure, enabling affected service members to receive Veterans Affairs disability benefits. 

== References ==
== External links ==
* GeneReviews/NIH/NCBI/UW entry on Perry syndrome
* GeneReviews/NCBI/NIH/UW entry on X-Linked Dystonia-Parkinsonism</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1531991" start="0" end="12" title="Parkinsonism" label="Parkinsonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="27" end="35" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="53" end="59" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036662" start="61" end="73" title="bradykinesia" label="bradykinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117060" start="94" end="102" title="Rigidity (neurology)" label="rigidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540864" start="108" end="128" title="balance disorder" label="postural instability"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="298" end="312" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease#Motor" label="motor symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="322" end="346" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q101245788" start="374" end="399" title="dementia with Lewy bodies" label="dementia with Lewy bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q52844159" start="407" end="440" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease dementia" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755122" start="569" end="586" title="neurodegenerative" label="neurodegenerative"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="606" end="611" title="toxin" label="toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351083" start="614" end="631" title="metabolic disease" label="metabolic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="730" end="738" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="765" end="779" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease#Motor" label="motor symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="789" end="813" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="815" end="821" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036662" start="823" end="835" title="bradykinesia" label="bradykinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117060" start="856" end="864" title="Rigidity (neurology)" label="rigidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540864" start="870" end="890" title="balance disorder" label="postural instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370000" start="906" end="910" title="gait" label="gait"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="1002" end="1008" title="Tremor" label="Tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q827017" start="1094" end="1108" title="shuffling gait" label="shuffling gait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036662" start="1127" end="1139" title="bradykinesia" label="bradykinesia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1151" end="1167" title="perception#Sound" label="sound perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960001" start="1192" end="1202" title="hypophonia" label="hypophonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="1205" end="1224" title="Difficulty sleeping" label="Difficulty sleeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929023" start="1227" end="1235" title="Dry skin" label="Dry skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q309406" start="1238" end="1244" title="Apathy" label="Apathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503965" start="1247" end="1273" title="Hypomimia" label="Lack of facial expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540864" start="1276" end="1292" title="Balance problems" label="Balance problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q333495" start="1304" end="1309" title="Falling (accident)" label="falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839570" start="1312" end="1334" title="Micrographia (handwriting)" label="Very small handwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q574942" start="1337" end="1357" title="Hypertonia" label="Rigid, stiff muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036662" start="1360" end="1371" title="Cogwheeling" label="Cogwheeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036662" start="1472" end="1490" title="lead-pipe rigidity" label="lead-pipe rigidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755122" start="1577" end="1594" title="Neurodegenerative" label="Neurodegenerative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915552" start="1610" end="1633" title="Parkinson plus syndrome" label="Parkinson-plus syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755684" start="1674" end="1699" title="Corticobasal degeneration" label="Corticobasal degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q101245788" start="1702" end="1727" title="Dementia with Lewy bodies" label="Dementia with Lewy bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q693519" start="1761" end="1777" title="essential tremor" label="essential tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18592" start="1794" end="1817" title="Frontotemporal dementia" label="Frontotemporal dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18592" start="1819" end="1838" title="Pick&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Pick&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q383228" start="1842" end="1881" title="Gerstmann–Sträussler–Scheinker syndrome" label="Gerstmann–Sträussler–Scheinker syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q190564" start="1884" end="1909" title="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Huntington&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508653" start="1912" end="1932" title="Lytico-bodig disease" label="Lytico-bodig disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="1934" end="1937" title="ALS" label="ALS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541975" start="1957" end="1980" title="Multiple system atrophy" label="Multiple system atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541975" start="1982" end="2001" title="Shy–Drager syndrome" label="Shy–Drager syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q746781" start="2005" end="2024" title="Neuroacanthocytosis" label="Neuroacanthocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358039" start="2027" end="2057" title="Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis" label="Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541975" start="2060" end="2088" title="Olivopontocerebellar atrophy" label="Olivopontocerebellar atrophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436162" start="2091" end="2139" title="Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration" label="Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892735" start="2155" end="2201" title="neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation" label="neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472777" start="2204" end="2219" title="Parkin mutation" label="Parkin mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q112169037" start="2228" end="2256" title="hereditary juvenile dystonia" label="hereditary juvenile dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="2259" end="2283" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q52844159" start="2286" end="2319" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease dementia" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q945930" start="2322" end="2352" title="Progressive supranuclear palsy" label="Progressive supranuclear palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q117121" start="2355" end="2376" title="Wilson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Wilson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042159" start="2379" end="2409" title="X-linked dystonia parkinsonism" label="X-linked dystonia parkinsonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042159" start="2411" end="2425" title="Lubag Syndrome" label="Lubag syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q49989" start="2449" end="2474" title="Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease" label="Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369020" start="2477" end="2500" title="Encephalitis lethargica" label="Encephalitis lethargica"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="2503" end="2506" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="2521" end="2525" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="2593" end="2603" title="pesticides" label="pesticides"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="2608" end="2618" title="herbicides" label="herbicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q409669" start="2669" end="2677" title="paraquat" label="paraquat"/>
<link wikidata="Q409156" start="2681" end="2686" title="maneb" label="maneb"/>
<link wikidata="Q409132" start="2687" end="2695" title="mancozeb" label="mancozeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="2715" end="2724" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746692" start="2870" end="2915" title="Management of Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="typical therapies used in the treatment of PD"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="2968" end="2976" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q753278" start="2997" end="3013" title="substantia nigra" label="substantia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="3047" end="3060" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18041848" start="3146" end="3154" title="SLC30A10" label="SLC30A10"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822234" start="3311" end="3322" title="Lewy body" label="Lewy bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q215946" start="3379" end="3391" title="Agent Orange" label="Agent Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q220025" start="3555" end="3565" title="Annonaceae" label="Annonaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="3568" end="3583" title="Carbon monoxide" label="Carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q243354" start="3586" end="3602" title="Carbon disulfide" label="Carbon disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="3605" end="3612" title="Cyanide" label="Cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="3615" end="3622" title="Ethanol" label="Ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q150440" start="3625" end="3631" title="Hexane" label="Hexane"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="3634" end="3641" title="Mercury (element)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="3644" end="3652" title="Methanol" label="Methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q239816" start="3655" end="3659" title="MPTP" label="MPTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q412388" start="3662" end="3670" title="Rotenone" label="Rotenone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15779" start="3673" end="3680" title="Toluene" label="Toluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q900521" start="3682" end="3696" title="inhalant abuse" label="inhalant abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399293" start="3739" end="3764" title="Binswanger&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Binswanger&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237081" start="3778" end="3797" title="leukoencephalopathy" label="leukoencephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q583908" start="3801" end="3818" title="Vascular dementia" label="Vascular dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4070256" start="3837" end="3864" title="Dural arteriovenous fistula" label="Dural arteriovenous fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114004" start="4021" end="4053" title="Chronic traumatic encephalopathy" label="Chronic traumatic encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="4123" end="4133" title="brain stem" label="brain stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q753278" start="4173" end="4189" title="substantia nigra" label="substantia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="4191" end="4204" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759633" start="4217" end="4232" title="globus pallidus" label="globus pallidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="4242" end="4250" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16501" start="4254" end="4268" title="Hypothyroidism" label="Hypothyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="4271" end="4289" title="Orthostatic tremor" label="Orthostatic tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q936417" start="4292" end="4315" title="Paraneoplastic syndrome" label="Paraneoplastic syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="4733" end="4746" title="antipsychotic" label="antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q410846" start="4763" end="4776" title="phenothiazine" label="phenothiazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423520" start="4787" end="4799" title="perphenazine" label="perphenazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407972" start="4804" end="4818" title="chlorpromazine" label="chlorpromazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628525" start="4821" end="4833" title="thioxanthene" label="thioxanthene"/>
<link wikidata="Q27164953" start="4844" end="4855" title="flupentixol" label="flupentixol"/>
<link wikidata="Q228143" start="4860" end="4874" title="zuclopenthixol" label="zuclopenthixol"/>
<link wikidata="Q421344" start="4880" end="4893" title="butyrophenone" label="butyrophenone"/>
<link wikidata="Q251347" start="4904" end="4915" title="haloperidol" label="haloperidol"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="4930" end="4944" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q324089" start="5000" end="5014" title="antihistaminic" label="antihistaminic"/>
<link wikidata="Q775073" start="5026" end="5037" title="cinnarizine" label="cinnarizine"/>
<link wikidata="Q424228" start="5116" end="5135" title="histamine receptors" label="histamine receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q15335165" start="5162" end="5182" title="dopamine D2 receptor" label="dopamine D2 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="5400" end="5414" title="Antipsychotics" label="Antipsychotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q152763" start="5417" end="5424" title="Lithium (medication)" label="Lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q421095" start="5427" end="5441" title="Metoclopramide" label="Metoclopramide"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="5444" end="5448" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q413050" start="5480" end="5493" title="Tetrabenazine" label="Tetrabenazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q775073" start="5496" end="5507" title="Cinnarizine" label="Cinnarizine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612881" start="5565" end="5599" title="National Defense Authorization Act" label="National Defense Authorization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q215946" start="5680" end="5692" title="Agent Orange" label="Agent Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="5748" end="5764" title="United States Department of Veterans Affairs" label="Veterans Affairs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50609" wikidata="Q600617" url="?curid=50609" title="Nuclear shell model">
<text>In nuclear physics, atomic physics, and nuclear chemistry, the nuclear shell model utilizes the Pauli exclusion principle to model the structure of atomic nuclei in terms of energy levels. The first shell model was proposed by Dmitri Ivanenko (together with E. Gapon) in 1932. The model was developed in 1949 following independent work by several physicists, most notably Maria Goeppert Mayer and J. Hans D. Jensen, who received the 1963 Nobel Prize in Physics for their contributions to this model, and Eugene Wigner, who received the Nobel Prize alongside them for his earlier groundlaying work on the atomic nuclei.

The nuclear shell model is partly analogous to the atomic shell model, which describes the arrangement of electrons in an atom, in that a filled shell results in better stability. When adding nucleons (protons and neutrons) to a nucleus, there are certain points where the binding energy of the next nucleon is significantly less than the last one. This observation that there are specific magic quantum numbers of nucleons (2, 8, 20, 28, 50, 82, and 126) that are more tightly bound than the following higher number is the origin of the shell model.

The shells for protons and neutrons are independent of each other. Therefore, there can exist both &quot;magic nuclei&quot;, in which one nucleon type or the other is at a magic number, and &quot;doubly magic quantum nuclei&quot;, where both are. Due to variations in orbital filling, the upper magic numbers are 126 and, speculatively, 184 for neutrons, but only 114 for protons, playing a role in the search for the so-called island of stability. Some semi-magic numbers have been found, notably &quot;Z&quot; = 40, which gives the nuclear shell filling for the various elements; 16 may also be a magic number.

To get these numbers, the nuclear shell model starts with an average potential with a shape somewhere between the square well and the harmonic oscillator. To this potential, a spin-orbit term is added. Even so, the total perturbation does not coincide with the experiment, and an empirical spin-orbit coupling must be added with at least two or three different values of its coupling constant, depending on the nuclei being studied.

The magic numbers of nuclei, as well as other properties, can be arrived at by approximating the model with a three-dimensional harmonic oscillator plus a spin–orbit interaction. A more realistic but complicated potential is known as the Woods–Saxon potential.

==Modified harmonic oscillator model==
Consider a three-dimensional harmonic oscillator. This would give, for example, in the first three levels (&quot;ℓ&quot; is the angular momentum quantum number):
Nuclei are built by adding protons and neutrons. These will always fill the lowest available level, with the first two protons filling level zero, the next six protons filling level one, and so on. As with electrons in the periodic table, protons in the outermost shell will be relatively loosely bound to the nucleus if there are only a few protons in that shell because they are farthest from the center of the nucleus. Therefore, nuclei with a full outer proton shell will have a higher nuclear binding energy than other nuclei with a similar total number of protons. The same is true for neutrons.

This means that the magic numbers are expected to be those in which all occupied shells are full. In accordance with the experiment, we get 2 (level 0 full) and 8 (levels 0 and 1 full) for the first two numbers. However, the full set of magic numbers does not turn out correctly. These can be computed as follows:

*In a three-dimensional harmonic oscillator the total degeneracy of states at level &quot;n&quot; is formula_1. 
*Due to the spin, the degeneracy is doubled and is formula_2.
*Thus, the magic numbers would beformula_3for all integer &quot;k&quot;. This gives the following magic numbers: 2, 8, 20, 40, 70, 112, ..., which agree with experiment only in the first three entries. These numbers are twice the tetrahedral numbers (1, 4, 10, 20, 35, 56, ...) from the Pascal Triangle.

In particular, the first six shells are:
* level 0: 2 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 0) = 2.
* level 1: 6 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 1) = 6.
* level 2: 2 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 0) + 10 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 2) = 12.
* level 3: 6 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 1) + 14 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 3) = 20.
* level 4: 2 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 0) + 10 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 2) + 18 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 4) = 30.
* level 5: 6 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 1) + 14 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 3) + 22 states (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 5) = 42.
where for every &quot;ℓ&quot; there are 2&quot;ℓ&quot;+1 different values of &quot;ml&quot; and 2 values of &quot;ms&quot;, giving a total of 4&quot;ℓ&quot;+2 states for every specific level.

These numbers are twice the values of triangular numbers from the Pascal Triangle: 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, ...

===Including a spin-orbit interaction===
We next include a spin–orbit interaction. First, we have to describe the system by the quantum numbers &quot;j&quot;, &quot;mj&quot; and parity instead of &quot;ℓ&quot;, &quot;ml&quot; and &quot;ms&quot;, as in the hydrogen–like atom. Since every even level includes only even values of &quot;ℓ&quot;, it includes only states of even (positive) parity. Similarly, every odd level includes only states of odd (negative) parity. Thus we can ignore parity in counting states. The first six shells, described by the new quantum numbers, are
* level 0 (&quot;n&quot; = 0): 2 states (&quot;j&quot; = ). Even parity.
* level 1 (&quot;n&quot; = 1): 2 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 4 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) = 6. Odd parity.
* level 2 (&quot;n&quot; = 2): 2 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 4 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 6 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) = 12. Even parity.
* level 3 (&quot;n&quot; = 3): 2 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 4 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 6 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 8 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) = 20. Odd parity.
* level 4 (&quot;n&quot; = 4): 2 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 4 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 6 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 8 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 10 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) = 30. Even parity.
* level 5 (&quot;n&quot; = 5): 2 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 4 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 6 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 8 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 10 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) + 12 states (&quot;j&quot; = ) = 42. Odd parity.
where for every &quot;j&quot; there are different states from different values of &quot;mj&quot;.

Due to the spin–orbit interaction, the energies of states of the same level but with different &quot;j&quot; will no longer be identical. This is because in the original quantum numbers, when formula_4 is parallel to formula_5, the interaction energy is positive, and in this case &quot;j&quot; = &quot;ℓ&quot; + &quot;s&quot; = &quot;ℓ&quot; + . When formula_4 is anti-parallel to formula_5 (i.e. aligned oppositely), the interaction energy is negative, and in this case . Furthermore, the strength of the interaction is roughly proportional to &quot;ℓ&quot;.

For example, consider the states at level 4:
* The 10 states with &quot;j&quot; = come from &quot;ℓ&quot; = 4 and &quot;s&quot; parallel to &quot;ℓ&quot;. Thus they have a positive spin–orbit interaction energy.
* The 8 states with &quot;j&quot; = came from &quot;ℓ&quot; = 4 and &quot;s&quot; anti-parallel to &quot;ℓ&quot;. Thus they have a negative spin–orbit interaction energy.
* The 6 states with &quot;j&quot; = came from &quot;ℓ&quot; = 2 and &quot;s&quot; parallel to &quot;ℓ&quot;. Thus they have a positive spin–orbit interaction energy. However, its magnitude is half compared to the states with &quot;j&quot; = .
* The 4 states with &quot;j&quot; = came from &quot;ℓ&quot; = 2 and &quot;s&quot; anti-parallel to &quot;ℓ&quot;. Thus they have a negative spin–orbit interaction energy. However, its magnitude is half compared to the states with &quot;j&quot; = .
* The 2 states with &quot;j&quot; = came from &quot;ℓ&quot; = 0 and thus have zero spin–orbit interaction energy.

===Changing the profile of the potential===
The harmonic oscillator potential formula_8 grows infinitely as the distance from the center &quot;r&quot; goes to infinity. A more realistic potential, such as the Woods–Saxon potential, would approach a constant at this limit. One main consequence is that the average radius of nucleons&#x27; orbits would be larger in a realistic potential. This leads to a reduced term formula_9 in the Laplace operator of the Hamiltonian operator. Another main difference is that orbits with high average radii, such as those with high &quot;n&quot; or high &quot;ℓ&quot;, will have a lower energy than in a harmonic oscillator potential. Both effects lead to a reduction in the energy levels of high &quot;ℓ&quot; orbits.

===Predicted magic numbers===
Together with the spin–orbit interaction, and for appropriate magnitudes of both effects, one is led to the following qualitative picture: at all levels, the highest &quot;j&quot; states have their energies shifted downwards, especially for high &quot;n&quot; (where the highest &quot;j&quot; is high). This is both due to the negative spin–orbit interaction energy and to the reduction in energy resulting from deforming the potential into a more realistic one. The second-to-highest &quot;j&quot; states, on the contrary, have their energy shifted up by the first effect and down by the second effect, leading to a small overall shift. The shifts in the energy of the highest &quot;j&quot; states can thus bring the energy of states of one level closer to the energy of states of a lower level. The &quot;shells&quot; of the shell model are then no longer identical to the levels denoted by &quot;n&quot;, and the magic numbers are changed.

We may then suppose that the highest &quot;j&quot; states for &quot;n&quot; = 3 have an intermediate energy between the average energies of &quot;n&quot; = 2 and &quot;n&quot; = 3, and suppose that the highest &quot;j&quot; states for larger &quot;n&quot; (at least up to &quot;n&quot; = 7) have an energy closer to the average energy of . Then we get the following shells (see the figure)

* 1st shell: 2 states (&quot;n&quot; = 0, &quot;j&quot; = ).
* 2nd shell: 6 states (&quot;n&quot; = 1, &quot;j&quot; = or ).
* 3rd shell: 12 states (&quot;n&quot; = 2, &quot;j&quot; = , or ).
* 4th shell: 8 states (&quot;n&quot; = 3, &quot;j&quot; = ).
* 5th shell: 22 states (&quot;n&quot; = 3, &quot;j&quot; = , or ; &quot;n&quot; = 4, &quot;j&quot; = ).
* 6th shell: 32 states (&quot;n&quot; = 4, &quot;j&quot; = , , or ; &quot;n&quot; = 5, &quot;j&quot; = ).
* 7th shell: 44 states (&quot;n&quot; = 5, &quot;j&quot; = , , , or ; &quot;n&quot; = 6, &quot;j&quot; = ).
* 8th shell: 58 states (&quot;n&quot; = 6, &quot;j&quot; = , , , , or ; &quot;n&quot; = 7, &quot;j&quot; = ).
and so on.

Note that the numbers of states after the 4th shell are doubled triangular numbers . Spin–orbit coupling causes so-called &#x27;intruder levels&#x27; to drop down from the next higher shell into the structure of the previous shell. The sizes of the intruders are such that the resulting shell sizes are themselves increased to the next higher doubled triangular numbers from those of the harmonic oscillator. For example, 1f2p has 20 nucleons, and spin–orbit coupling adds 1g9/2 (10 nucleons), leading to a new shell with 30 nucleons. 1g2d3s has 30 nucleons, and adding intruder 1h11/2 (12 nucleons) yields a new shell size of 42, and so on.

The magic numbers are then

* 2
* 
* 
* 

and so on. This gives all the observed magic numbers and also predicts a new one (the so-called &quot;island of stability&quot;) at the value of 184 (for protons, the magic number 126 has not been observed yet, and more complicated theoretical considerations predict the magic number to be 114 instead).

Another way to predict magic (and semi-magic) numbers is by laying out the idealized filling order (with spin–orbit splitting but energy levels not overlapping). For consistency, s is split into and components with 2 and 0 members respectively. Taking the leftmost and rightmost total counts within sequences bounded by / here gives the magic and semi-magic numbers.

* &quot;s&quot;(2,0)/p(4,2) &gt; 2,2/6,8, so (semi)magic numbers 2,2/6,8
* &quot;d&quot;(6,4):&quot;s&quot;(2,0)/&quot;f&quot;(8,6):&quot;p&quot;(4,2) &gt; 14,18:20,20/28,34:38,40, so 14,20/28,40
* &quot;g&quot;(10,8):&quot;d&quot;(6,4):&quot;s&quot;(2,0)/&quot;h&quot;(12,10):&quot;f&quot;(8,6):&quot;p&quot;(4,2) &gt; 50,58,64,68,70,70/82,92,100,106,110,112, so 50,70/82,112
* &quot;i&quot;(14,12):&quot;g&quot;(10,8):&quot;d&quot;(6,4):&quot;s&quot;(2,0)/&quot;j&quot;(16,14):&quot;h&quot;(12,10):&quot;f&quot;(8,6):&quot;p&quot;(4,2) &gt; 126,138,148,156,162,166,168,168/184,198,210,220,228,234,238,240, so 126,168/184,240

The rightmost predicted magic numbers of each pair within the quartets bisected by / are double tetrahedral numbers from the Pascal Triangle: 2, 8, 20, 40, 70, 112, 168, 240 are 2x 1, 4, 10, 20, 35, 56, 84, 120, ..., and the leftmost members of the pairs differ from the rightmost by double triangular numbers: 2 − 2 = 0, 8 − 6 = 2, 20 − 14 = 6, 40 − 28 = 12, 70 − 50 = 20, 112 − 82 = 30, 168 − 126 = 42, 240 − 184 = 56, where 0, 2, 6, 12, 20, 30, 42, 56, ... are 2 × 0, 1, 3, 6, 10, 15, 21, 28, ... .

===Other properties of nuclei===
This model also predicts or explains with some success other properties of nuclei, in particular spin and parity of nuclei ground states, and to some extent their excited nuclear states as well. Take (oxygen-17) as an example: Its nucleus has eight protons filling the first three proton &quot;shells&quot;, eight neutrons filling the first three neutron &quot;shells&quot;, and one extra neutron. All protons in a complete proton shell have zero total angular momentum, since their angular momenta cancel each other. The same is true for neutrons. All protons in the same level (&quot;n&quot;) have the same parity (either +1 or −1), and since the parity of a pair of particles is the product of their parities, an even number of protons from the same level (&quot;n&quot;) will have +1 parity. Thus, the total angular momentum of the eight protons and the first eight neutrons is zero, and their total parity is +1. This means that the spin (i.e. angular momentum) of the nucleus, as well as its parity, are fully determined by that of the ninth neutron. This one is in the first (i.e. lowest energy) state of the 4th shell, which is a d-shell (&quot;ℓ&quot; = 2), and since &quot;p&quot; = (−1), this gives the nucleus an overall parity of +1. This 4th d-shell has a &quot;j&quot; = , thus the nucleus of is expected to have positive parity and total angular momentum , which indeed it has.

The rules for the ordering of the nucleus shells are similar to Hund&#x27;s Rules of the atomic shells, however, unlike its use in atomic physics, the completion of a shell is not signified by reaching the next &quot;n&quot;, as such the shell model cannot accurately predict the order of excited nuclei states, though it is very successful in predicting the ground states. The order of the first few terms are listed as follows: 1s, 1p, 1p, 1d, 2s, 1d... For further clarification on the notation refer to the article on the RussellSaunders term symbol.

For nuclei farther from the magic quantum numbers one must add the assumption that due to the relation between the strong nuclear force and total angular momentum, protons or neutrons with the same &quot;n&quot; tend to form pairs of opposite angular momentum. Therefore, a nucleus with an even number of protons and an even number of neutrons has 0 spin and positive parity. A nucleus with an even number of protons and an odd number of neutrons (or vice versa) has the parity of the last neutron (or proton), and the spin equal to the total angular momentum of this neutron (or proton). By &quot;last&quot; we mean the properties coming from the highest energy level.

In the case of a nucleus with an odd number of protons and an odd number of neutrons, one must consider the total angular momentum and parity of both the last neutron and the last proton. The nucleus parity will be a product of theirs, while the nucleus spin will be one of the possible results of the sum of their angular momenta (with other possible results being excited states of the nucleus).

The ordering of angular momentum levels within each shell is according to the principles described above – due to spin–orbit interaction, with high angular momentum states having their energies shifted downwards due to the deformation of the potential (i.e. moving from a harmonic oscillator potential to a more realistic one). For nucleon pairs, however, it is often energetically favourable to be at high angular momentum, even if its energy level for a single nucleon would be higher. This is due to the relation between angular momentum and the strong nuclear force.

The nuclear magnetic moment of neutrons and protons is partly predicted by this simple version of the shell model. The magnetic moment is calculated through &quot;j&quot;, &quot;ℓ&quot; and &quot;s&quot; of the &quot;last&quot; nucleon, but nuclei are not in states of well-defined &quot;ℓ&quot; and &quot;s&quot;. Furthermore, for odd-odd nuclei, one has to consider the two &quot;last&quot; nucleons, as in deuterium. Therefore, one gets several possible answers for the nuclear magnetic moment, one for each possible combined &quot;ℓ&quot; and &quot;s&quot; state, and the real state of the nucleus is a superposition of them. Thus the real (measured) nuclear magnetic moment is somewhere in between the possible answers.

The electric dipole of a nucleus is always zero, because its ground state has a definite parity. The matter density (&quot;ψ&quot;, where &quot;ψ&quot; is the wavefunction) is always invariant under parity. This is usually the situation with the atomic electric dipole.

Higher electric and magnetic multipole moments cannot be predicted by this simple version of the shell model for reasons similar to those in the case of deuterium.

==Including residual interactions==
For nuclei having two or more valence nucleons (i.e. nucleons outside a closed shell), a residual two-body interaction must be added. This residual term comes from the part of the inter-nucleon interaction not included in the approximative average potential. Through this inclusion, different shell configurations are mixed, and the energy degeneracy of states corresponding to the same configuration is broken.

These residual interactions are incorporated through shell model calculations in a truncated model space (or valence space). This space is spanned by a basis of many-particle states where only single-particle states in the model space are active. The Schrödinger equation is solved on this basis, using an effective Hamiltonian specifically suited for the model space. This Hamiltonian is different from the one of free nucleons as, among other things, it has to compensate for excluded configurations.

One can do away with the average potential approximation entirely by extending the model space to the previously inert core and treating all single-particle states up to the model space truncation as active. This forms the basis of the no-core shell model, which is an ab initio method. It is necessary to include a three-body interaction in such calculations to achieve agreement with experiments.

==Collective rotation and the deformed potential==
In 1953 the first experimental examples were found of rotational bands in nuclei, with their energy levels following the same J(J+1) pattern of energies as in rotating molecules. Quantum mechanically, it is impossible to have a collective rotation of a sphere, so this implied that the shape of these nuclei was non-spherical. In principle, these rotational states could have been described as coherent superpositions of particle-hole excitations in the basis consisting of single-particle states of the spherical potential. But in reality, the description of these states in this manner is intractable, due to a large number of valence particles—and this intractability was even greater in the 1950s when computing power was extremely rudimentary. For these reasons, Aage Bohr, Ben Mottelson, and Sven Gösta Nilsson constructed models in which the potential was deformed into an ellipsoidal shape. The first successful model of this type is now known as the Nilsson model. It is essentially the harmonic oscillator model described in this article, but with anisotropy added, so the oscillator frequencies along the three Cartesian axes are not all the same. Typically the shape is a prolate ellipsoid, with the axis of symmetry taken to be z. Because the potential is not spherically symmetric, the single-particle states are not states of good angular momentum J. However, a Lagrange multiplier formula_10, known as a &quot;cranking&quot; term, can be added to the Hamiltonian. Usually the angular frequency vector ω is taken to be perpendicular to the symmetry axis, although tilted-axis cranking can also be considered. Filling the single-particle states up to the Fermi level produces states whose expected angular momentum along the cranking axis formula_11 is the desired value.

==Related models==
Igal Talmi developed a method to obtain the information from experimental data and use it to calculate and predict energies which have not been measured. This method has been successfully used by many nuclear physicists and has led to a deeper understanding of nuclear structure. The theory which gives a good description of these properties was developed. This description turned out to furnish the shell model basis of the elegant and successful interacting boson model.

A model derived from the nuclear shell model is the alpha particle model developed by Henry Margenau, Edward Teller, J. K. Pering, T. H. Skyrme, also sometimes called the Skyrme model. Note, however, that the Skyrme model is usually taken to be a model of the nucleon itself, as a &quot;cloud&quot; of mesons (pions), rather than as a model of the nucleus as a &quot;cloud&quot; of alpha particles.

==See also==

* Nuclear structure
* Table of nuclides
* Liquid drop model
* Isomeric shift
* Interacting boson model

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="3" end="18" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q26383" start="20" end="34" title="atomic physics" label="atomic physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q243545" start="40" end="57" title="nuclear chemistry" label="nuclear chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q600617" start="63" end="82" title="Nuclear shell model" label="nuclear shell model"/>
<link wikidata="Q131594" start="96" end="121" title="Pauli exclusion principle" label="Pauli exclusion principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="148" end="161" title="Atomic nucleus" label="atomic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q510928" start="227" end="242" title="Dmitri Ivanenko" label="Dmitri Ivanenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q57100" start="372" end="392" title="Maria Goeppert Mayer" label="Maria Goeppert Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76797" start="397" end="414" title="J. Hans D. Jensen" label="J. Hans D. Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="438" end="460" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q155790" start="504" end="517" title="Eugene Wigner" label="Eugene Wigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q53859" start="671" end="689" title="Electron configuration" label="atomic shell model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="726" end="734" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q102165" start="812" end="819" title="nucleon" label="nucleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="822" end="828" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="834" end="841" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q420754" start="893" end="907" title="binding energy" label="binding energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11606" start="1010" end="1030" title="Magic number (physics)" label="magic quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q600617" start="1045" end="1074" title="Nuclear shell model" label="2, 8, 20, 28, 50, 82, and 126"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1368" end="1395" title="Magic number (physics)#Doubly magic" label="doubly magic quantum nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774759" start="1600" end="1619" title="island of stability" label="island of stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038" start="1686" end="1688" title="Zirconium" label="40"/>
<link wikidata="Q909221" start="1900" end="1911" title="square well" label="square well"/>
<link wikidata="Q677864" start="1920" end="1939" title="quantum harmonic oscillator" label="harmonic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2330" end="2367" title="Quantum harmonic oscillator#Example: 3D isotropic harmonic oscillator" label="three-dimensional harmonic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570979" start="2375" end="2397" title="spin–orbit interaction" label="spin–orbit interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q841682" start="2458" end="2479" title="Woods–Saxon potential" label="Woods–Saxon potential"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2532" end="2569" title="Quantum harmonic oscillator#Example: 3D isotropic harmonic oscillator" label="three-dimensional harmonic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916324" start="2649" end="2680" title="Azimuthal quantum number" label="angular momentum quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="2710" end="2716" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="2722" end="2729" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="2906" end="2920" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q420754" start="3181" end="3195" title="binding energy" label="binding energy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3607" end="3644" title="Quantum harmonic oscillator#Example: 3D isotropic harmonic oscillator" label="three-dimensional harmonic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q584304" start="3655" end="3675" title="degenerate energy level" label="degeneracy of states"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="3726" end="3730" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q975166" start="4006" end="4024" title="tetrahedral number" label="tetrahedral number"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="4063" end="4078" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q245102" start="4819" end="4836" title="triangular number" label="triangular number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570979" start="4949" end="4971" title="spin–orbit interaction" label="spin–orbit interaction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5018" end="5033" title="Quantum number#Quantum numbers with spin–orbit interaction" label="quantum numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q141160" start="5068" end="5074" title="Parity (physics)" label="parity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5146" end="5164" title="Hydrogen-like atom#Including spin–orbit interaction" label="hydrogen–like atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q190070" start="8078" end="8097" title="harmonic oscillator" label="harmonic oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q841682" start="8239" end="8260" title="Woods–Saxon potential" label="Woods–Saxon potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q203484" start="8464" end="8480" title="Laplace operator" label="Laplace operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q660488" start="8488" end="8499" title="Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774759" start="11631" end="11650" title="island of stability" label="island of stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="13463" end="13467" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q141160" start="13472" end="13478" title="Parity (physics)" label="parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480008" start="13489" end="13501" title="ground state" label="ground state"/>
<link wikidata="Q215328" start="13529" end="13550" title="excited state" label="excited nuclear state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359113" start="13567" end="13576" title="oxygen-17" label="oxygen-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="13819" end="13835" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q462477" start="14825" end="14842" title="List of Hund&amp;#x27;s rules" label="Hund&amp;#x27;s Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628729" start="15303" end="15314" title="term symbol" label="term symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11606" start="15345" end="15366" title="Magic number (physics)" label="magic quantum numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11415" start="15432" end="15452" title="strong nuclear force" label="strong nuclear force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="15481" end="15487" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="15492" end="15499" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16290" end="16293" title="Angular momentum#Addition of quantized angular momenta" label="sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11415" start="16936" end="16956" title="strong nuclear force" label="strong nuclear force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269677" start="16963" end="16986" title="nuclear magnetic moment" label="nuclear magnetic moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011251" start="17291" end="17305" title="odd-odd nuclei" label="odd-odd nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17368" end="17377" title="Deuterium#Magnetic and electric multipoles" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="17566" end="17579" title="Superposition principle" label="superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q735135" start="17689" end="17704" title="electric dipole" label="electric dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480008" start="17746" end="17758" title="ground state" label="ground state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="17844" end="17856" title="wavefunction" label="wavefunction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17931" end="17953" title="Dipole#Atomic dipoles" label="atomic electric dipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027847" start="17985" end="18002" title="multipole moments" label="multipole moments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18109" end="18118" title="Deuterium#Magnetic and electric multipoles" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602181" start="19343" end="19359" title="ab initio methods (nuclear physics)" label="ab initio method"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797244" start="19390" end="19412" title="three-body force" label="three-body interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q103854" start="20293" end="20302" title="Aage Bohr" label="Aage Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q107423" start="20304" end="20317" title="Ben Mottelson" label="Ben Mottelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371077" start="20323" end="20341" title="Sven Gösta Nilsson" label="Sven Gösta Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11325049" start="20484" end="20497" title="Nilsson model" label="Nilsson model"/>
<link wikidata="Q457253" start="21331" end="21341" title="Igal Talmi" label="Igal Talmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665844" start="21779" end="21802" title="interacting boson model" label="interacting boson model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725452" start="21891" end="21905" title="Henry Margenau" label="Henry Margenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733" start="21907" end="21920" title="Edward Teller" label="Edward Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665938" start="21936" end="21948" title="Tony Skyrme" label="T. H. Skyrme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041630" start="21976" end="21988" title="Skyrme model" label="Skyrme model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500674" start="22221" end="22238" title="Nuclear structure" label="Nuclear structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q130399" start="22241" end="22258" title="Table of nuclides" label="Table of nuclides"/>
<link wikidata="Q206451" start="22261" end="22278" title="Liquid drop model" label="Liquid drop model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416399" start="22281" end="22295" title="Isomeric shift" label="Isomeric shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665844" start="22298" end="22321" title="Interacting boson model" label="Interacting boson model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50614" wikidata="Q43922" url="?curid=50614" title="Pope Leo XIII">
<text>Pope Leo XIII (; born Gioacchino Vincenzo Raffaele Luigi Pecci; 2 March 1810 – 20 July 1903) was head of the Catholic Church from 20 February 1878 until his death in July 1903. He had the fourth-longest reign of any pope, behind those of Peter the Apostle, Pius IX (his immediate predecessor) and John Paul II.

He is well known for his intellectualism and his attempts to define the position of the Catholic Church with regard to modern thinking. In his famous 1891 encyclical &quot;Rerum novarum&quot;, Pope Leo outlined the rights of workers to a fair wage, safe working conditions, and the formation of trade unions, while affirming the rights to property and free enterprise, opposing both socialism and &quot;laissez-faire&quot; capitalism. With that encyclical, he became popularly titled as the &quot;Social Pope&quot; and the &quot;Pope of the Workers&quot;, also having created the foundations for modern thinking in the social doctrines of the Catholic Church, influencing the thoughts of his successors. He influenced the Mariology of the Catholic Church and promoted both the rosary and the scapular. Upon his election, he immediately sought to revive Thomism, the theological system of Augustine of Hippo and Thomas Aquinas, desiring to refer to it as the official political, theological and philosophical foundation for the Catholic Church. As a result, he sponsored the &quot;Editio Leonina&quot; in 1879.

Leo XIII is particularly remembered for his belief that pastoral activity in political sociology was also a vital mission of the church as a vehicle of social justice and maintaining the rights and dignities of the human person. Leo XIII issued a record of eleven papal encyclicals on the rosary, earning him the title of the &quot;Rosary Pope&quot;. In addition, he approved two new Marian scapulars. He was the first pope never to have held any control over the Papal States, which had been dissolved by 1870, since Stephen II in the 8th century. Similarly, many of his policies were oriented towards mitigating the loss of the Papal States in an attempt to overcome the loss of temporal power, but nonetheless continuing the Roman Question.

After his death in 1903, he was buried in the Vatican Grottoes before his remains were later transferred in 1924 to the Basilica of Saint John Lateran.

== Early life and education, 1810–1836 ==
Born in Carpineto Romano, near Rome, he was the sixth of the seven children of Count Dominico Ludovico Pecci (2 June 1767 – 8 March 1833), Patrician of Siena, Colonel of the French Army under Napoleon, and his wife Anna Francesca Prosperi-Buzzi (1773 – 9 August 1824). His uncle Giuseppe Pecci was an protonotary apostolic and referendary of the Signature of Justice and died in 1806. His brothers included Giuseppe and Giovanni Battista or Giambattista Pecci (26 October 1802 - 28 March 1882), 1st Count Pecci, who married on 8 August 1851 Angela Salina (7 February 1830 - 9 October 1899) and had issue, and sister Anna Maria Pecci, wife of Michelangelo Pecci. Until 1818, he lived at home with his family &quot;in which religion counted as the highest grace on earth, as through her, salvation can be earned for all eternity&quot;. Together with Giuseppe, he studied in the Jesuit College in Viterbo until 1824. He enjoyed Latin and was known to have written his own Latin poems at the age of eleven. Leo was a descendant of the Italian leader Cola di Rienzo on his mother&#x27;s side.

His siblings were:
*Carlo (1793–1879)
*Anna Maria (1798–1870)
*Caterina (1800–1867)
*Giovanni Battista (1802–1881)
*Giuseppe (1807–1890)
*Fernando (1813–1830)

In 1824, he and Giuseppe were called to Rome, where their mother was dying. Count Pecci wanted his children near him after the loss of his wife and so they stayed with him in Rome and attended the Jesuit Collegium Romanum.

In 1828, the 18-year-old Vincenzo decided in favour of secular clergy, and Giuseppe entered the Jesuit order. Vincenzo studied at the Academia dei Nobili, mainly diplomacy and law. In 1834, he gave a student presentation, attended by several cardinals, on papal judgments. For his presentation, he received awards for academic excellence and gained the attention of Vatican officials. Cardinal Secretary of State Luigi Lambruschini introduced him to Vatican congregations. During a cholera epidemic in Rome, he assisted Cardinal Giuseppe Antonio Sala in his duties as overseer of all the city hospitals. In 1836, he received his doctorate in theology and doctorates of civil and Canon Law in Rome.

==Provincial administrator, 1837–1843==

On 14 February 1837, Pope Gregory XVI appointed the 27-year-old Pecci as personal prelate even before he was ordained a priest on 31 December 1837 by the Cardinal Vicar Carlo Odescalchi. He celebrated his first Mass with his priest brother Giuseppe. Shortly thereafter, Gregory XVI appointed Pecci as Papal legate (provincial administrator) to Benevento, the smallest Papal province, with a population of about 20,000.

The main problems facing Pecci were a decaying local economy, insecurity from widespread bandits, and pervasive Mafia or Camorra structures, which were often allied with aristocratic families. Pecci arrested the most powerful aristocrat in Benevento and his troops captured others, who were either killed or imprisoned by him. With public order restored, he turned to the economy and a reform of the tax system to stimulate trade with the neighboring provinces.

Pecci was first destined for Spoleto, a province of 100,000. On 17 July 1841, he was sent to Perugia with 200,000 inhabitants. His immediate concern was to prepare the province for a papal visitation in the same year. Pope Gregory XVI visited hospitals and educational institutions for several days, asking for advice and listing questions. The fight against corruption continued in Perugia, where Pecci investigated several incidents. When it was claimed that a bakery was selling bread below the prescribed pound weight, he personally went there, had all bread weighed and confiscated it if below legal weight. The confiscated bread was distributed to the poor.

==Nuncio to Belgium, 1843–1846==
In 1843, Pecci, at only 33, was appointed Apostolic Nuncio to Belgium, a position that guaranteed the cardinal&#x27;s hat after completion of the tour.

On 27 April 1843, Pope Gregory XVI appointed Pecci Archbishop and asked his Cardinal Secretary of State Lambruschini to consecrate him. Pecci developed excellent relations with the royal family and used the location to visit neighboring Germany, where he was particularly interested in the architectural completion of the Cologne Cathedral.

In 1844, upon his initiative, a Belgian College in Rome was opened; 102 years later, in 1946, the future Pope John Paul II would begin his Roman studies there. Pecci spent several weeks in England with Bishop Nicholas Wiseman, carefully reviewing the condition of the Catholic Church in that country.

In Belgium, the school question was sharply debated between the Catholic majority and the liberal minority. Pecci encouraged the struggle for Catholic schools, but he was able to win the good will of the Court not only of the pious Queen Louise but also of King Leopold I, who was strongly liberal in his views. The new nuncio succeeded in uniting Catholics. At the end of his mission, the King granted him the Grand Cordon in the Order of Leopold.

==Archbishop-Bishop of Perugia, 1846–1878==

===Papal assistant===

In 1843, Pecci had been named papal assistant. From 1846 to 1877, he was considered a popular and successful Archbishop of Perugia. In 1847, after Pope Pius IX granted unlimited freedom for the press in the Papal States, Pecci, who had been highly popular in the first years of his episcopate, became the object of attacks in the media and at his residence. In 1848, revolutionary movements developed throughout Western Europe, including France, Germany and Italy. Austrian, French and Spanish troops reversed the revolutionary gains but at a price for Pecci and the Catholic Church, who could not regain their former popularity.

===Provincial council===

Pecci called a provincial council in 1849 to reform the religious life in his dioceses in Spoleto and it was in this council that the need for a Syllabus of Errors was discussed. He invested in enlarging the seminary for future priests and in hiring new and prominent professors, preferably Thomists. He called on his brother Giuseppe Pecci, a noted Thomist scholar, to resign his professorship in Rome and to teach in Perugia instead. His own residence was next to the seminary, which facilitated his daily contacts with the students.

===Charitable activities===

While archbishop, Pecci developed several activities in support of various Catholic charities. He founded homeless shelters for boys, girls and elderly women. Throughout his dioceses, he opened branches of a &quot;Bank, Monte di Pietà&quot;, which focused on low-income people and provided low-interest loans. He created soup kitchens, which were run by the Capuchins. Upon his elevation to the cardinalate in late 1853, and in light of continuing earthquakes and floods, he donated all resources for the festivities of his elevation to the victims. Much of the public attention turned on the conflict between the Papal States and Italian nationalism, which aimed at the Papal States&#x27; annihilation to achieve the Unification of Italy.

===Cardinalate===

In the consistory of 19 December 1853, he was elevated to the College of Cardinals, as Cardinal-Priest of San Crisogono. Pope Gregory XVI originally intended to name him as a cardinal; however, his death in 1846 put pause to that idea while the events that characterized the beginning of the papacy of Pius IX further postponed the idea of Pecci&#x27;s elevation. By the time that Gregory XVI died, Leopold II repeatedly asked that Pecci be named as a cardinal. While Pius IX strongly desired having Pecci as close to Rome as possible, and repeatedly offered him a suburbicarian diocese, Pecci continually refused due to his preference for Perugia. It is possible that the archbishop did not share the views of the Cardinal Secretary of State, Giacomo Antonelli. It is not true that Pius IX deliberately sent him to Perugia as a way of exiling him from Rome simply because Pecci&#x27;s views were perceived to be liberalistic and conciliatory, as opposed to the conservatism of the papal court.

Allegedly, Pecci had been a cardinal reserved &quot;in pectore&quot; by Gregory XVI in the consistory of 19 January 1846, with the pope&#x27;s death just over four months later invalidating the appointment since his name was never actually revealed publicly.

===Defending the papacy===

Pecci defended the papacy and its claims. When Italian authorities expropriated convents and monasteries of Catholic orders, turning them into administration or military buildings, Pecci protested but acted moderately. When the Italian state took over Catholic schools, Pecci, fearing for his theological seminary, simply added all secular topics from other schools and opened the seminary to non-theologians. The new government also levied taxes on the Catholic Church and issued legislation according to which all episcopal or papal utterances were to be approved by the government before their publication.

===Organizing the First Vatican Council===

On 8 December 1869, an ecumenical council, which became known as the First Vatican Council, was to take place in the Vatican per Pope Pius IX. Pecci was likely well informed since the pope named his brother Giuseppe to help prepare the event.

During the 1870s, in his last years in Perugia, Pecci addressed the role of the church in modern society several times, defining the church as &quot;the mother of material civilization&quot; because it upheld human dignity of working people, opposed the excesses of industrialization and developed large-scale charities for the needy.

In August 1877, on the death of Cardinal Filippo de Angelis, Pope Pius IX appointed him Camerlengo, which required him to reside in Rome. Reportedly, Pius IX is alleged to have said to Pecci: &quot;Monsignor, I have decided to summon you to the Senate of the Church. I feel sure this will be the first act of my pontificate that you will not feel called upon to criticize&quot;. These comments were reported to have been said due to the stories that Pecci and Pius IX had a mutual animosity for each other and disagreed with each other in terms of policy; however, this purported animosity has never been proven. It was further alleged that by this stage Pecci desired a change of scenery from Perugia and hoped for either the bishopric of Albano or the position of datary of the Apostolic Dataria. It has also been said that Pecci was reportedly in line to succeed Cardinal Alessandro Barnabò as the prefect for Propaganda Fide; however, it was stymied by his opponent, Cardinal Antonelli.

==Papacy, 1878–1903==

===Election===

Pope Pius IX died on 7 February 1878, and during his closing years the liberal press had often insinuated that the Kingdom of Italy should take a hand in the conclave and occupy the Vatican. However, the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878) and the sudden death of King Victor Emmanuel II (9 January 1878) distracted the government&#x27;s attention.

In the conclave, the cardinals faced varied questions and discussed issues like church–state relations in Europe, specifically Italy; divisions in the church and the status of the First Vatican Council. It was also debated that the conclave be moved elsewhere, but Pecci decided otherwise in his capacity as the camerlengo. On 18 February 1878, the conclave assembled in Rome. Cardinal Pecci was elected on the third ballot and chose the name Leo XIII. He was crowned on 3 March 1878.

During the conclave, he secured his election on the third scrutiny with 44 out of 61 votes, more than the requisite two-thirds majority. While the 1878 conclave was characterized by fewer political influences than in previous conclaves due to a variety of European political crises, it was generally believed that the long papacy of the conservative Pius IX led many of the cardinals to vote for Pecci because his age and health created the expectation that his papacy would be somewhat brief. Following the conclave, John Henry Newman is reported to have said, &quot;In the successor of Pius IX recognize a depth of thought, a tenderness of heart, a winning simplicity, and a power answering to the name of Leo, which prevent me from lamenting that Pius is no longer here&quot;. In the conclave, Pecci was perceived as the main &quot;papabile&quot; candidate; however, Cardinals Flavio Chigi and Tommaso Martinelli were also considered as potential candidates. But some cardinals who opposed Pecci, and were alarmed at the rising votes he was securing, banded together to cast their ballots for Cardinal Alessandro Franchi; however, Franchi secured no votes in the final ballot that saw Pecci duly elected. Allegedly, those who were dedicated to thwarting his election were Cardinals Luigi Oreglia di Santo Stefano, Pietro Giannelli, Chigi, Lorenzo Ilarione Randi, Carlo Sacconi, Raffaele Monaco La Valletta, Luigi Amat di San Filippo e Sorso, and Johann Baptist Franzelin. It was also suggested that, before his death, Pius IX heavily favored Cardinal Luigi Bilio to succeed him, and while many of the cardinals created by the late pope intended to vote for Bilio to honor the man that elevated them in the first place, they feared that voting for an ultra-conservative could potentially evoke a veto from one of the European powers and stall the election more than was necessary. To that end, there had been early talks about Austria possibly vetoing Bilio; however, this never occurred. Before the conclave, Cardinals Domenico Bartolini, Monaco, Bilio, Henry Edward Manning, Lorenzo Nina, and Franchi (proposed by Pecci&#x27;s opponents) all agreed on supporting Pecci&#x27;s candidacy, also determining that the next pope needed to be an Italian. Both Manning and Edward Henry Howard agreed to persuade the foreign cardinals to back Pecci&#x27;s candidacy.

Upon his election, he announced that he would assume the name &quot;Leo&quot; in memory of Pope Leo XII due to his admiration for the late pope&#x27;s interest in education and his conciliatory attitude toward foreign governments. When asked what name he would take, the new pope responded: &quot;As Leo XIII, in remembrance of Leo XII, whom I have always venerated&quot;. His election was formally announced to the people of Rome and the world at 1:15pm.

He retained the administration of the Perugia see until 1880.

===Pontificate===
As soon as he was elected to the papacy, Leo XIII worked to encourage understanding between the church and the modern world. When he firmly reasserted the scholastic doctrine that science and religion coexist, he required the study of Thomas Aquinas and opened the Vatican Secret Archives to qualified researchers, among whom was the noted historian of the Papacy Ludwig von Pastor. He also refounded the Vatican Observatory
&quot;so that everyone might see clearly that the Church and her Pastors are not opposed to true and solid science, whether human or divine, but that they embrace it, encourage it, and promote it with the fullest possible devotion.&quot;

Leo XIII brought normality back to the Catholic Church after the tumultuous years of Pius IX. Leo&#x27;s intellectual and diplomatic skills helped regain much of the prestige lost with the fall of the Papal States. He tried to reconcile the church with the working class, particularly by dealing with the social changes that were sweeping Europe. The new economic order had resulted in the growth of an impoverished working class who had increasing anticlerical and socialist sympathies. Leo helped reverse that trend.

Although Leo XIII was no radical in either theology or politics, his papacy moved the Catholic Church back to the mainstream of European life. Considered a great diplomat, he managed to improve relations with Russia, Germany, France, Britain and other countries.

Pope Leo XIII was able to reach several agreements in 1896 that resulted in better conditions for the faithful and additional appointments of bishops. During the fifth cholera pandemic in 1891, he ordered the construction of a hospice inside the Vatican. That building would be torn down in 1996 to make way for construction of the Domus Sanctae Marthae.

Leo was a drinker of the cocaine-infused wine tonic Vin Mariani, a precursor drink to Coca-Cola. He awarded a Vatican gold medal to the wine&#x27;s creator, Angelo Mariani, and also appeared on a poster endorsing it. Leo XIII was a semi-vegetarian. In 1903, he attributed his longevity to the sparing use of meat and the consumption of eggs, milk and vegetables.

His favourite poets were Virgil and Dante.

===Foreign relations===

====Russia====

Pope Leo XIII began his pontificate with a friendly letter to Tsar Alexander II in which he reminded the Russian monarch of the millions of Catholics living in his empire who would like to be good Russian subjects if their dignity were respected.

After the assassination of Alexander II, the pope sent a high ranking representative to the coronation of his successor, Alexander III, who was grateful and asked for all religious forces to unify. He asked the pope to ensure that his bishops abstain from political agitation. Relations improved further when Pope Leo XIII, because of Italian considerations, distanced the Vatican from the Rome-Vienna-Berlin alliance, and helped to facilitate a rapprochement between Paris and St. Petersburg.

====Germany====

Under Otto von Bismarck, the anti-Catholic &quot;Kulturkampf&quot; in Prussia led to significant restrictions on the Catholic Church in the German Empire, including the Jesuits Law of 1872. During Leo&#x27;s papacy, compromises were informally reached and the anti-Catholic attacks subsided.

The Centre Party in Germany represented Catholic interests and was a force for social change. It was encouraged by Leo&#x27;s support for social welfare legislation and the rights of working people. Leo&#x27;s forward-looking approach encouraged Catholic Action in other European countries, where the social teachings of the church were incorporated into the agenda of Catholic parties, particularly the Christian democratic parties, which became an acceptable alternative to socialist parties. Leo&#x27;s social teachings were reiterated throughout the 20th century by his successors.

In his &quot;Memoirs&quot;, Emperor Wilhelm II discussed the &quot;friendly, trustful relationship that existed between me and Pope Leo XIII.&quot; During Wilhelm&#x27;s third visit to Leo: &quot;It was of interest to me that the Pope said on this occasion that Germany must be the sword of the Catholic Church. I remarked that the old Roman Empire of the German nation no longer existed, and that conditions had changed. But he adhered to his words.&quot;

====France====

Leo XIII possessed a great affection for France, and feared that the Third Republic would take advantage of the fact that most French Catholics were Royalists to abolish the Concordat of 1801. At the advisement of Cardinal Rampolla, he urged French Catholics to &quot;rally&quot; to the republic. Leo&#x27;s decision upset many French monarchists, who felt they were being forced to betray their king for their faith. Ultimately, this move split the French Church politically and decreased its influence in France. Leo&#x27;s move also failed to prevent the Concordant&#x27;s eventual repealment, as it was later abrogated by the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State.

====Italy====

In the light of a climate hostile to the Catholic Church, Leo continued the policies of Pius IX towards Italy without major modifications. In his relations with the Italian state, Leo continued the Papacy&#x27;s self-imposed incarceration-in-the-Vatican stance and continued to insist that Italian Catholics should not vote in Italian elections or hold any elected office. In his first consistory in 1879, he elevated his older brother, Giuseppe, to the cardinalate. He had to defend the freedom of the church against what Catholics considered Italian persecution and discrimination in the area of education, expropriation and violation of Catholic Churches, legal measures against the church and acts of terrorism such as anticlerical groups attempting to throw the corpse of Pope Pius IX into the Tiber on 13 July 1881. The pope even considered moving his residence to Trieste or Salzburg, two cities in Austria, an idea that Emperor Franz Joseph I gently rejected.

====United Kingdom====

Among the activities of Leo XIII that were important for the English-speaking world, he restored the Scottish hierarchy in 1878. The following year, on 12 May 1879, he raised to the rank of cardinal the convert theologian John Henry Newman, who would eventually be beatified by Pope Benedict XVI in 2010 and canonized by Pope Francis in 2019. In British India, too, Leo established a Catholic hierarchy in 1886 and regulated some longstanding conflicts with the Portuguese authorities. A papal rescript (20 April 1888) condemned the Irish Plan of Campaign and all clerical involvement in it as well as boycotting, followed in June by the papal encyclical &quot;Saepe Nos&quot; that was addressed to all the Irish bishops. Of outstanding significance, not least for the English-speaking world, was Leo&#x27;s encyclical &quot;Apostolicae curae&quot; on the invalidity of the Anglican orders, published in 1896. In 1899, he declared Bede the Venerable a Doctor of the Church.

====Spain====

In 1880, the Santa Maria de Montserrat Abbey in Catalonia celebrated 1000 years of existence. On 11 September 1881, to coincide with the Catalan national day, Leo XIII proclaimed the Virgin of Montserrat to be Patron of Catalonia. This had implications beyond the purely religious sphere, influencing the development of Catalan nationalism.

====Bulgaria====
Leo XIII welcomed the elevation of Prince Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg (the later Ferdinand I of Bulgaria) to Prince of Bulgaria in 1886. A fellow Catholic, whose wife was a member of the Italian House of Bourbon-Parma, the two had a lot in common. However, relations between the two degenerated when Ferdinand expressed his intention to allow his eldest son Crown Prince Boris (later Tsar Boris III) to convert to Orthodoxy, the majority religion of Bulgaria. Leo strongly condemned the action, and when Ferdinand went through with the conversion anyway, Leo excommunicated him.

====United States====

The United States frequently attracted his attention and admiration. He confirmed the decrees of the Third Plenary Council of Baltimore (1884) and raised James Gibbons, the archbishop of that city, to the cardinalate in 1886.

On 10 April 1887, a pontifical charter from Pope Leo XIII founded the Catholic University of America, establishing the national university of the Catholic Church in the United States.

American newspapers criticized Pope Leo because they claimed that he was attempting to gain control of American public schools. One cartoonist drew Leo as a fox unable to reach grapes that were labeled for American schools; the caption read &quot;Sour grapes!&quot;

In 1892, Pope Leo XIII opened the Vatican archives to William Eleroy Curtis, a special envoy planning the commemoration of Christopher Columbus at the 1893 World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition.

====Brazil====
Pope Leo XIII is remembered for the &quot;First Plenary Council of Latin America&quot; held at Rome in 1899, and for his encyclical of 1888 to the bishops of Brazil, &quot;In plurimis&quot;, on the abolition of slavery. In 1897 he published the Apostolic Letter &quot;Trans Oceanum&quot;, which dealt with the privileges and ecclesiastical structure of the Catholic Church in Latin America.

====Chile====
He bestowed his pontifical benediction over Chilean troops on the eve of the Battle of Chorrillos during the War of the Pacific in January 1881. The Chilean soldiers looted the cities of Chorrillos and Barranco, including the churches, and their chaplains headed the robbery at the Biblioteca Nacional del Perú, where the soldiers ransacked various items along with much capital, and Chilean Priests coveted rare and ancient editions of the Bible that were stored there.

====India====
Pope Leo XIII urged &quot;Filii tui India, administri tibi salutis&quot; (Your own sons, O India, will be the heralds of your salvation) and founded the national seminary, called Papal Seminary. He entrusted this task to the then Apostolic Delegate to India Ladislaus Michael Zaleski, who founded the Seminary in 1893.

==== Philippines ====
Leo XIII was pope during the Spanish–American War in 1898, in which the United States, a then largely Protestant nation, took control of the Philippines from Spain. In a 1902 meeting with Philippine Governor-General William Howard Taft, Leo XIII refused to allow the United States government to buy land from Catholic friars in the Philippines.

====Evangelization====
Pope Leo XIII sanctioned the missions to Eastern Africa beginning in 1884. In 1887, he approved the foundation of Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo, which were organized by the Bishop of Piacenza, Giovanni Battista Scalabrini. The missionaries were sent to North and South America to do pastoral care for Italian immigrants. In 1879 Catholic missionaries associated with the White Father Congregation (Society of the Missionaries of Africa) came to Uganda and others went to Tanganyika (present-day Tanzania) and Rwanda.

===Theology===



Leo XIII also approved a number of Scapulars. In 1885, he approved the Scapular of the Holy Face, (also known as &quot;The Veronica&quot;) and elevated the &quot;Priests of the Holy Face&quot; to an archconfraternity. He also approved the Scapular of Our Lady of Good Counsel and the Scapular of St. Joseph, both in 1893, and the Scapular of the Sacred Heart in 1900.

====Thomism====
As pope, he used all his authority for a revival of the theology of Thomas Aquinas. On 4 August 1879, Leo XIII promulgated the encyclical &quot;Aeterni Patris&quot; (&quot;Eternal Father&quot;), which, more than any other single document, provided a charter for the revival of Thomism, the medieval theological system based on the thought of Aquinas – as the official philosophical and theological system of the Catholic Church. It was to be normative not only in the training of priests but also in the education of the laity at universities.

Pope Leo XIII later created the Pontifical Academy of St. Thomas Aquinas on 15 October 1879 and ordered the publication of the critical edition, the so-called Leonine Edition, of the complete works of the &quot;doctor angelicus&quot;. The superintendence of the Leonine edition was entrusted to Tommaso Maria Zigliara, professor and rector of the &quot;Collegium Divi Thomae de Urbe&quot;, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, today called &quot;Angelicum&quot;. Leo also founded the &quot;Angelicum&#x27;s&quot; Faculty of Philosophy in 1882 and its Faculty of Canon Law in 1896.

====Consecrations====
Pope Leo XIII performed a number of consecrations, at times entering new theological territory. After he had received many letters from Sister Mary of the Divine Heart, the countess of Droste zu Vischering and in the Convent of the Good Shepherd Sisters in Porto, Portugal, asking him to consecrate the entire world to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, he commissioned a group of theologians to examine the petition on the basis of revelation and sacred tradition. The outcome of this investigation was positive and so in the encyclical letter &quot;Annum sacrum&quot; (on 25 May 1899), he decreed that the consecration of the entire human race to the Sacred Heart of Jesus should take place on 11 June 1899.

The encyclical letter also encouraged the entire Catholic episcopate to promote the First Friday Devotions, established June as the Month of the Sacred Heart, and included the Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart. His consecration of the entire world to the Sacred Heart of Jesus presented theological challenges in consecrating non-Christians. Since about 1850, various congregations and countries had consecrated themselves to the Sacred Heart, a practice common at the time throughout the Catholic world.

====Prayer====
Leo introduced the promotion of monthly prayer intentions in 1890, which he entrusted to the Apostleship of Prayer (now the Pope&#x27;s Worldwide Prayer Network).

====Scriptures====

In his 1893 encyclical &quot;Providentissimus Deus,&quot; he described the importance of scriptures for theological study. It was an important encyclical for Catholic theology and its relation to the Bible, as Pope Pius XII pointed out 50 years later in his encyclical &quot;Divino afflante Spiritu&quot;.

====Eastern Rite Catholics====
He devoted his encyclical &quot;Orientalium dignitas&quot; of 1894 to preserving Eastern Rite liturgies.

====Theological research====

Leo XIII is credited with great efforts in the areas of scientific and historical analysis. He opened the Vatican Archives and personally fostered a 20-volume comprehensive scientific study of the Papacy by Ludwig von Pastor, an Austrian historian.

====Mariology====

His predecessor, Pope Pius IX, became known as the Pope of the Immaculate Conception because of his dogmatization in 1854. Leo XIII, in light of his unprecedented promulgation of the rosary in 11 encyclicals, was called the Rosary Pope because he promulgated Marian devotion. In his encyclical on the 50th anniversary of the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception, he stresses Mary&#x27;s role in the redemption of humanity and calls her Mediatrix and Co-Redemptrix. While allowing the title &quot;Mediatrix&quot;, recent popes, following on the Second Vatican Council, have warned away from the term &quot;co-redemptrix&quot; as derogating from the one mediator, Jesus Christ.

====Social teachings====

=====&quot;Rerum novarum&quot;=====
His encyclicals changed the church&#x27;s relations with temporal authorities; the 1891 encyclical &quot;Rerum novarum&quot;, for the first time, addressed social inequality and social justice issues with papal authority by focusing on the rights and duties of capital and labour. He was greatly influenced by Wilhelm Emmanuel von Ketteler, a German bishop who propagated siding with the suffering working classes in his book &quot;Die Arbeiterfrage und das Christentum&quot;. Since Leo XIII, many papal teachings have expanded on the rights and obligations of workers. Leo argued that both capitalism and communism are flawed. &quot;Rerum novarum&quot; introduced the idea of subsidiarity, the principle that political and social decisions should be taken at a local level, if possible, rather than by a central authority, into Catholic social thought.

===Consistories===

Throughout his pontificate, Leo XIII elevated 147 cardinals in 27 consistories. While the limit of the College of Cardinals had been set at 70 since the papacy of Pope Sixtus V, Leo XIII never exceeded nor reached the limit, only ever coming close at 67 in 1901. Amongst the noteworthy cardinals whom he elevated, he named John Henry Newman as a cardinal while also elevating his own brother Giuseppe Pecci, though not a nepotistic act (it was based purely on recommendation and merit), in the same consistory. In 1893, he elevated Giuseppe Melchiorre Sarto to the cardinalate, who would go on to be his immediate successor, Pope Pius X in 1903. The pope also nominated the brothers, Serafino and Vincenzo Vannutelli and the cousins Luigi and Angelo Jacobini to the Sacred College. Other noteworthy inclusions were Andrea Carlo Ferrari (later beatified in 1987) and Girolamo Maria Gotti.

Of the 147 cardinals he elevated, 85 were Italian since Leo XIII nominated cardinals from beyond Europe, including the first cardinals from Australia, Canada, Slovenia, and Armenia, the latter of which would be the first Oriental selection since 1439.

In 1880, the pope named three cardinals &quot;in pectore&quot;, announcing them in 1882 and 1884. In 1882, he named another cardinal &quot;in pectore&quot;, announcing the name later that same year. On 30 December 1889, Leo XIII named only one cardinal whom he reserved &quot;in pectore&quot;, only announcing the name roughly six months later. In early 1893, he named another two cardinals &quot;in pectore&quot;, announcing their names in 1894 and 1895, while in April 1901 announcing the names of another two cardinals whom he had reserved &quot;in pectore&quot; in June 1899. In June 1896, Leo XIII named two other cardinals in pectore, announcing in March 1898 that both had died, hence, vacating the red hats he would have bestowed upon them.

With the elevation of Newman in 1879, it was widely praised throughout the English-speaking world, not simply on the account of Newman&#x27;s virtues and reputation, but on the basis that Leo XIII had a broader episcopal vision in mind than Pius IX ever did. His similar appointments of two prominent participants of the First Vatican Council, Lajos Haynald and Friedrich Egon von Fürstenberg both in 1879 was also noteworthy due to their roles in the short-lived Council. It was even alleged that Félix Antoine Philibert Dupanloup, a vocal opponent of papal infallibility like Newman, would have been elevated to the cardinalate in 1879 had he not died in October 1878. Additionally, in 1884, the Polish priest and former Curial official Stefan Pawlicki was offered but refused an offer of elevation. Leo XIII later intended to name the Archbishop of Santiago Mariano Santiago Casanova Casanova as a cardinal in 1895; however, the pope abandoned the idea after the Peruvian Church objected that the Archbishop of Lima was the Primate of South America and hence the one that needed to be made a cardinal. In order to avoid a conflict between Chile and Peru, the pope abandoned the idea reluctantly.

In 1897, the pope intended to name the Archbishop of Turin Davide Riccardi as a cardinal but the cardinal died before the promotion could take place. In 1891 and again in 1897, the pope offered the cardinalate to Johannes Montel Edler von Treuenfels, the dean of the Sacred Rota, though he refused the honor (he refused again in 1908 when invited by Pope Pius X). In 1899, Leo XIII hoped to nominate the Dominican procurator general Hyacinthe-Marie Cormier (later beatified) to the cardinalate; however, he was unable to do so because the French government did not favor a cardinal from a religious order to seek its best interests as a Curial member. In 1901, he planned to name Agapito Panici as a cardinal at the next consistory, but Panici died before the nomination could take place in 1903. Allegedly, before deciding to name him, Leo XIII asked his brother Diomede to renounce his claim to the red hat, but when Agapito died in 1902, the pope informed Diomede that he would ignore his previous missive asking him to renounce his claim to the red hat, a position that Diomede was never then given. According to witnesses, Leo XIII failed three times to invite Vincenzo Tarozzi (whose cause for beatification has since been launched) to receive the red hat. According to a conversation in 1904 between Pope Pius X and Antonio Mele-Virdis, the former is alleged to have said, &quot;he should have been in my place&quot;.

===Canonizations and beatifications===

Leo XIII canonized the following saints during his pontificate:
* 8 December 1881: Clare of Montefalco (d. 1308), John Baptist de Rossi (1696–1764), Lawrence of Brindisi (d. 1619), and Benedict Joseph Labre (1748–1783)
* 15 January 1888: Seven Holy Founders of the Servite Order, Peter Claver (1581–1654), John Berchmans (1599–1621), and Alphonsus Rodriguez (1531–1617)
* 27 May 1897: Anthony Zaccaria (1502–1539) and Peter Fourier (1565–1640)
* 24 May 1900: John Baptist de la Salle (1651–1719) and Rita of Cascia (1381–1457)

Leo XIII beatified several of his predecessors: Urban II (14 July 1881), Victor III (23 July 1887) and Innocent V (9 March 1898). He canonized Adrian III on 2 June 1891.

He also beatified the following:
* Giancarlo Melchiori on 22 January 1882
* Edmund Campion and Ralph Sherwin in 1886
* John Haile on 29 December 1886
* Jean-Baptiste de La Salle (whom he later canonized) on 19 February 1888
* Inés de Benigánim on 26 February 1888
* Antonio Maria Zaccaria (whom he later canonized) on 3 January 1890
* Giovanni Giovenale Ancina on 9 February 1890
* Pompilio Maria Pirrotti on 26 January 1890
* Gerard Majella on 29 January 1893
* Leopoldo Croci on 12 May 1893
* Antonio Baldinucci on 16 April 1893
* Rodolfo Acquaviva and 4 Companions on 30 April 1893
* Diego José López-Caamaño on 22 April 1894
* Bernardino Realino on 12 January 1896
* Francis Regis Clet on 27 May 1900
* Ignatius Delgado y Cebrian as one of 64 Martyrs of Vietnam on 27 May 1900
* Louis Gabriel Taurin Dufresse on 27 May 1900
* John Lantrua of Triora on 27 May 1900
* Maria Maddalena Martinengo on 3 June 1900
* Dénis Berthelot of the Nativity and Redento Rodríguez of the Cross on 10 June 1900
* Jeanne de Lestonnac on 23 September 1900
* Antonio Grassi on 30 September 1900

He approved the cult of Cosmas of Aphrodisia. He beatified several of the English martyrs in 1895.

====Doctors of the Church====
Leo XIII named four individuals as Doctors of the Church:
* Cyril of Alexandria (28 July 1882) – he named him as &quot;Doctor Incarnationis&quot; (&quot;Doctor of the Incarnation&quot;)
* Cyril of Jerusalem (28 July 1882)
* John of Damascus (29 August 1890)
* Bede the Venerable (13 November 1899) – he named him as &quot;Anglorum doctor&quot; (&quot;Doctor of the English&quot;)

===Audiences===

One of the first audiences that Leo XIII granted was to the professors and students of the Collegio Capranica, where in the first row knelt in front of him the young seminarian Giacomo Della Chiesa, the future Pope Benedict XV, who would be pope from 1914 to 1922.

On a pilgrimage with her father and sister in 1887, Thérèse of Lisieux attended a general audience with Pope Leo XIII and asked him to allow her to enter the Carmelite order. Even though she was strictly forbidden to speak to him because she was told that it would prolong the audience too much, she addressed him with the Pope telling her: &quot;If it is God&#x27;s will that you should enter the Convent, then it shall be&quot;.[a story of a soul]

There are several versions of a story of how Leo came to compose the Prayer to Saint Michael. Various dates are given. A common account says that on the morning of 13 October 1884, Leo XIII celebrated Mass but as he finished, he turned to step down the stairs and allegedly collapsed, falling into what was originally thought to be a coma, but was rather a mystical ecstasy. As the priests and cardinals rushed to his side, Leo XIII rose and visibly shaken, brushed off his aides and rushed back towards his apartment where he immediately wrote the Prayer to Saint Michael the Archangel. Leo XIII reportedly saw a vision of demons being released from Hell, and as the vision ended, he saw Saint Michael charge in and drive them all back into Hell. Leo XIII mandated that the prayer be said after every Mass from that point forth.

In 1934, a German writer, Fr. Bers, tried to trace the origin of the story and declared that, though the story was widespread, nowhere could he find a trace of proof. Sources close to the institution of the prayer in 1886, including an account of a conversation with Leo XIII about his decision, say nothing of the alleged vision. Bers concluded that the story was a later invention that spread like a virus.

==Health==

At the time of his election in 1878, the pope had started to experience a slight tremor in his hand due to a poorly undertaken bloodletting procedure for a previous malady.

In March 1899, it had been believed that the pope was gravely ill and that he was nearing death. Originally, it was presumed that the pope was suffering from a violent case of pneumonia and that the alarm was raised regarding his health. However, it was soon discovered that the reason for the pope&#x27;s illness was the sudden inflammation of a cyst which had been troubling him for almost thirty years and which had never been previously removed. The only reason it had never been of any particular concern was due to incisions designed for pain relief. While Leo XIII strongly rejected the notion of surgery at first, he was persuaded by Cardinal Mariano Rampolla del Tindaro that it was necessary to ensure his good health. Before the pope was taken for surgery, he asked that his chaplain celebrate Mass in his private chapel while the operation was taking place. Reportedly, the cyst removed &quot;was the size of an ordinary-sized orange.&quot;

Towards the end of his life, Leo XIII resorted to using a gold-headed cane when going on walks, as he often found it difficult to do so. While Leo XIII was certainly able to walk without it, he only did so if he felt truly comfortable in doing so. When there were ever rumors about his health, Leo XIII was known to mischievously walk about briskly to dispel the rumors.

==Death==

On 30 June 1903, Leo XIII reported slight feelings of dyspepsia and said that he would take a dose of castor oil to help himself recuperate, shrugging off concerns about his health. While it seemed to work, and the pope resumed his duties with a renewed vigor, it was not to last.

Leo XIII originally contracted a cold while taking an outing in the Vatican Gardens on 3 July 1903; however, his condition rapidly deteriorated to the point that he had contracted pneumonia. That night, he immediately went to bed and lost consciousness. Originally, the pope refused his doctor&#x27;s desire to secure a second opinion from a colleague, insisting on a doctor who had previously tended to him in 1899 when he suffered a previous serious illness. When the doctor was immediately summoned to the pope&#x27;s bedside, he determined that the castor oil had disturbed his stomach and exacerbated his condition. The pope&#x27;s nephews were immediately notified of their uncle&#x27;s illness, as were Cardinals Mariano Rampolla del Tindaro and Luigi Oreglia di Santo Stefano in their capacities as the Secretary of State and Camerlengo respectively. On 4 July, the pope made his last confession to Cardinal Serafino Vannutelli and later was barely able to recite the profession of faith. That same day, he experienced a loss of appetite and suffered from shortness of breath. On 5 July, the doctor said reported that the hepatisation affected the upper and middle lobes of the right lung, while Leo XIII suffered from considerable cardiac weakness and difficulties in breathing, while reporting the absence of any fever or coughing fits. That same day, after having received the sacraments, the pope said, &quot;I am now near my end. I do not know if all I have done has been good, but I certainly obeyed my conscience and our faith&quot;.

On 6 July 1903, he was administered an injection to ease the pain that he was experiencing, while it was reported that the pneumonia he had contracted was starting to spread to the left lung. The pope, who had an imperceptible pulse, had a restless night and was given oxygen by his doctors. When given the oxygen, Leo XIII replied, &quot;That is much better. Before I felt as though I had lost my liberty&quot;. That morning, he intimated to those with him that he would prefer it if Cardinal Girolamo Maria Gotti succeeded him in the next conclave. When doctors ordered him to rest, so as not to further aggravate his declining health, Leo XIII said: &quot;If it were only of any use, but I do not believe it would be. The brief remainder of my life must be given to God&#x27;s Church, not to my own poor comfort&quot;. The pope lost consciousness but was awake to receive the sacraments at 9:00pm before experiencing yet another restless night, marveling, &quot;God&#x27;s will be done. Who would have believed it when only ten days ago I was presiding over a public consistory?&quot; Leo XIII only slept three hours but severe pain saw him immediately awaken, complaining of pain on both sides of the thorax that forced doctors to move his frail form for better comfort. His situation had previously been critical that afternoon when he was given the Last Rites, while his doctors apprised him of his sudden deterioration. On 7 July, the feeble pope asked that the shutters of his window be opened, saying &quot;I wish to see once more, perhaps for the last time, the rays of the sun&quot;. In the nights following, the pope suffered from several coughing fits, perspiring heavily due to his rising fever. The pope felt slightly better enough on 10 July to receive a group of Hungarian pilgrims; however, the pope was exhausted and collapsed after the meeting.

Leo XIII deteriorated further until he died at 3:55pm on 20 July 1903, whispering a final blessing before he died. However, Vatican officials gave the time of his death as 4:04pm when officials officially confirmed that the pope had died. Officially, Leo XIII had died of pneumonia, followed by hemorrhagic pleurisy.

Leo XIII was the first pope to be born in the 19th century and was also the first to die in the 20th century, living to the age of 93. He is the oldest verified pope to have served in the office, and the second-oldest verified person to have been pope, surpassed only by Pope Benedict XVI as &quot;Pope emeritus&quot;, who died at the age of 95. There are three other popes that are claimed to have lived longer than Pope Leo XIII: Pope St Agatho (574–681), who died at the age of 107; Pope Gregory IX (1145–1241), who died at the age of 96; and Pope Adrian I (700–795), who died at the age of 95. However, although there is some contemporary documentation attesting to their ages, there is not sufficient evidence for them to be verified with complete certainty; this is due to the poor record keeping typical of the era in which they lived.

At the time of his death, Leo XIII was the third-longest-reigning pope (25 years), exceeded only by his immediate predecessor, Pius IX (31 years), and Saint Peter (38 years).

He was entombed in Saint Peter&#x27;s Basilica only briefly after his funeral; he was later moved to the Basilica of Saint John Lateran, his cathedral church as the Bishop of Rome, and a church in which he took a particular interest. He was moved there in late 1924. Until the death of Pope Francis, who will be interred at the Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome, Leo will be the last pope not to be buried in St. Peter&#x27;s Basilica.

==Tributes==
Pope Paul VI described Leo as &quot;great and wise&quot;, his &quot;first teacher&quot;, from whom he had inherited &quot;a pastoral outlook and a pastoral approach&quot;.

==In sound recording and film==

Leo XIII was the first pope whose voice was recorded. The recording can be found on a compact disc of Alessandro Moreschi&#x27;s singing; a recording of his praying of the Ave Maria is available on the web. He was also the first pope to be filmed by a motion picture camera. He was filmed in 1898 by inventor, W. K. Dickson, and blessed the camera while being filmed. The video contains three segments: the pope on a throne, the pope arriving in a horse-drawn carriage, the pope taking a seat on a bench. Born in 1810, he is also the earliest-born known person to appear in a film.

In the 2024 film, &quot;Cabrini&quot;, Pope Leo XIII is depicted by Giancarlo Giannini in several scenes offering his support to Mother Cabrini for her mission in the United States in 1889 and thereafter.

==See also==
* List of encyclicals of Pope Leo XIII
* Cardinals created by Leo XIII
* Distributism
* List of popes
* List of popes by length of reign
* Papal Navy
* Prayer to Saint Michael
* Restoration of the Scottish hierarchy

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==

===In English===

* Chadwick, Owen. &quot;A History of the Popes 1830–1914&quot; (2003). online pp 273–331.
* Chadwick, Owen. &quot;The Popes and European Revolution&quot; (1981) 655pp excerpt; also online 
* .
* .

===In German===
* .
* .
* .

===In Italian===

==Further reading==

* Richard H. Clarke (1903), &quot;The Life of His Holiness Leo XIII&quot;, Philadelphia: P. W. Ziegler &amp; Co.

==External links==

* 
* 
* Film of Pope Leo XIII in 1896 on YouTube with recording of Leo XIII chanting the &quot;Ave Maria&quot; in Latin in 1903
* Colorized film of Pope Leo XIII in 1896 on YouTube
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="0" end="13" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="22" end="62" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Gioacchino Vincenzo Raffaele Luigi Pecci"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="109" end="124" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="238" end="255" title="Peter the Apostle" label="Peter the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="257" end="264" title="Pius IX" label="Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="297" end="309" title="Pope John Paul II" label="John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="467" end="477" title="Papal encyclical" label="encyclical"/>
<link wikidata="Q335987" start="484" end="497" title="Rerum novarum" label="Rerum novarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915476" start="527" end="544" title="Workers rights" label="rights of workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q543406" start="550" end="559" title="fair wage" label="fair wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q629029" start="561" end="584" title="Occupational safety and health" label="safe working conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="607" end="619" title="trade unions" label="trade unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="641" end="659" title="rights to property" label="rights to property"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="664" end="679" title="Market economy" label="free enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="695" end="704" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="715" end="728" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="735" end="745" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="931" end="970" title="social doctrines of the Catholic Church" label="social doctrines of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361856" start="1034" end="1066" title="Mariology of the Catholic Church" label="Mariology of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="1089" end="1095" title="rosary" label="rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q866214" start="1104" end="1112" title="scapular" label="scapular"/>
<link wikidata="Q328945" start="1165" end="1172" title="Thomism" label="Thomism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="1200" end="1218" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="1223" end="1237" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986647" start="1392" end="1406" title="Editio Leonina" label="Editio Leonina"/>
<link wikidata="Q745692" start="1500" end="1519" title="political sociology" label="political sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="1575" end="1589" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="1887" end="1899" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q211789" start="1941" end="1951" title="Pope Stephen II" label="Stephen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351925" start="2151" end="2165" title="Roman Question" label="Roman Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q1717939" start="2214" end="2230" title="Vatican Grottoes" label="Vatican Grottoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="2288" end="2318" title="Basilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Basilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q242000" start="2371" end="2387" title="Carpineto Romano" label="Carpineto Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="2442" end="2447" title="Count" label="Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095374" start="2502" end="2511" title="Patrician (post-Roman Europe)" label="Patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="2515" end="2520" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="2522" end="2529" title="Colonel" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="2537" end="2548" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2555" end="2563" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q620175" start="2664" end="2685" title="protonotary apostolic" label="protonotary apostolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q465288" start="2690" end="2701" title="referendary" label="referendary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332564" start="2770" end="2778" title="Giuseppe Pecci" label="Giuseppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="3239" end="3245" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13395" start="3257" end="3264" title="Viterbo" label="Viterbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3288" end="3293" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q433189" start="3409" end="3423" title="Cola di Rienzo" label="Cola di Rienzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332564" start="3568" end="3576" title="Giuseppe Pecci" label="Giuseppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q467025" start="3816" end="3833" title="Collegium Romanum" label="Collegium Romanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q924774" start="3891" end="3905" title="secular clergy" label="secular clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q972938" start="3970" end="3989" title="Pontifical Ecclesiastical Academy" label="Academia dei Nobili"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="4078" end="4087" title="cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054345" start="4221" end="4248" title="Cardinal Secretary of State" label="Cardinal Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q584470" start="4249" end="4267" title="Luigi Lambruschini" label="Luigi Lambruschini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084719" start="4365" end="4386" title="Giuseppe Antonio Sala" label="Giuseppe Antonio Sala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="4515" end="4524" title="Canon law (Catholic Church)" label="Canon Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q43734" start="4597" end="4613" title="Pope Gregory XVI" label="Pope Gregory XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q725440" start="4658" end="4665" title="prelate" label="prelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729117" start="4730" end="4744" title="Cardinal Vicar" label="Cardinal Vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518595" start="4745" end="4761" title="Carlo Odescalchi" label="Carlo Odescalchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="4877" end="4889" title="Papal legate" label="Papal legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q13437" start="4920" end="4929" title="Benevento" label="Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q468804" start="5117" end="5124" title="Camorra" label="Camorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q20571" start="5488" end="5495" title="Spoleto" label="Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="5552" end="5559" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43734" start="5677" end="5693" title="Pope Gregory XVI" label="Pope Gregory XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437" start="5842" end="5849" title="Perugia" label="Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q511060" start="6199" end="6226" title="Apostolic Nuncio to Belgium" label="Apostolic Nuncio to Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="6259" end="6267" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="6361" end="6371" title="Archbishop" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176" start="6632" end="6649" title="Cologne Cathedral" label="Cologne Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q763499" start="6684" end="6699" title="Belgian Pontifical College" label="Belgian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="6757" end="6774" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q672816" start="6861" end="6877" title="Nicholas Wiseman" label="Nicholas Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6920" end="6951" title="Catholic Church in England#Nineteenth century" label="Catholic Church in that country"/>
<link wikidata="Q72795" start="7186" end="7198" title="Louise-Marie of France" label="Queen Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12971" start="7216" end="7225" title="Leopold I of Belgium" label="Leopold I"/>
<link wikidata="Q26126" start="7385" end="7401" title="Order of Leopold (Belgium)" label="Order of Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120388" start="7502" end="7517" title="Assistant at the Pontifical Throne" label="papal assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365289" start="7581" end="7602" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Perugia–Città della Pieve" label="Archbishop of Perugia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="7619" end="7631" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="7839" end="7862" title="revolutions of 1848" label="revolutionary movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="7937" end="7945" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58326" start="7947" end="7953" title="Second French Republic" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821150" start="7958" end="7965" title="History of Spain (1808-1874)" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20571" start="8219" end="8226" title="Spoleto" label="Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q596420" start="8274" end="8292" title="Syllabus of Errors" label="Syllabus of Errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q328945" start="8420" end="8427" title="Thomist" label="Thomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332564" start="8455" end="8469" title="Giuseppe Pecci" label="Giuseppe Pecci"/>
<link wikidata="Q27961621" start="8770" end="8788" title="Catholic charities" label="Catholic charities"/>
<link wikidata="Q772298" start="8801" end="8817" title="homeless shelter" label="homeless shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q179179" start="8985" end="9002" title="low-interest loan" label="low-interest loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142654" start="9016" end="9028" title="soup kitchen" label="soup kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="9143" end="9154" title="earthquakes" label="earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="9309" end="9321" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093359" start="9326" end="9345" title="Italian nationalism" label="Italian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="9413" end="9433" title="Unification of Italy" label="Unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q852242" start="9517" end="9537" title="College of Cardinals" label="College of Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="9542" end="9557" title="Cardinal-Priest" label="Cardinal-Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631638" start="9561" end="9574" title="San Crisogono" label="San Crisogono"/>
<link wikidata="Q313169" start="9854" end="9864" title="Leopold II, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184788" start="10020" end="10041" title="suburbicarian diocese" label="suburbicarian diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054345" start="10170" end="10197" title="Cardinal Secretary of State" label="Cardinal Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q712085" start="10199" end="10216" title="Giacomo Antonelli" label="Giacomo Antonelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319909" start="10503" end="10513" title="in pectore" label="in pectore"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="10786" end="10793" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053154" start="11417" end="11435" title="Catholic Ecumenical Councils" label="ecumenical council"/>
<link wikidata="Q190857" start="11463" end="11484" title="First Vatican Council" label="First Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="11523" end="11535" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399905" start="12015" end="12033" title="Filippo de Angelis" label="Filippo de Angelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q339477" start="12062" end="12072" title="Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church" label="Camerlengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q866790" start="12701" end="12720" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Albano" label="bishopric of Albano"/>
<link wikidata="Q620020" start="12754" end="12771" title="Apostolic Dataria" label="Apostolic Dataria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832751" start="12849" end="12867" title="Alessandro Barnabò" label="Alessandro Barnabò"/>
<link wikidata="Q386359" start="12887" end="12902" title="Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples" label="Propaganda Fide"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="13005" end="13017" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="13120" end="13136" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186431" start="13163" end="13171" title="Papal conclave" label="conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q145093" start="13187" end="13194" title="Apostolic Palace" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="13209" end="13238" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="13268" end="13286" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310733" start="13429" end="13451" title="church-state relations (Catholic Church)" label="church–state relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="14353" end="14370" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545186" start="14670" end="14678" title="papabile" label="papabile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063536" start="14732" end="14750" title="Tommaso Martinelli" label="Tommaso Martinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q647382" start="14940" end="14958" title="Alessandro Franchi (cardinal)" label="Alessandro Franchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345306" start="15120" end="15150" title="Luigi Oreglia di Santo Stefano" label="Luigi Oreglia di Santo Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518293" start="15152" end="15168" title="Pietro Giannelli" label="Pietro Giannelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q948349" start="15201" end="15214" title="Carlo Sacconi" label="Carlo Sacconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337371" start="15216" end="15243" title="Raffaele Monaco La Valletta" label="Raffaele Monaco La Valletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229925" start="15245" end="15278" title="Luigi Amat di San Filippo e Sorso" label="Luigi Amat di San Filippo e Sorso"/>
<link wikidata="Q79142" start="15284" end="15308" title="Johann Baptist Franzelin" label="Johann Baptist Franzelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235028" start="15389" end="15400" title="Luigi Bilio" label="Luigi Bilio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383937" start="15781" end="15788" title="Jus exclusivae" label="vetoing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15958387" start="15857" end="15875" title="Domenico Bartolini" label="Domenico Bartolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q464946" start="15892" end="15912" title="Henry Edward Manning" label="Henry Edward Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q261206" start="15914" end="15926" title="Lorenzo Nina" label="Lorenzo Nina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292523" start="16104" end="16123" title="Edward Henry Howard" label="Edward Henry Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q43727" start="16289" end="16301" title="Pope Leo XII" label="Pope Leo XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="16891" end="16901" title="scholasticism" label="scholastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="16971" end="16985" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q536580" start="17001" end="17024" title="Vatican Secret Archives" label="Vatican Secret Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q64162" start="17100" end="17117" title="Ludwig von Pastor" label="Ludwig von Pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q591923" start="17141" end="17160" title="Vatican Observatory" label="Vatican Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="18129" end="18135" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="18137" end="18144" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="18146" end="18152" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="18154" end="18161" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447588" start="18346" end="18368" title="fifth cholera pandemic" label="fifth cholera pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q608152" start="18411" end="18418" title="hospice" label="hospice"/>
<link wikidata="Q665917" start="18516" end="18537" title="Domus Sanctae Marthae" label="Domus Sanctae Marthae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="18565" end="18572" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665382" start="18592" end="18603" title="Vin Mariani" label="Vin Mariani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="18626" end="18635" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="18650" end="18657" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974777" start="18697" end="18711" title="Angelo Mariani (chemist)" label="Angelo Mariani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583254" start="18772" end="18787" title="semi-vegetarianism" label="semi-vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="18929" end="18935" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="18940" end="18945" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="19056" end="19068" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="19094" end="19101" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="19358" end="19371" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="19503" end="19512" title="Political demonstration" label="agitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="19755" end="19772" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063123" start="19778" end="19791" title="anti-Catholic" label="anti-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159879" start="19798" end="19809" title="Kulturkampf" label="Kulturkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="19819" end="19826" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="19889" end="19902" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516392" start="19918" end="19937" title="Jesuits Law (1872)" label="Jesuits Law of 1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q157537" start="20046" end="20058" title="Centre Party (Germany)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q482027" start="20288" end="20303" title="Catholic Action" label="Catholic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="20446" end="20466" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="20665" end="20675" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="20965" end="20998" title="Roman Empire of the German nation" label="Roman Empire of the German nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="21172" end="21186" title="Third French Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q943197" start="21252" end="21261" title="Royalists" label="Royalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428015" start="21277" end="21294" title="Concordat of 1801" label="Concordat of 1801"/>
<link wikidata="Q508860" start="21317" end="21334" title="Cardinal Rampolla" label="Cardinal Rampolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518944" start="21733" end="21796" title="1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State" label="1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="21918" end="21923" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236289" start="22039" end="22067" title="prisoner in the Vatican" label="incarceration-in-the-Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q841535" start="22200" end="22210" title="papal consistory" label="consistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332564" start="22251" end="22259" title="Giuseppe Pecci" label="Giuseppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="22613" end="22618" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="22685" end="22692" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q34713" start="22696" end="22704" title="Salzburg" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="22720" end="22727" title="Cisleithania" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="22750" end="22764" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria" label="Franz Joseph I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316222" start="22895" end="22926" title="Restoration of the Scottish hierarchy" label="restored the Scottish hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="22997" end="23005" title="cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="23029" end="23046" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="23072" end="23081" title="beatification" label="beatified"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="23085" end="23102" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="23115" end="23124" title="canonization" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="23128" end="23140" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="23153" end="23166" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q323904" start="23269" end="23291" title="Portuguese India" label="Portuguese authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418386" start="23301" end="23309" title="rescript" label="rescript"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23346" end="23362" title="Plan of Campaign#Papal Encyclical 1888" label="Plan of Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q619982" start="23632" end="23649" title="Apostolicae curae" label="Apostolicae curae"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="23738" end="23756" title="Bede the Venerable" label="Bede the Venerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="23759" end="23779" title="Doctor of the Church" label="Doctor of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q771935" start="23810" end="23841" title="Santa Maria de Montserrat Abbey" label="Santa Maria de Montserrat Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q301779" start="23980" end="24000" title="Virgin of Montserrat" label="Virgin of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735599" start="24117" end="24136" title="Catalan nationalism" label="Catalan nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151667" start="24234" end="24257" title="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria" label="Ferdinand I of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q379687" start="24262" end="24280" title="Prince of Bulgaria" label="Prince of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q895187" start="24348" end="24370" title="House of Bourbon-Parma" label="House of Bourbon-Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q159585" start="24537" end="24551" title="Tsar Boris III" label="Tsar Boris III"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="24712" end="24726" title="Excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076959" start="24857" end="24891" title="Third Plenary Council of Baltimore" label="Third Plenary Council of Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q712605" start="24910" end="24923" title="James Gibbons" label="James Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="25053" end="25083" title="Catholic University of America" label="Catholic University of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q536580" start="25469" end="25485" title="Vatican Apostolic Archive" label="Vatican archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q18324162" start="25489" end="25510" title="William Eleroy Curtis" label="William Eleroy Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="25558" end="25578" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="25591" end="25624" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="25800" end="25806" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q600619" start="25814" end="25825" title="In plurimis" label="In plurimis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649877" start="25840" end="25860" title="slavery in Brazil" label="abolition of slavery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25887" end="25903" title="Ecclesiastical letter#Letters of the popes in modern times" label="Apostolic Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="26092" end="26097" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772977" start="26125" end="26145" title="Battle of Chorrillos" label="Battle of Chorrillos"/>
<link wikidata="Q152004" start="26157" end="26175" title="War of the Pacific" label="War of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321093" start="26235" end="26245" title="Chorrillos District" label="Chorrillos"/>
<link wikidata="Q808823" start="26250" end="26258" title="Barranco District" label="Barranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901492" start="26330" end="26358" title="National Library of Peru" label="Biblioteca Nacional del Perú"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132428" start="26713" end="26727" title="Papal Seminary" label="Papal Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q176008" start="26792" end="26817" title="Ladislaus Michael Zaleski" label="Ladislaus Michael Zaleski"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="26905" end="26925" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="27017" end="27028" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="27092" end="27111" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="27286" end="27300" title="Eastern Africa" label="Eastern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15141148" start="27359" end="27395" title="Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo" label="Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q874204" start="27425" end="27443" title="Bishop of Piacenza" label="Bishop of Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394839" start="27445" end="27473" title="Giovanni Battista Scalabrini" label="Giovanni Battista Scalabrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q278165" start="27623" end="27688" title="White Fathers" label="White Father Congregation (Society of the Missionaries of Africa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036" start="27697" end="27703" title="Uganda" label="Uganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="27747" end="27755" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="27761" end="27767" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q866214" start="27823" end="27831" title="Scapular" label="Scapular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430201" start="27859" end="27884" title="Scapular of the Holy Face" label="Scapular of the Holy Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q784648" start="28039" end="28063" title="Our Lady of Good Counsel" label="Our Lady of Good Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430198" start="28072" end="28094" title="Scapular of St. Joseph" label="Scapular of St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430208" start="28118" end="28146" title="Scapular of the Sacred Heart" label="Scapular of the Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="28241" end="28255" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q381906" start="28317" end="28331" title="Aeterni Patris" label="Aeterni Patris"/>
<link wikidata="Q579326" start="28750" end="28790" title="Pontifical Academy of St. Thomas Aquinas" label="Pontifical Academy of St. Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986647" start="28877" end="28892" title="Leonine Edition" label="Leonine Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129575" start="29013" end="29035" title="Tommaso Maria Zigliara" label="Tommaso Maria Zigliara"/>
<link wikidata="Q246887" start="29119" end="29164" title="Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas" label="Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="29301" end="29310" title="Canon law (Catholic Church)" label="Canon Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q441996" start="29486" end="29510" title="Mary of the Divine Heart" label="Mary of the Divine Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260611" start="29528" end="29548" title="Droste zu Vischering" label="Droste zu Vischering"/>
<link wikidata="Q276590" start="29575" end="29596" title="Congregation of Our Lady of Charity of the Good Shepherd" label="Good Shepherd Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="29600" end="29605" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q371834" start="29886" end="29898" title="Annum sacrum" label="Annum sacrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921800" start="30130" end="30152" title="First Friday Devotions" label="First Friday Devotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q371834" start="30222" end="30264" title="Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart" label="Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q408284" start="30310" end="30331" title="Sacred Heart of Jesus" label="Sacred Heart of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q944735" start="30700" end="30736" title="Pope&amp;#x27;s Worldwide Prayer Network" label="Pope&amp;#x27;s Worldwide Prayer Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235053" start="30789" end="30810" title="Providentissimus Deus" label="Providentissimus Deus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="30970" end="30983" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230698" start="31035" end="31058" title="Divino afflante Spiritu" label="Divino afflante Spiritu"/>
<link wikidata="Q911221" start="31130" end="31150" title="Orientalium dignitas" label="Orientalium dignitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q536580" start="31340" end="31355" title="Vatican Archive" label="Vatican Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q64162" start="31441" end="31458" title="Ludwig von Pastor" label="Ludwig von Pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="31520" end="31532" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="31566" end="31587" title="Immaculate Conception" label="Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="31686" end="31692" title="rosary" label="rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765039" start="31727" end="31738" title="Rosary Pope" label="Rosary Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582954" start="31937" end="31946" title="Mediatrix" label="Mediatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162687" start="31951" end="31964" title="Co-Redemptrix" label="Co-Redemptrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q335987" start="32345" end="32358" title="Rerum novarum" label="Rerum novarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q626805" start="32550" end="32579" title="Wilhelm Emmanuel von Ketteler" label="Wilhelm Emmanuel von Ketteler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631996" start="32917" end="32929" title="subsidiarity (Catholicism)" label="subsidiarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="33278" end="33291" title="Pope Sixtus V" label="Pope Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="33438" end="33455" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332564" start="33507" end="33521" title="Giuseppe Pecci" label="Giuseppe Pecci"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="33536" end="33550" title="Nepotism" label="nepotistic act"/>
<link wikidata="Q43739" start="33740" end="33751" title="Pope Pius X" label="Pope Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q525018" start="33799" end="33807" title="Serafino Vannutelli" label="Serafino"/>
<link wikidata="Q728475" start="33812" end="33831" title="Vincenzo Vannutelli" label="Vincenzo Vannutelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q549462" start="33848" end="33853" title="Luigi Jacobini" label="Luigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q769871" start="33858" end="33873" title="Angelo Jacobini" label="Angelo Jacobini"/>
<link wikidata="Q493594" start="33930" end="33950" title="Andrea Carlo Ferrari" label="Andrea Carlo Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369805" start="33981" end="34001" title="Girolamo Maria Gotti" label="Girolamo Maria Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319909" start="34303" end="34313" title="in pectore" label="in pectore"/>
<link wikidata="Q948995" start="35351" end="35364" title="Lajos Haynald" label="Lajos Haynald"/>
<link wikidata="Q691345" start="35369" end="35399" title="Friedrich Egon von Fürstenberg" label="Friedrich Egon von Fürstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159910" start="35746" end="35761" title="Stefan Pawlicki" label="Stefan Pawlicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q175832" start="35845" end="35867" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Santiago de Chile" label="Archbishop of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q950805" start="35973" end="35988" title="Catholic Church in Peru" label="Peruvian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364847" start="36007" end="36025" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Lima" label="Archbishop of Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q326330" start="36034" end="36058" title="Primate (bishop)" label="Primate of South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365785" start="36246" end="36265" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Turin" label="Archbishop of Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43384635" start="36266" end="36281" title="Davide Riccardi" label="Davide Riccardi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36420" end="36456" title="Johannes Montel Edler von Treuenfels" label="Johannes Montel Edler von Treuenfels"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="36611" end="36639" title="Order of Preachers" label="Dominican procurator general"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482347" start="36640" end="36663" title="Hyacinthe-Marie Cormier" label="Hyacinthe-Marie Cormier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36887" end="36901" title="Agapito Panici" label="Agapito Panici"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37373" end="37389" title="Vincenzo Tarozzi" label="Vincenzo Tarozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43739" start="37514" end="37525" title="Pope Pius X" label="Pope Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37530" end="37549" title="Antonio Mele-Virdis" label="Antonio Mele-Virdis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="37682" end="37691" title="Canonization" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q271780" start="37756" end="37775" title="Clare of Montefalco" label="Clare of Montefalco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115725" start="37787" end="37808" title="John Baptist de Rossi" label="John Baptist de Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313803" start="37822" end="37842" title="Lawrence of Brindisi" label="Lawrence of Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q451907" start="37858" end="37879" title="Benedict Joseph Labre" label="Benedict Joseph Labre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057218" start="37911" end="37951" title="Seven Holy Founders of the Servite Order" label="Seven Holy Founders of the Servite Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q167458" start="37953" end="37965" title="Peter Claver" label="Peter Claver"/>
<link wikidata="Q724169" start="37979" end="37993" title="John Berchmans" label="John Berchmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q582213" start="38011" end="38030" title="Alphonsus Rodriguez" label="Alphonsus Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q380099" start="38058" end="38074" title="Anthony Zaccaria" label="Anthony Zaccaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q635048" start="38091" end="38104" title="Peter Fourier" label="Peter Fourier"/>
<link wikidata="Q312758" start="38132" end="38156" title="John Baptist de la Salle" label="John Baptist de la Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q153024" start="38173" end="38187" title="Rita of Cascia" label="Rita of Cascia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30578" start="38249" end="38257" title="Urban II" label="Urban II"/>
<link wikidata="Q227724" start="38274" end="38284" title="Victor III" label="Victor III"/>
<link wikidata="Q170871" start="38304" end="38314" title="Innocent V" label="Innocent V"/>
<link wikidata="Q172398" start="38344" end="38354" title="Adrian III" label="Adrian III"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="38380" end="38389" title="Beatification" label="beatified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733698" start="38407" end="38426" title="Charles of Sezze" label="Giancarlo Melchiori"/>
<link wikidata="Q547042" start="38448" end="38462" title="Edmund Campion" label="Edmund Campion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4523041" start="38467" end="38480" title="Ralph Sherwin" label="Ralph Sherwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887052" start="38491" end="38501" title="John Haile" label="John Haile"/>
<link wikidata="Q312758" start="38524" end="38549" title="Jean-Baptiste de La Salle" label="Jean-Baptiste de La Salle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769895" start="38598" end="38615" title="Inés de Benigánim" label="Inés de Benigánim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3767380" start="38707" end="38732" title="Giovanni Giovenale Ancina" label="Giovanni Giovenale Ancina"/>
<link wikidata="Q954021" start="38754" end="38777" title="Pompilio Maria Pirrotti" label="Pompilio Maria Pirrotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q562233" start="38799" end="38813" title="Gerard Majella" label="Gerard Majella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3830726" start="38835" end="38849" title="Leopoldo da Gaiche" label="Leopoldo Croci"/>
<link wikidata="Q647434" start="38867" end="38885" title="Antonio Baldinucci" label="Antonio Baldinucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q709273" start="38905" end="38939" title="Rodolfo Acquaviva" label="Rodolfo Acquaviva and 4 Companions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698619" start="38959" end="38983" title="Diego José de Cádiz" label="Diego José López-Caamaño"/>
<link wikidata="Q822928" start="39003" end="39021" title="Bernardino Realino" label="Bernardino Realino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448655" start="39043" end="39061" title="Francis Regis Clet" label="Francis Regis Clet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075684" start="39079" end="39105" title="Ignatius Delgado y Cebrian" label="Ignatius Delgado y Cebrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075684" start="39119" end="39137" title="Vietnamese Martyrs" label="Martyrs of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559842" start="39155" end="39184" title="Louis Gabriel Taurin Dufresse" label="Louis Gabriel Taurin Dufresse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668281" start="39202" end="39224" title="John Lantrua of Triora" label="John Lantrua of Triora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847404" start="39242" end="39268" title="Maria Maddalena Martinengo" label="Maria Maddalena Martinengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058977" start="39286" end="39317" title="Denis of the Nativity" label="Dénis Berthelot of the Nativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058780" start="39322" end="39352" title="Redemptus of the Cross" label="Redento Rodríguez of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q288825" start="39371" end="39390" title="Jeanne de Lestonnac" label="Jeanne de Lestonnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854019" start="39414" end="39428" title="Antonio Grassi" label="Antonio Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173983" start="39475" end="39495" title="Cosmas of Aphrodisia" label="Cosmas of Aphrodisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192499" start="39616" end="39637" title="Doctors of the Church" label="Doctors of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q44079" start="39641" end="39660" title="Cyril of Alexandria" label="Cyril of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q298654" start="39769" end="39787" title="Cyril of Jerusalem" label="Cyril of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q51884" start="39805" end="39821" title="John of Damascus" label="John of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="39841" end="39859" title="Bede" label="Bede the Venerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q528019" start="40070" end="40088" title="Collegio Capranica" label="Collegio Capranica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448" start="40189" end="40205" title="Pope Benedict XV" label="Pope Benedict XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q181715" start="40297" end="40315" title="Thérèse of Lisieux" label="Thérèse of Lisieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="40403" end="40418" title="Carmelite order" label="Carmelite order"/>
<link wikidata="Q531462" start="40765" end="40788" title="Prayer to Saint Michael" label="Prayer to Saint Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="41261" end="41282" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Michael the Archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="42030" end="42036" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q356405" start="42076" end="42088" title="bloodletting" label="bloodletting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="42299" end="42308" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="42452" end="42464" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193211" start="42470" end="42474" title="cyst" label="cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q508860" start="42774" end="42802" title="Mariano Rampolla del Tindaro" label="Mariano Rampolla del Tindaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q653971" start="43514" end="43523" title="Indigestion" label="dyspepsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q337492" start="43562" end="43572" title="castor oil" label="castor oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42003" start="43810" end="43825" title="Vatican Gardens" label="Vatican Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q508860" start="44462" end="44490" title="Mariano Rampolla del Tindaro" label="Mariano Rampolla del Tindaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345306" start="44495" end="44525" title="Luigi Oreglia di Santo Stefano" label="Luigi Oreglia di Santo Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054345" start="44553" end="44571" title="Cardinal Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q339477" start="44576" end="44586" title="Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church" label="Camerlengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q525018" start="44658" end="44677" title="Serafino Vannutelli" label="Serafino Vannutelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607632" start="44872" end="44884" title="Hepatization of lungs" label="hepatisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369805" start="45786" end="45806" title="Girolamo Maria Gotti" label="Girolamo Maria Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="47453" end="47464" title="hemorrhagic" label="hemorrhagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55998" start="47465" end="47473" title="pleurisy" label="pleurisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="47747" end="47764" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q104467" start="47908" end="47922" title="Pope Agatho" label="Pope St Agatho"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="47962" end="47977" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q103292" start="48022" end="48035" title="Pope Adrian I" label="Pope Adrian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="48447" end="48454" title="Pius IX" label="Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="48471" end="48482" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="48515" end="48542" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="48601" end="48631" title="Basilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Basilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="48782" end="48794" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="48824" end="48844" title="Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="48941" end="48953" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q504969" start="49249" end="49268" title="Alessandro Moreschi" label="Alessandro Moreschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42203" start="49319" end="49328" title="Ave Maria (musical settings)" label="Ave Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976456" start="49429" end="49443" title="Sua Santità papa Leone XIII" label="filmed in 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q465350" start="49457" end="49470" title="W. K. Dickson" label="W. K. Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123022311" start="49754" end="49761" title="Cabrini (film)" label="Cabrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q315258" start="49798" end="49816" title="Giancarlo Giannini" label="Giancarlo Giannini"/>
<link wikidata="Q238983" start="49859" end="49873" title="Frances Xavier Cabrini" label="Mother Cabrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q719704" start="49951" end="49987" title="List of encyclicals of Pope Leo XIII" label="List of encyclicals of Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819018" start="49990" end="50019" title="Cardinals created by Leo XIII" label="Cardinals created by Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229663" start="50022" end="50034" title="Distributism" label="Distributism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40483" start="50037" end="50050" title="List of popes" label="List of popes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="50053" end="50085" title="List of popes by length of reign" label="List of popes by length of reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628858" start="50088" end="50098" title="Papal Navy" label="Papal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q531462" start="50101" end="50124" title="Prayer to Saint Michael" label="Prayer to Saint Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316222" start="50127" end="50164" title="Restoration of the Scottish hierarchy" label="Restoration of the Scottish hierarchy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50620" wikidata="Q272388" url="?curid=50620" title="Scyphozoa">
<text>The Scyphozoa are an exclusively marine class of the phylum Cnidaria, referred to as the true [[jellyfish]] (or &quot;true jellies&quot;).

The class name Scyphozoa comes from the Greek word &quot;skyphos&quot; (), denoting a kind of drinking cup and alluding to the cup shape of the organism.

Scyphozoans have existed from the earliest Cambrian to the present.

==Biology==
Most species of Scyphozoa have two life-history phases, including the planktonic medusa or polyp form, which is most evident in the warm summer months, and an inconspicuous, but longer-lived, bottom-dwelling polyp, which seasonally gives rise to new medusae. Most of the large, often colorful, and conspicuous jellyfish found in coastal waters throughout the world are Scyphozoa. They typically range from in diameter, but the largest species, &quot;Cyanea capillata&quot; can reach across. Scyphomedusae are found throughout the world&#x27;s oceans, from the surface to great depths; no Scyphozoa occur in freshwater (or on land).

As medusae, they eat a variety of crustaceans and fish, which they capture using stinging cells called nematocysts. The nematocysts are located throughout the tentacles that radiate downward from the edge of the umbrella dome, and also cover the four or eight oral arms that hang down from the central mouth. Some species, however, are instead filter feeders, using their tentacles to strain plankton from the water.

==Anatomy==
Scyphozoans usually display a four-part symmetry and have an internal gelatinous material called mesoglea, which provides the same structural integrity as a skeleton. The mesoglea includes mobile amoeboid cells originating from the epidermis.

Scyphozoans have no durable hard parts, including no head, no skeleton, and no specialized organs for respiration or excretion. Marine jellyfish can consist of as much as 98% water, so are rarely found in fossil form.

Unlike the hydrozoan jellyfish, Hydromedusae, Scyphomedusae lack a vellum, which is a circular membrane beneath the umbrella that helps propel the (usually smaller) Hydromedusae through the water. However, a ring of muscle fibres is present within the mesoglea around the rim of the dome, and the jellyfish swims by alternately contracting and relaxing these muscles. The periodic contracting and relaxing propels the jellyfish through the water, allowing it to escape predation or catch its prey.

The mouth opens into a central stomach, from which four interconnected diverticula radiate outwards. In many species, this is further elaborated by a system of radial canals, with or without an additional ring canal towards the edge of the dome. Some genera, such as &quot;Cassiopea&quot;, even have additional, smaller mouths in the oral arms. The lining of the digestive system includes further stinging nematocysts, along with cells that secrete digestive enzymes.

The nervous system usually consists of a distributed net of cells, although some species possess more organised nerve rings. In species lacking nerve rings, the nerve cells are instead concentrated into small structures called &quot;rhopalia&quot;. There are between four and sixteen of these small lobes arranged around the rim of the umbrella, where they coordinate the muscular action allowing the animal to move. Each rhopalium is typically associated with a pair of sensory pits, a statocyst, and sometimes a pigment-cup ocellus.

===Reproduction===

Most species appear to be gonochorists, with separate male and female individuals. The gonads are located in the stomach lining, and the mature gametes are expelled through the mouth. After fertilization, some species brood their young in pouches on the oral arms, but they are more commonly planktonic.

===Growth and development===
The fertilized egg produces a planular larva which, in most species, quickly attaches itself to the sea bottom. The larva develops into the hydroid stage of the lifecycle, a tiny sessile polyp called a scyphistoma. The scyphistoma reproduces asexually, producing similar polyps by budding, and then either transforming into a medusa, or budding several medusae off from its upper surface via a process called strobilation. The medusae are initially microscopic and may take years to reach sexual maturity.

==Commercial importance==
Scyphozoa include the moon jelly &quot;Aurelia aurita&quot;, in the order Semaeostomeae, and the enormous &quot;Nemopilema nomurai&quot;, in the order Rhizostomeae, found between Japan and China and which in some years causes major fisheries disruptions.

The jellyfish fished commercially for food are Scyphomedusae in the order Rhizostomeae. Most rhizostome jellyfish live in warm water.

==Taxonomy==
Although the Scyphozoa were formerly considered to include the animals now referred to as the classes Cubozoa and Staurozoa, they now include just three extant orders (two of which are in Discomedusae, a subclass of Scyphozoa). About 200 extant species are recognized at present, but the true diversity is likely to be at least 400 species.

Class Scyphozoa
*Subclass Coronamedusae
:* Order Coronatae
:::* Family Atollidae
:::* Family Atorellidae
:::* Family Linuchidae
:::* Family Nausithoidae
:::* Family Paraphyllinidae
:::* Family Periphyllidae
* Subclass Discomedusae
:* Order Rhizostomeae
::* Suborder Daktyliophorae
:::* Family Catostylidae
:::* Family Lobonematidae
:::* Family Lychnorhizidae
:::* Family Rhizostomatidae
:::* Family Stomolophidae
::* Suborder Kolpophorae
:::* Family Cassiopeidae
:::* Family Cepheidae
:::* Family Mastigiidae
:::* Family Thysanostomatidae
:::* Family Versurigidae
:* Order Semaeostomeae
:::* Family Cyaneidae
:::* Family Drymonematidae
:::* Family Pelagiidae
:::* Family Phacellophoridae
:::* Family Ulmaridae

==References==
==External links==

* The Classification and Distribution of the Class Scyphozoa</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q272388" start="4" end="13" title="Scyphozoa" label="Scyphozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="53" end="59" title="phylum" label="phylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25441" start="60" end="68" title="Cnidaria" label="Cnidaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q272388" start="89" end="107" title="Scyphozoa" label="true [[jellyfish]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="180" end="185" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136095" start="197" end="204" title="skyphos" label="skyphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="338" end="346" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178" start="457" end="463" title="medusa (biology)" label="medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q689884" start="467" end="472" title="Polyp (zoology)" label="polyp"/>
<link wikidata="Q522939" start="826" end="842" title="Cyanea capillata" label="Cyanea capillata"/>
<link wikidata="Q916596" start="1112" end="1123" title="nematocysts" label="nematocysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="1401" end="1409" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q203646" start="1536" end="1544" title="mesoglea" label="mesoglea"/>
<link wikidata="Q181989" start="1913" end="1922" title="hydrozoan" label="hydrozoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141055" start="2472" end="2483" title="diverticulum" label="diverticula"/>
<link wikidata="Q289354" start="2674" end="2683" title="Cassiopea" label="Cassiopea"/>
<link wikidata="Q419557" start="2850" end="2866" title="digestive enzyme" label="digestive enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q519823" start="3103" end="3111" title="rhopalia" label="rhopalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757105" start="3357" end="3366" title="statocyst" label="statocyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364287" start="3396" end="3403" title="ocellus" label="ocellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110580" start="3452" end="3464" title="gonochorists" label="gonochorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="3513" end="3518" title="gonad" label="gonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="3570" end="3576" title="gamete" label="gamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q943388" start="3790" end="3797" title="planula" label="planula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411746" start="4169" end="4181" title="strobilation" label="strobilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26864" start="4332" end="4346" title="Aurelia aurita" label="Aurelia aurita"/>
<link wikidata="Q133389" start="4405" end="4423" title="Nemopilema nomurai" label="Nemopilema nomurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q838519" start="4623" end="4635" title="Rhizostomeae" label="Rhizostomeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q273179" start="4799" end="4806" title="Cubozoa" label="Cubozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050073" start="4811" end="4820" title="Staurozoa" label="Staurozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="4850" end="4856" title="Extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197346" start="5065" end="5078" title="Coronamedusae" label="Coronamedusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q277471" start="5088" end="5097" title="Coronatae" label="Coronatae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378999" start="5110" end="5119" title="Atollidae" label="Atollidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011373" start="5132" end="5143" title="Atorellidae" label="Atorellidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384592" start="5156" end="5166" title="Linuchidae" label="Linuchidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q151008" start="5179" end="5191" title="Nausithoidae" label="Nausithoidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007529" start="5204" end="5219" title="Paraphyllinidae" label="Paraphyllinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012038" start="5232" end="5245" title="Periphyllidae" label="Periphyllidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413884" start="5257" end="5269" title="Discomedusae" label="Discomedusae"/>
<link wikidata="Q838519" start="5279" end="5291" title="Rhizostomeae" label="Rhizostomeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994922" start="5332" end="5344" title="Catostylidae" label="Catostylidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996348" start="5357" end="5370" title="Lobonematidae" label="Lobonematidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004024" start="5383" end="5397" title="Lychnorhizidae" label="Lychnorhizidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416684" start="5410" end="5425" title="Rhizostomatidae" label="Rhizostomatidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382576" start="5438" end="5451" title="Stomolophidae" label="Stomolophidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q289354" start="5489" end="5501" title="Cassiopeidae" label="Cassiopeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307123" start="5514" end="5523" title="Cepheidae (jellyfish)" label="Cepheidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729594" start="5536" end="5547" title="Mastigiidae" label="Mastigiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4014204" start="5560" end="5577" title="Thysanostomatidae" label="Thysanostomatidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41791968" start="5590" end="5602" title="Versurigidae" label="Versurigidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q908486" start="5612" end="5625" title="Semaeostomeae" label="Semaeostomeae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743664" start="5638" end="5647" title="Cyaneidae" label="Cyaneidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309733" start="5660" end="5674" title="Drymonematidae" label="Drymonematidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467067" start="5687" end="5697" title="Pelagiidae" label="Pelagiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352335" start="5710" end="5726" title="Phacellophoridae" label="Phacellophoridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400989" start="5739" end="5748" title="Ulmaridae" label="Ulmaridae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50621" wikidata="Q901685" url="?curid=50621" title="History of Cyprus">
<text>Human habitation of Cyprus dates back to the Paleolithic era. Cyprus&#x27;s geographic position has caused the island to be influenced by differing Eastern Mediterranean civilisations over the millennia.

Periods of Cyprus&#x27;s history from 1050 BC have been named according to styles of pottery found, as follows:
* Cypro-Geometric I: 1050–950 BC
* Cypro-Geometric II: 950–900 BC
* Cypro-Geometric III: 900–750 BC
* Cypro-Archaic I: 750–600 BC
* Cypro-Archaic II: 600–480 BC
* Cypro-Classical I: 480–400 BC
* Cypro-Classical II: 400–310 BC

==Prehistoric Cyprus==

Prior to the arrival of humans in Cyprus, only four terrestrial mammal species were present on the island, including the Cypriot pygmy hippopotamus and the Cyprus dwarf elephant, which were much smaller than their mainland ancestors as a result of insular dwarfism, with the other species being the genet &quot;Genetta plesictoides&quot; and the still living Cypriot mouse. The earliest humans to inhabit Cyprus were hunter gatherers who arrived on the island around 13-12,000 years ago (11-10,000 BC). The last records of the endemic mammals other than the mouse date to shortly after human settlement. The hunter gatherers later introduced wild boar to the island around 12,000 years ago, likely to act as a source of food. The earliest presence of Neolithic farming settlements dates to around 8,500 BC.

Dogs, sheep, goats and possibly cattle were introduced, as well as numerous wild animals such as foxes (&quot;Vulpes vulpes&quot;) and Persian fallow deer (&quot;Dama mesopotamica&quot;) that were previously unknown on the island. The PPNB settlers built round houses with floors made of terrazzo of burned lime (e.g. Kastros, Shillourokambos) and cultivated einkorn and emmer. Pigs, sheep, goats and cattle were kept but remained, for the most part, behaviourally wild. Evidence of cattle such as that attested at Shillourokambos is rare, and when they apparently died out in the course of the 8th millennium BC they were not re-introduced until the ceramic Neolithic.

In the 6th millennium BC, the aceramic Khirokitia culture was characterised by roundhouses, stone vessels and an economy based on sheep, goats and pigs. Cattle were unknown, and Persian fallow deer were hunted. This was followed by the ceramic Sotira phase. The Eneolithic era is characterised by stone figurines with spread arms.
Water wells discovered by archaeologists in western Cyprus are believed to be among the oldest in the world, dated at 9,000 to 10,500 years old, putting them in the Stone Age. They are said to show the sophistication of early settlers, and their heightened appreciation for the environment.

In 2004, the remains of an 8-month-old cat were discovered buried with its human owner at a Neolithic archeological site in Cyprus. The grave is estimated to be 9,500 years old, predating Egyptian civilization and pushing back the earliest known feline-human association significantly.

== Bronze Age ==
In the Bronze Age the first cities, such as Enkomi, were built in Alashiya (today Cyprus). Systematic copper mining began, and this resource was widely traded. Mycenaean Greeks were undoubtedly inhabiting Cyprus from the late stage of the Bronze Age while culturually destroying remaining Alašija, whereas the island&#x27;s Greek name is already attested from the 15th century BC in the Linear B script.

The yet undeciphered Cypro-Minoan syllabic script was first used in early phases of the late Bronze Age (LCIB) and continued in use for ca. 500 years into the LC IIIB, maybe up to the second half of the eleventh century BC. It is not known if pre-Greek languages survived beyond the Bronze Age as Eteocypriot, or if this language was introduced by later Eastern immigrants.

The LCIIC (1300–1200 BC) was a time of local prosperity. Cities such as Enkomi were rebuilt on a rectangular grid plan, where the town gates correspond to the grid axes and numerous grand buildings front the street system or newly founded.
Great official buildings constructed from ashlar masonry point to increased social hierarchisation and control. Some of these buildings contain facilities for processing and storing olive oil, such as Maroni-Vournes and Building X at Kalavassos-Ayios Dhimitrios. A sanctuary with a horned altar constructed from ashlar masonry has been found at Myrtou-Pigadhes, other temples have been located at Enkomi, Kition and Kouklia (Palaepaphos). Both the regular layout of the cities and the new masonry techniques find their closest parallels in Syria, especially in Ugarit (modern Ras Shamra).
Rectangular corbelled tombs point to close contacts with Syria and Canaan (modern-day Israel) as well.

The practice of writing spread and tablets in the Cypro-Minoan syllabic script have been found at Ras Shamra, then the city of Ugarit. Ugaritic texts from Ras Shamra and Enkomi mention Ya, the Assyrian name of Cyprus, that thus seems to have been in use already in the late Bronze Age.

Copper ingots shaped like oxhides have been recovered from shipwrecks such as at Uluburun, Iria and Cape Gelidonya, which attest to the widespread metal trade. Weights in the shape of animals found in Enkomi and Kalavassos follow the Syro-Palestinian, Mesopotamian, Hittite and Aegean standards and thus attest to the wide-ranging trade as well.

Late Bronze Age Cyprus was a part of the Hittite Empire, but was a client state and as such was not invaded, but rather merely part of the empire by association and governed by the ruling kings of Ugarit. As such Cyprus was essentially &quot;left alone with little intervention in Cypriot affairs&quot;.

Although Achaean Greeks were living in Cyprus from the 14th century,
most of them inhabited the island after the Trojan war. Achaeans were colonizing Cyprus from 1210 to 1000 BC.
Dorian Greeks arrived around 1100 BC and, unlike the pattern on the Greek mainland, the evidence suggests that they settled on Cyprus peacefully.

Another wave of Greek settlement is believed to have taken place in the following century (LCIIIB, 1100–1050), indicated, among other things, by a new type of graves (long dromoi) and Mycenaean influences in pottery decoration.

===Alashiya===
Alashiya, the Bronze Age Eastern Mediterranean state that was the major source of copper in the region, was likely situated in Cyprus or includes parts of Cyprus.

Correspondences between the King of Alashiya and Egyptian administration could be found in the Amarna letters, while the Ugaritic texts contains exchanges between the King of Alashiya and the King of Ugarit.

In the second half of the 13th century BC., the current town of Enkomi - if it can be identified with Alašija - was conquered and destroyed twice. The first destruction may have coincided with the historically documented conquest of Alašija by the Hittite king Tudḫalija IV. The second destruction took place around 1220 BC - archaeological sources indicate this - apparently by members of the Mycenaean Greek culture, who rebuilt the city in a chessboard fashion. Around 1050 BC Enkomi was destroyed again by an earthquake.

===Pottery===

In the later phase of the late Bronze Age (LCIIIA, 1200–1100 BC) great amounts of &#x27;Mycenaean&#x27; IIIC:1b pottery were produced locally. New architectural features include cyclopean walls, found on the Greek mainland, as well and a certain type of rectangular stepped capitals, endemic on Cyprus. Chamber tombs are given up in favour of shaft graves. Large amounts of IIIC:1b pottery are found in Palestine during this period as well. While this was formerly interpreted as evidence of an invasion (&#x27;Sea Peoples&#x27;), this is seen more and more as an indigenous development, triggered by increasing trade relations with Cyprus and Crete. Evidence of early trade with Crete is found in archaeological recovery on Cyprus of pottery from Cydonia, a powerful urban center of ancient Crete.

===Cypriot city kingdoms===
Most authors claim that the Cypriot city kingdoms, first described in written sources in the 8th century BC were already founded in the 11th century BC. Other scholars see a slow process of increasing social complexity between the 12th and the 8th centuries, based on a network of chiefdoms. In the 8th century (geometric period) the number of settlements increases sharply and monumental tombs, like the &#x27;Royal&#x27; tombs of Salamis appear for the first time. This could be a better indication for the appearance of the Cypriot kingdoms.

== Early Iron Age ==
The early Iron Age on Cyprus follows the Submycenaean period (1125–1050 BC) of the Late Bronze Age. It is divided into the Geometric (1050–700) and Archaic (700–525) periods.

Foundations myths documented by classical authors connect the foundation of numerous Cypriot towns with immigrant Greek heroes in the wake of the Trojan War. For example, Teucer, brother of Aias was supposed to have founded Salamis, and the Arcadian Agapenor of Tegea to have replaced the native ruler Kinyras and to have founded Paphos. Some scholars see this a memory of a Greek colonisation already in the 11th century. In the 11th century tomb 49 from Palaepaphos-Skales three bronze obeloi with inscriptions in Cypriot syllabic script have been found, one of which bears the name of Opheltas. This is the first indication of the use of Greek language on the island.

Cremation as a burial rite is seen as a Greek introduction as well. The first cremation burial in bronze vessels has been found at Kourion-Kaloriziki, tomb 40, dated to the first half of the 11th century (LCIIIB). The shaft grave contained two bronze rod tripod stands, the remains of a shield and a golden sceptre as well. Formerly seen as the Royal grave of first Argive founders of Kourion, it is now interpreted as the tomb of a native Cypriot or a Phoenician prince. The cloisonné enamelling of the sceptre head with the two falcons surmounting it has no parallels in the Aegean, but shows a strong Egyptian influence.

A population living in Amathus in the early Iron age left inscriptions in the Eteocypriot language using the Cypriot syllabary. It is not known if this language survived from a Bronze Age language spoken in Cyprus, maybe one written in the Cypro-Minoan script, or if it was related to Hurrian, since later Eastern immigrants may have adopted the script, similar to how the Mycenaeans adopted the Minoan script.

===Phoenicians===
Literary evidence suggests an early Phoenician presence at Kition which was under Tyrian rule at the beginning of the 10th century BC. Some Phoenician merchants who were believed to come from Tyre colonized the area and expanded the political influence of Kition. After c. 850 BC the sanctuaries [at the Kathari site] were rebuilt and reused by the Phoenicians. The oldest cemetery of Salamis has produced children&#x27;s burials in Canaanite jars, indication of Phoenician presence already in the LCIIIB 11th century. Similar jar burials have been found in cemeteries in Kourion-Kaloriziki and Palaepaphos-Skales near Kouklia. In Skales, many Levantine imports and Cypriot imitations of Levantine forms have been found and point to a Phoenician expansion even before the end of the 11th century.

==Ancient Cyprus==
The Assyrians rediscovered Cyprus in the late eighth century BCE, yet they did not establish lasting territorial control over the island. The Assyrian name for Cyprus, Iadnana, likely designated it as the &quot;island of the Danunians,&quot; although its exact origins remain uncertain. A stela found 1845 in Kition commemorates the victory of king Sargon II (721–705 BC) in 709 over the seven kings in the land of Ia&#x27;, in the district of Iadnana or Atnana. There are other inscriptions referring to Ia&#x27; in Sargon&#x27;s palace at Khorsabad. The ten kingdoms listed by an inscription of Esarhaddon in 673/2 BC have been identified as Salamis, Kition, Amathus, Kourion, Paphos and Soli on the coast and Tamassos, Ledra, Idalium and Chytri in the interior.Cyprus gained independence for some time around 669 but was conquered by Egypt under Amasis (570–526/525). The island was conquered by the Persians around 545 BC. A Persian palace has been excavated in the territory of Marion on the North coast near Soli. The inhabitants took part in the Ionian rising. At the beginning of the 4th century BC, Euagoras I, King of Salamis, took control of the whole island and tried to gain independence from Persia. Another uprising took place in 350 but was crushed by Artaxerxes in 344.

During the siege of Tyre, the Cypriot Kings went over to Alexander the Great. In 321 four Cypriot kings sided with Ptolemy I and defended the island against Antigonos. Ptolemy lost Cyprus to Demetrios Poliorketes between 306 and 295 BC, but after that it remained under Ptolemaic rule till 58 BC. It was ruled by a governor from Egypt and sometimes formed a minor Ptolemaic kingdom during the power-struggles of the 2nd and 1st centuries. Strong commercial relationships with Athens and Alexandria, two of the most important commercial centres of antiquity, developed.

Full Hellenisation only took place under Ptolemaic rule. Phoenician traits disappeared, together with the old Cypriot syllabic script. A number of cities were founded during this time, e.g. Arsinoe that was founded between old and new Paphos by Ptolemy II.

Cyprus became a Roman province in 58 BC, according to Strabo because the Roman politician, Publius Clodius Pulcher, held a grudge against the king of Cyprus, Ptolemy, and sent Marcus Cato to conquer the island after he had become tribune. Mark Antony gave the island to Cleopatra VII of Egypt and her sister Arsinoe IV, but it became a Roman province again after his defeat at the Battle of Actium (31 BC) in 30 BC. From 22 BC it was a senatorial province. The island suffered great losses during the Jewish uprising of 115/116 AD.

After the reforms of Diocletian it was placed under the control of the Consularis Oriens and governed by a proconsul. Several earthquakes led to the destruction of Salamis at the beginning of the 4th century, at the same time drought and famine hit the island.

==Medieval Cyprus==

After the division of the Roman Empire into an eastern half and a western half, Cyprus came under the rule of the Eastern Roman Empire. At that time, its bishop, while still subject to the Christian Church, was made autocephalous by the First Council of Ephesus in 431.

The Arab Muslims invaded Cyprus in force in the 650s, but in 688, the Byzantine emperor Justinian II and the Umayyad caliph ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān reached an unprecedented agreement. For the next 300 years, Cyprus was ruled jointly by both the Arabs and the Byzantines as a &quot;condominium&quot;, despite the nearly constant warfare between the two parties on the mainland. The Byzantines recovered control over the island for short periods thereafter, but the &quot;status quo&quot; was always restored.

This period lasted until the year 965, when Niketas Chalkoutzes conquered the island for a resurgent Byzantium. In 1185, the last Byzantine governor of Cyprus, Isaac Comnenus of Cyprus from a minor line of the Imperial house, rose in rebellion, and attempted to seize the throne. His attempted coup was unsuccessful, but Comnenus was able to retain control of the island. Byzantine actions against Comnenus failed because he enjoyed the support of William II of Sicily. The Byzantine emperor had an agreement with the sultan of Egypt to close Cypriot harbours to the Crusaders.

===The Third Crusade===
During the Third Crusade, the island of Cyprus became a target of the Crusaders in the late 12th century. Richard the Lionheart landed in Limassol on 1 June 1191 in search of his sister and his bride Berengaria, whose ship had become separated from the fleet in a storm. Richard&#x27;s army landed when Isaac refused to return the hostages (Richard&#x27;s sister, his bride, and several shipwrecked soldiers), and forced Isaac to flee from Limassol. He eventually surrendered, conceding control of the island to the King of England. Richard married Berengaria in Limassol on 12 May 1192; she was crowned as Queen of England by John Fitzluke, Bishop of Évreux. The Crusader fleet continued to St. Jean d&#x27;Acre on 5 June of the same year.

The army of Richard the Lionheart continued to occupy Cyprus and raised taxes. He sold the island to the Knights Templar. Soon after that, the French army under the House of Lusignan occupied the island, establishing the Kingdom of Cyprus in 1192. They declared Latin as the official language, later replacing it with French; much later, Greek was recognized as a second official language. In 1196, dioceses of the Latin Church were established on the island, and the Greek Orthodox Cypriot Church experienced a series of religious persecutions perpetrated by the Latin Catholics. Maronites settled on Cyprus during the Crusades and still maintain some villages in the North.

==Kingdom of Cyprus==

Amalric I of Cyprus (Aimery de Lusignan) received the royal crown and title from Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor. A small minority Roman Catholic population of the island was mainly confined to some coastal cities, such as Famagusta, as well as inland Nicosia, the traditional capital. Roman Catholics kept the reins of power and control, while the Greek inhabitants lived in the countryside; this was much the same as the arrangement in the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The independent Eastern Orthodox Church of Cyprus, with its own archbishop and subject to no patriarch, was allowed to remain on the island, but the Latin Church largely displaced it in stature and holding property.

After the death of Amalric of Lusignan, the Kingdom continually passed to a series of young boys who grew up as king. The Ibelin family, which had held much power in Jerusalem prior its downfall, acted as regents during these early years. In 1229 one of the Ibelin regents was forced out of power by Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor, who brought the struggle between the Guelphs and Ghibellines to the island.

Frederick&#x27;s supporters were defeated in this struggle by 1233, although it lasted longer in the Kingdom of Jerusalem and in the Holy Roman Empire. Frederick&#x27;s Hohenstaufen descendants continued to rule as kings of Jerusalem until 1268 when Hugh III of Cyprus (d.1284) of the Lusignan family claimed the title and its territory of Acre for himself upon the death of Conrad III of Jerusalem, thus uniting the two kingdoms. The territory in Palestine was finally lost while Henry II was king in 1291, but the kings of Cyprus continued to claim the title.

Like Jerusalem, Cyprus had a Haute Cour (High Court), although it was less powerful than it had been in Jerusalem. The island was richer and more feudal than Jerusalem, so the king had more personal wealth and could afford to ignore the Haute Cour. The most important vassal family was the multi-branch House of Ibelin. However, the king was often in conflict with the Italian merchants, especially because Cyprus had become the centre of European trade with Africa and Asia after the fall of Acre in 1291.

The kingdom eventually came to be dominated more and more in the 14th century by the Genoese merchants. Cyprus therefore sided with the Avignon Papacy in the Western Schism, in the hope that the French would be able to drive out the Italians. The Mameluks then made the kingdom a tributary state in 1426; the remaining monarchs gradually lost almost all independence, until 1489 when the last Queen, Catherine Cornaro, was forced to sell the island to Venice. Ottomans started raiding Cyprus immediately afterwards, and captured it in 1571.

This is the historical setting to Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Othello&quot;, the play&#x27;s title character being the commander of the Venetian garrison defending Cyprus against the Ottomans.
==Ottoman Cyprus==
===Cyprus 1571===
In 1571, Cyprus became an Eyalet, a province, of the Ottoman Empire until 1878. In 1571, the Turks entered the country in order of the Ottoman–Venetian War (1570–1573), also known as the Fourth Ottoman - Venetian War, or the War of Cyprus. Following the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s invasion of Cyprus with 350-400 ships and 60,000-100,000 soldiers to take control of the island, Turks and Cypriots coexisted on the island. Cyprus was rich in salt, sugar, cotton, grains, and other import and export goods at that time, in addition it was also a transfer country for the Syria-Venice trade. As a result, Cyprus served as the eastern Mediterranean&#x27;s main emporium for Venice&#x27;s maritime trade.

After the Venetians lost control and the Ottomans gained control over Cyprus, Venice continued to use Cyprus for trading. Merchants that were imprisoned during the war were released and had their goods and ships returned to them. The trade continued and was only interrupted during wars. There were also Venetian consuls present in Cyprus to stabilize trade and protect the traders. The government of Cyprus used to borrow money from Venician merchants in the early 16th century. Until the end of Ottoman rule on Cyprus, the trade continued with being held during the times of war.

===Religion and culture under Ottoman leadership===
The Ottoman Empire was predominantly Muslim. Therefore, there was a cultural and religious clash when it conquered Cyprus. As Cyprus became a territory of the Ottoman Empire, more Muslims came to Cyprus mixing in with the Orthodox Christian Greek population of the island. That&#x27;s why the Millet System was introduced in Cyprus, it allowed authorities to rule over their religious minorities to keep peace in the Country. The Ottoman Empire still tried to spread the Muslim culture in Cyprus. That especially concerned women as by Islam they had to cover their heads and most women at the time obeyed that rule.

===Change of Administration of Cyprus===
Since 1670, the Ottomans have shifted their governance of Cyprus and its significance multiple times. From a sanjak (sub-province) to a Grand Vizer&#x27;s fief, to an eyalet, back to a fief, and finally back to a sanjak.
===Cyprus 1878 (Russo-Turkish War)===
During the Russo-Turkish War in the Mediterranean Cyprus prepared for the invasion which occurred and left the population with financial issues for the decades to come. The Russians had been spreading propaganda in the Mediterranean which called upon Orthodox Greek Christians to fight against the Ottoman Empire. Cyprus was trying to balance between supporting the Ottoman Empire with grain but on the other hand they tried not to oppose Russia.

The Russo-Turkish War ended the Ottoman control of Cyprus in 1878. Cyprus then came under the control of the British Empire with its conditions set out in the Cyprus Convention between the United Kingdom and Ottoman Empire. However, the sovereignty of the island continued to be maintained by the Ottoman Empire until Great Britain annexed the island unilaterally in 1914, after it declared war against the Ottomans during the First World War. Following World War I, under the provisions of the Lausanne Treaty, Turkey relinquished all claims and rights on Cyprus.

Under British rule, the island began to enjoy a period of increased freedom of speech, something which allowed further development of the Greek Cypriots&#x27; ideas of &quot;enosis&quot; (unification with Greece).

==Modern Cyprus==

In 1878, as the result of the Cyprus Convention, the United Kingdom took over the government of Cyprus as a protectorate from the Ottoman Empire. In 1914, at the beginning of World War I, the Ottomans declared war on Britain, leading to the British annexation of Cyprus.

The island&#x27;s population welcomed the arrival of the British in 1878, as it meant the end of the long Turkish occupation, on one hand, but also because (bearing in mind the example of the Ionian islands) it was believed to be a necessary transitional stage for the final purpose, which was the return of Cyprus to Greece. In the 1920s, the political leaders of the Cypriot Greeks decided to adopt a change of tactics in their pursuit for enosis—the union of Cyprus with Greece. Instead of the uncompromising course for &quot;union and only union&quot;, it was decided that, under the circumstances, some civil liberties could be negotiated and won in favor of the Cypriot people. In 1921, the Political Organization of Cyprus was formed to serve that purpose, but was dissolved later that decade.

Greek Cypriot representatives were repeatedly sent to England over the years to formally set the request to the colonial metropolis, but to no avail whatsoever. The participation of Greek Cypriots in the national struggles of the Greeks (such as in the wars at the end of the 19th century and in the Balkan wars of 1912-13) was an expression of their belief in the common origin of Greeks and Cypriots, in a common fate and a common path. The participation of Greek Cypriot volunteers in the First World War was an expression of the belief that there would be a &quot;Cypriot share&quot; in the &quot;distribution of profits&quot; after the victory (something that also happened later, during the Second World War). Besides, the Greek Prime Minister, Eleftherios Venizelos, had negotiated the handing over of Cyprus to Greece, in the years leading to the First World War. However, during the &quot;distribution of profits&quot; at the Paris conference after the First World War, there was no &quot;Cypriot share&quot; despite the Greek Cypriot leadership&#x27;s presence and efforts. After the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), by which Turkey renounced all its rights over Cyprus, some new hopes were born because a very serious obstacle to the return of Cyprus to Greece was removed. However, in 1925, following the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire, and with the removal of this obstacle, England proceeded not to cede Cyprus to Greece but to annex it by declaring the island a Crown Colony. It had then become absolutely clear to the Greek Cypriots, from English officials (such as the Colonial Secretary Leo Amery) that unification was out of the question, and that this subject was definitively closed, rebutting the hopes and expectations of the Greek Cypriots for achieving their ideal.

The National Organization of Cyprus (EOK; not to be confused with EOKA), that was founded in 1930 by church circles and whose members were chosen by the Archbishop, played a role in strengthening the demand of enosis. Its purpose was the pursuit of this goal and the rejection of the Autonomy proposed by the English. In 1931, the even more hardline National Radical Union of the Center (ΕRΕΚ) was founded whose members were secret. The repetitive rebuttal of the Greek Cypriots&#x27; hopes, along with other political events at the time, triggered the great uprising of October 1931, known as the October riots. Cyprus thus entered a period of autocratic rule known as &quot;Palmerokratia&quot; (&quot;Palmerocracy&quot;), named after governor Richmond Palmer, which started shortly before the revolt and would last until the beginning of World War II.

In January 1950, the Orthodox Church of Cyprus organized the Union Referendum (referendum about Enosis), in which Greek Cypriots, which constituted around 80% of the population at the time, were called to vote, and ended in strong favor for the movement. However, their shout fell on deaf ears since the international community showed no desire to support their request Between 1955 and 1959 Greek Cypriots formed the EOKA organisation, led by George Grivas, and began the liberation struggle with ultimate goal being enosis. However the EOKA campaign did not result in union with Greece but rather in an independent republic, the Republic of Cyprus, in 1960.

The 1960 constitution put in place a form of power-sharing, or consociational government, in which concessions were made to the Turkish Cypriots minority, including as a requirement that the vice-president of Cyprus and at least 30% of members of parliament be Turkish Cypriots. Archbishop Makarios III would be the President and Dr. Fazıl Küçük would become vice president. One of the articles in the constitution was the creation of separate local municipalities so that Greek and Turkish Cypriots could manage their own municipalities in large towns.

Internal conflicts turned into full-fledged armed fighting between the two communities on the island which prompted the United Nations to send peacekeeping forces in 1964; these forces are still in place today. In 1974, Greek nationalists performed a military coup with the support of the military junta in Greece. Unable to secure multilateral support against the coup, Turkey invaded the northern portion of the island. Turkish forces remained after a cease-fire, resulting in the partition of the island. The intercommunal violence, the coup, and the subsequent invasion led to the displacement of hundreds of thousands of Cypriots.

The &quot;de facto&quot; state of Northern Cyprus was proclaimed in 1975 under the name of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus. The name was changed to its present form, the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, on 15 November 1983. Recognised only by Turkey, Northern Cyprus is considered by the international community to be part of the Republic of Cyprus.

In 2002 UN Secretary General Kofi Annan started a new round of negotiations for the unification of the island. In 2004 after long negotiations between both sides a plan for unification of the island emerged. The resulting plan was supported by United Nations, European Union and the United States. The nationalists on both sides campaigned for the rejection of the plan, the result being that Turkish Cypriots accepted the plan while Greek Cypriots rejected it overwhelmingly.

After Cyprus became a member of the European Union in 2004, it adopted the euro as its currency on January 1, 2008, replacing the previously used Cypriot pound; Northern Cyprus continued to use the Turkish lira.

The political environment is dominated by the communist AKEL, the liberal conservative Democratic Rally, the centrist Democratic Party and the social-democratic EDEK.
In 2008, Dimitris Christofias became the country&#x27;s first Communist head of state. Due to his involvement in the 2012–13 Cypriot financial crisis, Christofias did not run for re-election in 2013. The Presidential election in 2013 resulted in Democratic Rally candidate Nicos Anastasiades winning 57.48% of the vote. As a result, Anastasiades was sworn in on 28 February 2013. Anastasiades was re-elected with 56% of the vote in the 2018 presidential election. On 28 February 2023, Nikos Christodoulides, the winner of the 2023 presidential election run-off, was sworn in as the eighth president of the Republic of Cyprus.

==See also==

*Kingdom of Cyprus
*Timeline of Cypriot history

General:
*History of Europe

==References==
 Enkomi Alasia in Cyprus. Auf: turkish.co.uk vom 12. Februar 2020.

==Further reading==
=== History, general===
* Kinross, Lord. &quot;The Problem of Cyprus.&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (Nov 1954) 4#11 pp 725–733
* Mallinson, William. &quot;Cyprus: A modern history&quot; (IB Tauris, 2005).
* Wallace, Paul W., &amp; Andreas G. Orphanides (eds.), &quot;Sources for the History of Cyprus&quot;, vols I - XV, (Albany, NY, Greece and Cyprus Research Center, University at Albany (SUNY) 1990-2007)
* C. D. Cobham, &quot;Excerpta Cypria: materials for a history of Cyprus&quot; (Cambridge 1908). Nice Collection of written sources.
* D. Hunt, &quot;Footprints in Cyprus&quot; (London, Trigraph 1990).

=== Prehistory===
* Vassos Karageorghis, &quot;Cyprus&quot; (1969). Includes bibliography.
* Andreas G. Orphanides, &quot;Late Bronze Age Socio-Economic and Political Organization, and the Hellenization of Cyprus&quot;, Athens Journal of History, volume 3, number 1, 2017, pp. 7–20
* Veronica Tatton-Brown, &quot;Cyprus BC: 7000 years of history&quot; (London, British Museum 1979).
* Stuart Swiny, &quot;Earliest Prehistory of Cyprus&quot; (American School of Oriental Research 2001) 
* J. M. Webb/D. Frankel, &quot;Characterising the Philia facies. Material culture, chronology and the origins of the Bronze Age in Cyprus&quot; in &quot;American Journal of archaeology&quot; 103, 1999, 3-43.
* S. Gitin/A. Mazar/E. Stern (eds.), &quot;Mediterranean peoples in transition, thirteenth to early 10th century BC&quot; (Jerusalem, Israel exploration Society 1998). Late Bronze Age and transition to the Iron Age.
* J. D. Muhly, &quot;The role of the Sea People in Cyprus during the LCIII period. In: Vassos Karageorghis and J. D. Muhly (eds.), &quot;Cyprus at the close of the Bronze Age&quot; (Nicosia 1984), 39-55. End of Bronze Age 
* Winbladh, M.-L., The Bearded Goddess, Androgynes, goddesses and monsters in ancient Cyprus. Armida Edition, Cypern 2012
* Winbladh, M.-L., The Origins of The Cypriots. With Scientific Data of Archaeology and Genetics, Galeri Kultur Publishing, Lefkosa 2020
* Winbladh, M-L., &#x27;Adventuring with Cyprus. A Chronicle of the Swedish Cyprus Expedition 1927 – 1931&#x27; in The Northern Face of Cyprus. New Studies in Cypriot Archaeology and Art History, eds. Hazar Kaba &amp; Summerer, Latife, Istanbul 2016
* Winbladh, M-L., Adventures of an archaeologist. Memoirs of a museum curator, AKAKIA Publications, London

=== Classical Period===
* Paul W Wallace &amp; Andreas G. Orphanides (eds.), &quot;Sources for the History of Cyprus: Greek and Latin Texts to the Third Century A.D.&quot;, vol. I, (Nicosia, The Institute of Cypriot Studies, University at Albany (SUNY) &amp; Cyprus College 1990)
* Herodotus, &quot;The Histories&quot;
* Isocrates, &quot;Nicocles&quot;
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Bibliothiki&quot; (Library)
* Arrian, &quot;The Campaigns of Alexander the Great&quot;
* T. Bekker-Nielsen, &quot;The Roads of Ancient Cyprus&quot;. Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum 2004. 

=== Medieval Age===
* Angel Nicolaou-Konnari, Chris Schabel (eds.): &quot;Cyprus: Society and Culture, 1191–1374&quot;; Leiden : Brill, 2005. - XVI, 403 S., 
* Peter W. Edbury: &quot;The Kingdom of Cyprus and the Crusades, 1191–1374&quot; (Cambridge, 1991).

===British era 1878-1960===
* Georghallides, George S. &quot;A political and administrative history of Cyprus, 1918-1926: with a survey of the foundations of British rule&quot; (Cyprus Research Centre, 1979).
* Hakki, Murat Metin. &quot;The Cyprus issue: a documentary history, 1878-2007&quot; (Bloomsbury Publishing, 2007).
* Heraclidou, Antigone. &quot;Politics of education and language in Cyprus and Malta during the inter-war years.&quot; &quot;Journal of Mediterranean Studies&quot; 23.1 (2014): 75-88. excerpt
* Katsourides, Yiannos, and Antigone Heraclidou. &quot;Nationalism and Decolonisation in the Mediterranean: Cyprus and Malta Compared, 1918–1964.&quot; &quot;Journal of Mediterranean Studies&quot; 23.1 (2014): 1-7.
* Medlicott, W. N. “The Gladstone Government and the Cyprus Convention, 1880-85.” &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; 13#2 (1940), pp. 186–208. online.
* Persianis, Panayiotis. &quot;The British Colonial Education &#x27;Lending&#x27; Policy in Cyprus (1878-1960): An intriguing example of an elusive &#x27;adapted education&#x27; policy.&quot; &quot;Comparative Education&quot; 32.1 (1996): 45-68.
* Phylaktis, Kate. &quot;Banking in a British colony: Cyprus 1878–1959.&quot; &quot;Business History&quot; 30.4 (1988): 416-431 online .
* Rosenbaum, Naomi. &quot;Success in foreign policy: The British in Cyprus, 1878-1960.&quot; &quot;Canadian Journal of Political Science&quot; (1970): 605-627 online.
* C. Spyridiakis, &quot;The education policy of the English government in Cyprus&quot; (1878–1954).
* Varnava, Andrekos. &quot;British imperialism in Cyprus, 1878–1915: the inconsequential possession&quot; (Manchester UP, 2017)
* Yiangou, Anastasia. &quot;The Political Impact of World War II on Cyprus and Malta.&quot; &quot;Journal of Mediterranean Studies&quot; 23.1 (2014): 101-112. online

===Since 1960===
* Bishku, Michael B. &quot;The Middle Eastern Relations of Cyprus and Malta: From Independence to Nonalignment to the European Union.&quot; &quot;Mediterranean Quarterly&quot; 26.2 (2015): 42-62. excerpt

==External links==

*&quot;Cyprus, as I Saw it in 1879&quot; by Samuel W. Baker.
*Cyprus - an island divided - Interactive guide from &quot;The Guardian&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="20" end="26" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="45" end="56" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="148" end="169" title="Eastern Mediterranean" label="Eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23586278" start="290" end="297" title="Pottery of ancient Cyprus" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q867518" start="689" end="715" title="Cypriot pygmy hippopotamus" label="Cypriot pygmy hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q375755" start="724" end="745" title="Cyprus dwarf elephant" label="Cyprus dwarf elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q749639" start="816" end="832" title="insular dwarfism" label="insular dwarfism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030101" start="879" end="899" title="Genetta plesictoides" label="Genetta plesictoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q245798" start="927" end="940" title="Cypriot mouse" label="Cypriot mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="1210" end="1219" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1319" end="1328" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="1408" end="1414" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="1473" end="1476" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q756889" start="1511" end="1530" title="Persian fallow deer" label="Persian fallow deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334655" start="1664" end="1672" title="terrazzo" label="terrazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374839" start="1694" end="1701" title="Kastros" label="Kastros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959474" start="1703" end="1718" title="Shillourokambos" label="Shillourokambos"/>
<link wikidata="Q161397" start="1735" end="1742" title="einkorn" label="einkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q167339" start="1747" end="1752" title="emmer" label="emmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q385086" start="2086" end="2096" title="Khirokitia" label="Khirokitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432586" start="2126" end="2137" title="roundhouse (dwelling)" label="roundhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q912336" start="2233" end="2244" title="fallow deer" label="fallow deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q733386" start="2291" end="2297" title="Sotira, Limassol" label="Sotira"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="2309" end="2319" title="Eneolithic" label="Eneolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066288" start="2350" end="2358" title="figurine" label="figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="2543" end="2552" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2858" end="2879" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2981" end="2991" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343280" start="3018" end="3024" title="Enkomi" label="Enkomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760729" start="3040" end="3048" title="Alashiya" label="Alashiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="3134" end="3150" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q190102" start="3361" end="3369" title="Linear B" label="Linear B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751985" start="3400" end="3428" title="Cypro-Minoan syllabary" label="Cypro-Minoan syllabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q35309" start="3676" end="3687" title="Eteocypriot language" label="Eteocypriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="4036" end="4042" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="4176" end="4185" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559623" start="4195" end="4201" title="Maroni, Cyprus" label="Maroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722060" start="4228" end="4238" title="Kalavassos" label="Kalavassos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="4306" end="4312" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743884" start="4399" end="4405" title="Kition" label="Kition"/>
<link wikidata="Q930838" start="4410" end="4417" title="Kouklia" label="Kouklia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191369" start="4555" end="4561" title="Ugarit" label="Ugarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751985" start="4737" end="4765" title="Cypro-Minoan syllabary" label="Cypro-Minoan syllabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q191369" start="4785" end="4795" title="Ras Shamra" label="Ras Shamra"/>
<link wikidata="Q573852" start="5055" end="5063" title="Uluburun shipwreck" label="Uluburun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107863" start="5074" end="5088" title="Cape Gelidonya" label="Cape Gelidonya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="5362" end="5376" title="Hittite Empire" label="Hittite Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191962" start="5635" end="5642" title="Achaeans (tribe)" label="Achaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="5805" end="5811" title="Dorians" label="Dorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="6409" end="6432" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptian administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q235502" start="6455" end="6469" title="Amarna letters" label="Amarna letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791511" start="6481" end="6495" title="Ugaritic texts" label="Ugaritic texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191369" start="6560" end="6566" title="Ugarit" label="Ugarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="7136" end="7151" title="late Bronze Age" label="late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q245580" start="7288" end="7303" title="cyclopean walls" label="cyclopean walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q193850" start="7621" end="7632" title="Sea Peoples" label="Sea Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="7754" end="7759" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481525" start="7858" end="7865" title="Kydonia" label="Cydonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q852337" start="8250" end="8266" title="Geometric art" label="geometric period"/>
<link wikidata="Q767089" start="8370" end="8377" title="Salamis, Cyprus" label="Salamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="8515" end="8523" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="8588" end="8603" title="Late Bronze Age" label="Late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="8827" end="8837" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q878184" start="8852" end="8858" title="Teucer" label="Teucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="8871" end="8875" title="Aias" label="Aias"/>
<link wikidata="Q767089" start="8905" end="8912" title="Salamis, Cyprus" label="Salamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q390492" start="8931" end="8939" title="Agapenor" label="Agapenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180918" start="9011" end="9017" title="Paphos" label="Paphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="9169" end="9175" title="obelisk" label="obeloi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757689" start="9197" end="9220" title="Cypriot syllabary" label="Cypriot syllabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="9353" end="9362" title="Cremation" label="Cremation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35309" start="10056" end="10076" title="Eteocypriot language" label="Eteocypriot language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757689" start="10087" end="10104" title="Cypriot syllabary" label="Cypriot syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751985" start="10218" end="10237" title="Cypro-Minoan syllabary" label="Cypro-Minoan script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144159" start="10263" end="10270" title="Hurro-Urartian languages" label="Hurrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743884" start="10467" end="10473" title="Kition" label="Kition"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="10548" end="10557" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="10559" end="10568" title="merchants" label="merchants"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="10600" end="10604" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="10605" end="10614" title="colony" label="colonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="11229" end="11238" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="11514" end="11519" title="stela" label="stela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743884" start="11534" end="11540" title="Kition (ancient state)" label="Kition"/>
<link wikidata="Q208336" start="11574" end="11583" title="Sargon II" label="Sargon II"/>
<link wikidata="Q253208" start="11766" end="11775" title="Khorsabad" label="Khorsabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q193912" start="11822" end="11832" title="Esarhaddon" label="Esarhaddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q767089" start="11869" end="11876" title="Salamis, Cyprus" label="Salamis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743884" start="11878" end="11884" title="Kition" label="Kition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343313" start="11886" end="11893" title="Amathus" label="Amathus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785592" start="11895" end="11902" title="Kourion" label="Kourion"/>
<link wikidata="Q180918" start="11904" end="11910" title="Paphos" label="Paphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757296" start="11915" end="11919" title="Soli, Cyprus" label="Soli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720688" start="11937" end="11945" title="Tamassos" label="Tamassos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508095" start="11947" end="11952" title="Ledra" label="Ledra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656624" start="11954" end="11961" title="Idalium" label="Idalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967764" start="11966" end="11972" title="Chytri" label="Chytri"/>
<link wikidata="Q312045" start="12074" end="12080" title="Amasis II" label="Amasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="12128" end="12136" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466831" start="12208" end="12214" title="Marion, Cyprus" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192867" start="12493" end="12503" title="Artaxerxes III of Persia" label="Artaxerxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="12533" end="12537" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="12570" end="12589" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q168261" start="12628" end="12637" title="Ptolemy I" label="Ptolemy I"/>
<link wikidata="Q200401" start="12670" end="12679" title="Antigonus I Monophthalmus" label="Antigonos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247317" start="12689" end="12700" title="Battle of Salamis (306 BC)" label="lost Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59734" start="12704" end="12725" title="Demetrios Poliorketes" label="Demetrios Poliorketes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131976" start="12783" end="12792" title="Ptolemaic dynasty" label="Ptolemaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="12989" end="12995" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="13000" end="13010" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="13088" end="13101" title="Hellenisation" label="Hellenisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131976" start="13124" end="13133" title="Ptolemaic dynasty" label="Ptolemaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757689" start="13193" end="13216" title="Cypriot syllabic script" label="Cypriot syllabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561051" start="13273" end="13280" title="Arsinoe (Southwest Cyprus)" label="Arsinoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180918" start="13318" end="13324" title="Paphos" label="Paphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="13328" end="13338" title="Ptolemy II" label="Ptolemy II"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="13395" end="13401" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q313664" start="13432" end="13455" title="Publius Clodius Pulcher" label="Publius Clodius Pulcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q888470" start="13499" end="13506" title="Ptolemy of Cyprus" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193506" start="13517" end="13528" title="Cato the Younger" label="Marcus Cato"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="13571" end="13578" title="tribune" label="tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="13580" end="13591" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="13611" end="13624" title="Cleopatra VII" label="Cleopatra VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q40013" start="13649" end="13659" title="Arsinoe IV of Egypt" label="Arsinoe IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q160387" start="13722" end="13738" title="Battle of Actium" label="Battle of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="13777" end="13796" title="senatorial province" label="senatorial province"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192091" start="13842" end="13871" title="Kitos War" label="Jewish uprising of 115/116 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="13895" end="13905" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="13981" end="13990" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671119" start="14167" end="14195" title="History of the Roman Empire" label="division of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="14223" end="14235" title="Western Roman Empire" label="western half"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="14271" end="14291" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="14311" end="14317" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275182" start="14346" end="14362" title="One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church" label="Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q191903" start="14373" end="14386" title="autocephalous" label="autocephalous"/>
<link wikidata="Q184332" start="14394" end="14418" title="First Council of Ephesus" label="First Council of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="14432" end="14436" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="14437" end="14444" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="14498" end="14515" title="Byzantine emperor" label="Byzantine emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42021" start="14516" end="14528" title="Justinian II" label="Justinian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="14537" end="14551" title="Umayyad caliphate" label="Umayyad caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q36788" start="14552" end="14576" title="Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan" label="ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwān"/>
<link wikidata="Q734818" start="14710" end="14721" title="Condominium (international law)" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826232" start="14982" end="15001" title="Niketas Chalkoutzes" label="Niketas Chalkoutzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27424" start="15098" end="15122" title="Isaac Comnenus of Cyprus" label="Isaac Comnenus of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q367387" start="15386" end="15406" title="William II of Sicily" label="William II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115925" start="15456" end="15471" title="sultan of Egypt" label="sultan of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="15505" end="15514" title="Crusaders" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="15552" end="15565" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="15611" end="15620" title="Crusaders" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="15647" end="15668" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard the Lionheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q185632" start="15679" end="15687" title="Limassol" label="Limassol"/>
<link wikidata="Q229807" start="15741" end="15751" title="Berengaria of Navarre" label="Berengaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16168" end="16181" title="John Fitzluke" label="John Fitzluke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077343" start="16183" end="16199" title="Bishop of Évreux" label="Bishop of Évreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="16233" end="16253" title="St. Jean d&amp;#x27;Acre" label="St. Jean d&amp;#x27;Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="16295" end="16316" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard the Lionheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="16388" end="16403" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="16426" end="16432" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q378193" start="16448" end="16465" title="House of Lusignan" label="House of Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="16504" end="16521" title="Kingdom of Cyprus" label="Kingdom of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16545" end="16550" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="16601" end="16607" title="Medieval French" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q36387" start="16621" end="16626" title="Medieval Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="16698" end="16710" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q59776" start="16751" end="16780" title="Church of Cyprus" label="Greek Orthodox Cypriot Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19819963" start="16805" end="16827" title="Persecution of Eastern Orthodox Christians" label="religious persecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="16864" end="16873" title="Maronites" label="Maronites"/>
<link wikidata="Q453325" start="16983" end="17002" title="Amalric I of Cyprus" label="Amalric I of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="17064" end="17092" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q544496" start="18322" end="18340" title="Hugh III of Cyprus" label="Hugh III of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="19301" end="19315" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="19603" end="19610" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q961430" start="19663" end="19682" title="Ottoman–Venetian War (1570–1573)" label="captured it in 1571"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="19719" end="19730" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="19744" end="19751" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="19921" end="19927" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44565" start="19938" end="19944" title="Eyalet" label="Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="19965" end="19979" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q961430" start="20047" end="20079" title="Ottoman–Venetian War (1570–1573)" label="Ottoman–Venetian War (1570–1573)"/>
<link wikidata="Q961430" start="20099" end="20128" title="Ottoman–Venetian War (1570–1573)" label="Fourth Ottoman - Venetian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q961430" start="20137" end="20150" title="War of Cyprus" label="War of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q961430" start="20166" end="20196" title="Ottoman conquest of Cyprus" label="Ottoman Empire&amp;#x27;s invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009513" start="20618" end="20627" title="Venecia, San Carlos" label="Venetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q845763" start="21536" end="21549" title="Millet (Ottoman Empire)" label="Millet System"/>
<link wikidata="Q330425" start="22010" end="22016" title="sanjak" label="sanjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811" start="22037" end="22048" title="Grand vizier" label="Grand Vizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44565" start="22068" end="22074" title="eyalet" label="eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q743046" start="22171" end="22188" title="Russo-Turkish War" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="22411" end="22436" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Greek Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555069" start="22767" end="22784" title="Cyprus Convention" label="Cyprus Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="22905" end="22919" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="23103" end="23118" title="Treaty of Lausanne" label="Lausanne Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q369063" start="23348" end="23354" title="enosis" label="enosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555069" start="23438" end="23455" title="Cyprus Convention" label="Cyprus Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="23461" end="23475" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="23538" end="23552" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="23583" end="23594" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q170295" start="23872" end="23886" title="Ionian Islands" label="Ionian islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q369063" start="24122" end="24128" title="enosis" label="enosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205545" start="25233" end="25254" title="Eleftherios Venizelos" label="Eleftherios Venizelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="25417" end="25433" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="Paris conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="25576" end="25594" title="Treaty of Lausanne" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="25793" end="25826" title="dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="dissolution of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="25956" end="25968" title="Crown Colony" label="Crown Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q333573" start="26084" end="26093" title="Leo Amery" label="Leo Amery"/>
<link wikidata="Q369063" start="26481" end="26487" title="enosis" label="enosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094043" start="26869" end="26882" title="1931 Cyprus revolt" label="October riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735394" start="27016" end="27031" title="Richmond Palmer" label="Richmond Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="27111" end="27123" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q245794" start="27518" end="27532" title="Greek Cypriots" label="Greek Cypriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q847314" start="27544" end="27548" title="EOKA" label="EOKA"/>
<link wikidata="Q712817" start="27570" end="27583" title="George Grivas" label="George Grivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q369063" start="27644" end="27650" title="enosis" label="enosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="27757" end="27775" title="Cyprus" label="Republic of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414948" start="27850" end="27864" title="Consociationalism" label="consociational"/>
<link wikidata="Q245807" start="27915" end="27931" title="Turkish Cypriots" label="Turkish Cypriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q153509" start="28077" end="28089" title="Makarios III" label="Makarios III"/>
<link wikidata="Q841760" start="28103" end="28112" title="President of Cyprus" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q936932" start="28121" end="28132" title="Fazıl Küçük" label="Fazıl Küçük"/>
<link wikidata="Q694772" start="28485" end="28504" title="United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus" label="peacekeeping forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069434" start="28591" end="28606" title="1974 Cypriot coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="a military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050999" start="28720" end="28727" title="Turkish invasion of Cyprus" label="invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q663511" start="28825" end="28834" title="Taksim (politics)" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200423" start="28927" end="28939" title="Cypriot refugees" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="28989" end="28997" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q784851" start="29074" end="29107" title="Turkish Federated State of Cyprus" label="Turkish Federated State of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23681" start="29155" end="29190" title="Northern Cyprus" label="Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="29348" end="29368" title="UN Secretary General" label="UN Secretary General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="29369" end="29379" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="29584" end="29598" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="29600" end="29614" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="29623" end="29636" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="29893" end="29897" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q193716" start="29964" end="29977" title="Cypriot pound" label="Cypriot pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q172872" start="30016" end="30028" title="Turkish lira" label="Turkish lira"/>
<link wikidata="Q212158" start="30087" end="30091" title="Progressive Party of Working People" label="AKEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q644973" start="30118" end="30134" title="Democratic Rally" label="Democratic Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="30140" end="30148" title="centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q816863" start="30149" end="30165" title="Democratic Party (Cyprus)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="30174" end="30191" title="social democracy" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q259800" start="30192" end="30196" title="Movement for Social Democracy" label="EDEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q57334" start="30207" end="30227" title="Dimitris Christofias" label="Dimitris Christofias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625271" start="30315" end="30347" title="2012–13 Cypriot financial crisis" label="2012–13 Cypriot financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q644973" start="30444" end="30460" title="Democratic Rally" label="Democratic Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112764" start="30471" end="30489" title="Nicos Anastasiades" label="Nicos Anastasiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637211" start="30634" end="30660" title="Cypriot presidential election, 2018" label="2018 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q48905549" start="30683" end="30704" title="Nikos Christodoulides" label="Nikos Christodoulides"/>
<link wikidata="Q84027707" start="30742" end="30750" title="2023 Cypriot presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="30840" end="30857" title="Kingdom of Cyprus" label="Kingdom of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805704" start="30859" end="30886" title="Timeline of Cypriot history" label="Timeline of Cypriot history"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787" start="30898" end="30915" title="History of Europe" label="History of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583551" start="31253" end="31274" title="Andreas G. Orphanides" label="Andreas G. Orphanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583551" start="31726" end="31747" title="Andreas G. Orphanides" label="Andreas G. Orphanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583551" start="33430" end="33451" title="Andreas G. Orphanides" label="Andreas G. Orphanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="33665" end="33674" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q221182" start="33704" end="33713" title="Isocrates" label="Isocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="33738" end="33754" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31845" start="33792" end="33798" title="Arrian" label="Arrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q61233114" start="35746" end="35753" title="Andrekos Varnava" label="Varnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q376087" start="36325" end="36340" title="Samuel Baker" label="Samuel W. Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="36401" end="36413" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50622" wikidata="Q819667" url="?curid=50622" title="John Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach">
<text>John Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach (18 October 1654 – 22 March 1686) succeeded his father Albert II as margrave of Ansbach in 1667. He married his second wife Princess Eleonore Erdmuthe of Saxe-Eisenach on 4 November 1681. Their daughter Wilhelmine Charlotte Caroline, Margravine of Brandenburg-Ansbach (Caroline of Ansbach) married George II of Great Britain before he became king.

==Issue==

By Margravine Johanna Elisabeth of Baden-Durlach, daughter of Frederick VI, Margrave of Baden-Durlach, and his wife Christina Magdalena of the Palatinate-Zweibrücken:

#Margrave Leopold Frederick of Brandenburg-Ansbach (29 May 1674 – 21 August 1676) died in infancy.
#Margrave Christian Albert of Brandenburg-Ansbach (18 September 1675 – 16 October 1692) died unmarried.
#Margravine Dorothea Friederike of Brandenburg-Ansbach (12 August 1676 – 13 March 1731) married Johann Reinhard III of Hanau-Lichtenberg and had issue, including Charlotte of Hanau, wife of Louis VIII, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt
#Margrave George Frederick of Brandenburg-Ansbach (3 May 1678 – 29 March 1703) died unmarried.
#Margravine Charlotte Sophie of Brandenburg-Ansbach (29 June 1679 – 24 January 1680) died in infancy.

By Princess Eleonore Erdmuthe of Saxe-Eisenach:

#Margravine Caroline of Brandenburg-Ansbach (1 March 1683 – 20 November 1737) married George II of Great Britain and had issue.
#Margrave Frederick Augustus of Brandenburg-Ansbach (3 January 1685 – 30 January 1685) died in infancy.
#Margrave William Frederick of Brandenburg-Ansbach (8 January 1686 – 7 January 1723) married Duchess Christiane Charlotte of Württemberg, daughter of Frederick Charles, Duke of Württemberg-Winnental and had issue.

== Ancestors ==
== Notes and sources ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q819667" start="0" end="47" title="John Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach" label="John Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q657578" start="103" end="112" title="Albert II, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach" label="Albert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q157802" start="116" end="124" title="margrave" label="margrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q42199" start="128" end="135" title="Principality of Ansbach" label="Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q445211" start="172" end="215" title="Princess Eleonore Erdmuthe of Saxe-Eisenach" label="Princess Eleonore Erdmuthe of Saxe-Eisenach"/>
<link wikidata="Q76961" start="317" end="336" title="Caroline of Ansbach" label="Caroline of Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="346" end="372" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q62884" start="470" end="509" title="Frederick VI, Margrave of Baden-Durlach" label="Frederick VI, Margrave of Baden-Durlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q64125" start="524" end="573" title="Christina Magdalena of the Palatinate-Zweibrücken" label="Christina Magdalena of the Palatinate-Zweibrücken"/>
<link wikidata="Q540845" start="676" end="724" title="Christian Albert, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach" label="Margrave Christian Albert of Brandenburg-Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q74691" start="780" end="833" title="Dorothea Friederike of Brandenburg-Ansbach" label="Margravine Dorothea Friederike of Brandenburg-Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q66845" start="875" end="915" title="Johann Reinhard III of Hanau-Lichtenberg" label="Johann Reinhard III of Hanau-Lichtenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64194" start="941" end="959" title="Countess Charlotte of Hanau-Lichtenberg" label="Charlotte of Hanau"/>
<link wikidata="Q213677" start="969" end="1009" title="Louis VIII, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt" label="Louis VIII, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q567159" start="1011" end="1059" title="George Frederick II, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach" label="Margrave George Frederick of Brandenburg-Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q445211" start="1211" end="1254" title="Princess Eleonore Erdmuthe of Saxe-Eisenach" label="Princess Eleonore Erdmuthe of Saxe-Eisenach"/>
<link wikidata="Q76961" start="1258" end="1300" title="Caroline of Ansbach" label="Margravine Caroline of Brandenburg-Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="1343" end="1369" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q568415" start="1490" end="1539" title="William Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach" label="Margrave William Frederick of Brandenburg-Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q461515" start="1582" end="1625" title="Duchess Christiane Charlotte of Württemberg" label="Duchess Christiane Charlotte of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q63472" start="1639" end="1687" title="Frederick Charles, Duke of Württemberg-Winnental" label="Frederick Charles, Duke of Württemberg-Winnental"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50623" wikidata="Q310986" url="?curid=50623" title="Chmod">
<text>In Unix and Unix-like operating systems, &#x27; is the command and system call used to change the access permissions and the special mode flags (the &quot;setuid&quot;, &quot;setgid&quot;, and &quot;sticky&quot; flags) of file system objects (files and directories). Collectively these were originally called its modes, and the name was chosen as an abbreviation of changemod&quot;&#x27;e&quot;.

==History==
A command first appeared in AT&amp;T Unix version 1, along with the system call.

As systems grew in number and types of users, access-control lists were added to many file systems in addition to these most basic modes to increase flexibility.

The version of bundled in GNU coreutils was written by David MacKenzie and Jim Meyering. The command is available as a separate package for Microsoft Windows as part of the UnxUtils collection of native Win32 ports of common GNU Unix-like utilities. The command has also been ported to the IBM i operating system.


==Command syntax==

Throughout this section, &quot;ser&quot; refers to the owner of the file, as a reminder that the symbolic form of the command uses &quot;u&quot;, to avoid confusion with &quot;other&quot;.

Note that only the user or the superuser (root) is able to change file permissions.

codice_1

Usually implemented options include:
* Recursive, i.e. include objects in subdirectories.
* verbose, show objects changed (unchanged objects are not shown).

If a symbolic link is specified, the target object is affected. File modes directly associated with symbolic links themselves are typically not used.

To view the file mode, the  or  commands may be used:

$ ls -l findPhoneNumbers.sh
-rwxr-xr-- 1 dgerman staff 823 Dec 16 15:03 findPhoneNumbers.sh
$ stat -c %a findPhoneNumbers.sh
754
The , , and specify the read, write, and execute access respectively. The first character of the display denotes the object type; a hyphen represents a plain file. The script can be read, written to, and executed by the user ; read and executed by members of the group; and only read by any other users.

The main parts of the permissions:

For example: 

Each group of three characters define permissions for each &quot;class&quot;:
* the three leftmost characters, , define permissions for the &quot;User&quot; class (i.e. the file owner).
* the middle three characters, , define permissions for the &quot;Group&quot; class (i.e. the group owning the file)
* the rightmost three characters, , define permissions for the &quot;Others&quot; class. In this example, users who are not the owner of the file and who are not members of the &quot;Group&quot; (and, thus, are in the &quot;Others&quot; class) have no permission to access the file.

=== Numerical permissions ===
The numerical format accepts up to four digits. The three rightmost digits define permissions for the file user, the group, and others. The optional leading digit, when 4 digits are given, specifies the special , , and flags. Each digit of the three rightmost digits represents a binary value, which controls the &quot;read&quot;, &quot;write&quot; and &quot;execute&quot; permissions respectively. A value of 1 means a class is allowed that action, while a 0 means it is disallowed.

For example, would allow:
* &quot;read&quot; (4), &quot;write&quot; (2), and &quot;execute&quot; (1) for the &quot;User&quot; class; i.e., 7 (4 + 2 + 1).
* &quot;read&quot; (4) and &quot;execute&quot; (1) for the &quot;Group&quot; class; i.e., 5 (4 + 1).
* Only &quot;read&quot; (4) for the &quot;Others&quot; class.

A numerical code permits execution if and only if it is odd (i.e. , , , or ). A numerical code permits &quot;read&quot; if and only if it is greater than or equal to (i.e. , , , or ). A numerical code permits &quot;write&quot; if and only if it is , , , or .

=== Numeric example ===
Change permissions to permit the update of a file:

$ ls -l File
-rw-r--r-- 1 jsmith programmers 57 Jul 3 10:13 File
$ chmod 664 File
$ ls -l File
-rw-rw-r-- 1 jsmith programmers 57 Jul 3 10:13 File
Since the , and bits are not specified, this is equivalent to:

$ chmod 0664 File


===Symbolic modes===
The command also accepts a finer-grained symbolic notation, which allows modifying specific modes while leaving other modes untouched. The symbolic mode is composed of three components, which are combined to form a single string of text:

$ chmod [references][operator][modes] file ...
Classes of users are used to distinguish to whom the permissions apply. If no classes are specified &quot;all&quot; is implied. The classes are represented by one or more of the following letters:
The program uses an operator to specify how the modes of a file should be adjusted. The following operators are accepted:
The modes indicate which permissions are to be granted or removed from the specified classes. There are three basic modes which correspond to the basic permissions:
Multiple changes can be specified by separating multiple symbolic modes with commas (without spaces). If a user is not specified, codice_2 will check the umask and the effect will be as if &quot;a&quot; was specified except bits that are set in the umask are not affected.

====Symbolic examples====
* Add write permission () to the Group&#x27;s () access modes of a directory, allowing users in the same group to add files:

$ ls -ld dir # show access modes before chmod
drwxr-xr-x 2 jsmitt northregion 96 Apr 8 12:53 shared_dir
$ chmod g+w dir
$ ls -ld dir # show access modes after chmod
drwxrwxr-x 2 jsmitt northregion 96 Apr 8 12:53 shared_dir

* Remove write permissions () for all classes (), preventing anyone from writing to the file:

$ ls -l ourBestReferenceFile
-rw-rw-r-- 2 tmiller northregion 96 Apr 8 12:53 ourBestReferenceFile
$ chmod a-w ourBestReferenceFile
$ ls -l ourBestReferenceFile
-r--r--r-- 2 tmiller northregion 96 Apr 8 12:53 ourBestReferenceFile

* Set the permissions for the &quot;ser&quot; and the Group () to read and execute () only (no write permission) on , preventing anyone from adding files.

$ ls -ld referenceLib
drwxr----- 2 ebowman northregion 96 Apr 8 12:53 referenceLib
$ chmod ug=rx referenceLib
$ ls -ld referenceLib
dr-xr-x--- 2 ebowman northregion 96 Apr 8 12:53 referenceLib

* Add the read and write permissions to the user and group classes of a file or directory named :

$ chmod ug+rw sample
$ ls -ld sample
drw-rw---- 2 rsanchez budget 96 Dec 8 12:53 sample

* Remove all permissions, allowing no one to read, write, or execute the file named to no useful end.

$ chmod a-rwx sample
$ ls -l sample
---------- 2 rswven planning 96 Dec 8 12:53 sample

* Change the permissions for the user and the group to read and execute only (no write permission) on .

$ # Sample file permissions before command
$ ls -ld sample
drw-rw---- 2 oschultz warehousing 96 Dec 8 12:53 NY_DBs
$ chmod ug=rx sample
$ ls -ld sample
dr-xr-x--- 2 oschultz warehousing 96 Dec 8 12:53 NJ_DBs

* Set the item writable for the user while making it read-only for anyone else with only one command:

$ chmod u=rw,go=r sample
$ ls -ld sample
drw-r--r-- 2 oschultz warehousing 96 Dec 8 12:53 sample
===Special modes===
The command is also capable of changing the additional permissions or special modes of a file or directory. The symbolic modes use &quot; to represent the &quot;setuid&quot; and &quot;setgid&quot; modes, and &quot; to represent the &quot;sticky&quot; mode. The modes are only applied to the appropriate classes, regardless of whether or not other classes are specified.

Most operating systems support the specification of special modes numerically, particularly in octal, but some do not. On these systems, only the symbolic modes can be used.

===Command line examples===

==See also==
* File-system permissions
* codice_3, the command used to change the attributes of a file or directory on Linux systems
* codice_4, the command used to change the owner of a file or directory on Unix-like systems
* codice_5, the command used to change the group of a file or directory on Unix-like systems
* codice_6, a command used on Windows NT and its derivatives to modify the access control lists associated with a file or directory
* codice_7
* codice_8, restricts mode (permissions) at file or directory creation on Unix-like systems
* User identifier
* Group identifier
* List of Unix commands

==References==
==External links==
* 
* codice_2 — manual page from GNU coreutils.
* GNU &quot;Setting Permissions&quot; manual
* CHMOD-Win 3.0 — Freeware Windows&#x27; ACL ↔ CHMOD converter.
* Beginners tutorial with on-line &quot;live&quot; example</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="3" end="7" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="12" end="21" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="22" end="38" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079196" start="55" end="62" title="command (computing)" label="command"/>
<link wikidata="Q722192" start="67" end="78" title="system call" label="system call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172314" start="98" end="116" title="File-system permissions" label="access permissions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125" end="137" title="#Special modes" label="special mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q269582" start="149" end="187" title="setuid" label="&amp;quot;setuid&amp;quot;, &amp;quot;setgid&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260039" start="193" end="211" title="sticky bit" label="&amp;quot;sticky&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="222" end="233" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="243" end="248" title="Computer file" label="files"/>
<link wikidata="Q201456" start="253" end="264" title="Directory (computing)" label="directories"/>
<link wikidata="Q310986" start="313" end="318" title="Chmod" label="modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q310986" start="368" end="372" title="Chmod" label="ange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666693" start="437" end="450" title="Research Unix" label="AT&amp;amp;T Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q338966" start="537" end="556" title="access-control list" label="access-control list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348204" start="680" end="693" title="GNU Core Utilities" label="GNU coreutils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="794" end="811" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q119391" start="827" end="835" title="UnxUtils" label="UnxUtils"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="857" end="862" title="Windows API" label="Win32"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637561" start="944" end="949" title="IBM i" label="IBM i"/>
<link wikidata="Q646197" start="1438" end="1451" title="symbolic link" label="symbolic link"/>
<link wikidata="Q283503" start="1611" end="1611" title="ls" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q665327" start="1615" end="1615" title="stat (Unix)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q180309" start="1900" end="1906" title="hyphen" label="hyphen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2189" end="2194" title="File-system permissions#Classes" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q975373" start="2404" end="2409" title="Group identifier" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="3600" end="3603" title="Odd number" label="odd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050397" start="5056" end="5061" title="umask" label="umask"/>
<link wikidata="Q269582" start="7301" end="7307" title="setuid" label="setuid"/>
<link wikidata="Q269582" start="7324" end="7330" title="setgid" label="setgid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260039" start="7378" end="7384" title="sticky bit" label="sticky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172314" start="7730" end="7753" title="File-system permissions" label="File-system permissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="8064" end="8074" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q818371" start="8271" end="8286" title="User identifier" label="User identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q975373" start="8289" end="8305" title="Group identifier" label="Group identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q839478" start="8308" end="8329" title="List of Unix commands" label="List of Unix commands"/>
<link wikidata="Q44571" start="8398" end="8401" title="GNU" label="GNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348204" start="8402" end="8411" title="coreutils" label="coreutils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50627" wikidata="Q850275" url="?curid=50627" title="Conformal map">
<text>In mathematics, a conformal map is a function that locally preserves angles, but not necessarily lengths.

More formally, let formula_1 and formula_2 be open subsets of formula_3. A function formula_4 is called conformal (or angle-preserving) at a point formula_5 if it preserves angles between directed curves through formula_6, as well as preserving orientation. Conformal maps preserve both angles and the shapes of infinitesimally small figures, but not necessarily their size or curvature.

The conformal property may be described in terms of the Jacobian derivative matrix of a coordinate transformation. The transformation is conformal whenever the Jacobian at each point is a positive scalar times a rotation matrix (orthogonal with determinant one). Some authors define conformality to include orientation-reversing mappings whose Jacobians can be written as any scalar times any orthogonal matrix.

For mappings in two dimensions, the (orientation-preserving) conformal mappings are precisely the locally invertible complex analytic functions. In three and higher dimensions, Liouville&#x27;s theorem sharply limits the conformal mappings to a few types.

The notion of conformality generalizes in a natural way to maps between Riemannian or semi-Riemannian manifolds.

==In two dimensions==
If formula_1 is an open subset of the complex plane formula_8, then a function formula_9 is conformal if and only if it is holomorphic and its derivative is everywhere non-zero on formula_1. If formula_11 is antiholomorphic (conjugate to a holomorphic function), it preserves angles but reverses their orientation.

In the literature, there is another definition of conformal: a mapping formula_11 which is one-to-one and holomorphic on an open set in the plane. The open mapping theorem forces the inverse function (defined on the image of formula_11) to be holomorphic. Thus, under this definition, a map is conformal if and only if it is biholomorphic. The two definitions for conformal maps are not equivalent. Being one-to-one and holomorphic implies having a non-zero derivative. In fact, we have the following relation, the inverse function theorem:
::formula_14
where formula_15. However, the exponential function is a holomorphic function with a nonzero derivative, but is not one-to-one since it is periodic.

The Riemann mapping theorem, one of the profound results of complex analysis, states that any non-empty open simply connected proper subset of formula_8 admits a bijective conformal map to the open unit disk in formula_8. Informally, this means that any blob can be transformed into a perfect circle by some conformal map.

=== Global conformal maps on the Riemann sphere ===

A map of the Riemann sphere onto itself is conformal if and only if it is a Möbius transformation.

The complex conjugate of a Möbius transformation preserves angles, but reverses the orientation. For example, circle inversions.

===Conformality with respect to three types of angles===
In plane geometry there are three types of angles that may be preserved in a conformal map. Each is hosted by its own real algebra, ordinary complex numbers, split-complex numbers, and dual numbers. The conformal maps are described by linear fractional transformations in each case.

==In three or more dimensions==

===Riemannian geometry===

In Riemannian geometry, two Riemannian metrics formula_18 and formula_19 on a smooth manifold formula_20 are called conformally equivalent if formula_21 for some positive function formula_22 on formula_20. The function formula_22 is called the conformal factor.

A diffeomorphism between two Riemannian manifolds is called a conformal map if the pulled back metric is conformally equivalent to the original one. For example, stereographic projection of a sphere onto the plane augmented with a point at infinity is a conformal map.

One can also define a conformal structure on a smooth manifold, as a class of conformally equivalent Riemannian metrics.

===Euclidean space===
A classical theorem of Joseph Liouville shows that there are far fewer conformal maps in higher dimensions than in two dimensions. Any conformal map from an open subset of Euclidean space into the same Euclidean space of dimension three or greater can be composed from three types of transformations: a homothety, an isometry, and a special conformal transformation. For linear transformations, a conformal map may only be composed of homothety and isometry, and is called a conformal linear transformation.

==Applications==

Applications of conformal mapping exist
in aerospace engineering, 
in biomedical sciences 
(including brain mapping
and genetic mapping),
in applied math
(for geodesics 
and in geometry),
in earth sciences
(including geophysics,
geography,
and cartography),
in engineering, 
and in electronics.

===Cartography===

In cartography, several named map projections, including the Mercator projection and the stereographic projection are conformal. The preservation of compass directions makes them useful in marine navigation.

===Physics and engineering===
Conformal mappings are invaluable for solving problems in engineering and physics that can be expressed in terms of functions of a complex variable yet exhibit inconvenient geometries. By choosing an appropriate mapping, the analyst can transform the inconvenient geometry into a much more convenient one. For example, one may wish to calculate the electric field, formula_25, arising from a point charge located near the corner of two conducting planes separated by a certain angle (where formula_26 is the complex coordinate of a point in 2-space). This problem &quot;per se&quot; is quite clumsy to solve in closed form. However, by employing a very simple conformal mapping, the inconvenient angle is mapped to one of precisely formula_27 radians, meaning that the corner of two planes is transformed to a straight line. In this new domain, the problem (that of calculating the electric field impressed by a point charge located near a conducting wall) is quite easy to solve. The solution is obtained in this domain, formula_28, and then mapped back to the original domain by noting that formula_29 was obtained as a function (&quot;viz&quot;., the composition of formula_30 and formula_29) of formula_26, whence formula_28 can be viewed as formula_34, which is a function of formula_26, the original coordinate basis. Note that this application is not a contradiction to the fact that conformal mappings preserve angles, they do so only for points in the interior of their domain, and not at the boundary. Another example is the application of conformal mapping technique for solving the boundary value problem of liquid sloshing in tanks.

If a function is harmonic (that is, it satisfies Laplace&#x27;s equation formula_36) over a plane domain (which is two-dimensional), and is transformed via a conformal map to another plane domain, the transformation is also harmonic. For this reason, any function which is defined by a potential can be transformed by a conformal map and still remain governed by a potential. Examples in physics of equations defined by a potential include the electromagnetic field, the gravitational field, and, in fluid dynamics, potential flow, which is an approximation to fluid flow assuming constant density, zero viscosity, and irrotational flow. One example of a fluid dynamic application of a conformal map is the Joukowsky transform that can be used to examine the field of flow around a Joukowsky airfoil.

Conformal maps are also valuable in solving nonlinear partial differential equations in some specific geometries. Such analytic solutions provide a useful check on the accuracy of numerical simulations of the governing equation. For example, in the case of very viscous free-surface flow around a semi-infinite wall, the domain can be mapped to a half-plane in which the solution is one-dimensional and straightforward to calculate.

For discrete systems, Noury and Yang presented a way to convert discrete systems root locus into continuous root locus through a well-know conformal mapping in geometry (aka inversion mapping).

===Maxwell&#x27;s equations===
Maxwell&#x27;s equations are preserved by Lorentz transformations which form a group including circular and hyperbolic rotations. The latter are sometimes called Lorentz boosts to distinguish them from circular rotations. All these transformations are conformal since hyperbolic rotations preserve hyperbolic angle, (called rapidity) and the other rotations preserve circular angle. The introduction of translations in the Poincaré group again preserves angles. 

A larger group of conformal maps for relating solutions of Maxwell&#x27;s equations was identified by Ebenezer Cunningham (1908) and Harry Bateman (1910). Their training at Cambridge University had given them facility with the method of image charges and associated methods of images for spheres and inversion. As recounted by Andrew Warwick (2003) &quot;Masters of Theory&quot;:
: Each four-dimensional solution could be inverted in a four-dimensional hyper-sphere of pseudo-radius formula_37 in order to produce a new solution.
Warwick highlights this &quot;new theorem of relativity&quot; as a Cambridge response to Einstein, and as founded on exercises using the method of inversion, such as found in James Hopwood Jeans textbook &quot;Mathematical Theory of Electricity and Magnetism&quot;.

===General relativity===
In general relativity, conformal maps are the simplest and thus most common type of causal transformations. Physically, these describe different universes in which all the same events and interactions are still (causally) possible, but a new additional force is necessary to affect this (that is, replication of all the same trajectories would necessitate departures from geodesic motion because the metric tensor is different). It is often used to try to make models amenable to extension beyond curvature singularities, for example to permit description of the universe even before the Big Bang.

==See also==
* Biholomorphic map
* Carathéodory&#x27;s theorem – A conformal map extends continuously to the boundary
* Penrose diagram
* Schwarz–Christoffel mapping – a conformal transformation of the upper half-plane onto the interior of a simple polygon
* Special linear group – transformations that preserve volume (as opposed to angles) and orientation

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Constantin Carathéodory (1932) &quot;Conformal Representation&quot;, Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics and Physics
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Interactive visualizations of many conformal maps
* Conformal Maps by Michael Trott, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
* Conformal Mapping images of current flow in different geometries without and with magnetic field by Gerhard Brunthaler.
* Conformal Transformation: from Circle to Square.
* Online Conformal Map Grapher.
* Joukowski Transform Interactive WebApp</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q850275" start="18" end="31" title="Conformal map" label="conformal map"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="37" end="45" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="69" end="74" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q850275" start="211" end="220" title="Conformal map" label="conformal"/>
<link wikidata="Q850275" start="225" end="241" title="Conformal map" label="angle-preserving"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="304" end="309" title="curve" label="curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q214881" start="484" end="493" title="curvature" label="curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q506041" start="552" end="560" title="Jacobian matrix and determinant" label="Jacobian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="584" end="609" title="coordinate transformation" label="coordinate transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256564" start="708" end="723" title="rotation matrix" label="rotation matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q333871" start="725" end="735" title="Orthogonal matrix" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207476" start="1026" end="1042" title="Holomorphic function" label="complex analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454976" start="1086" end="1110" title="Liouville&amp;#x27;s theorem (conformal mappings)" label="Liouville&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="1238" end="1248" title="Riemannian manifold" label="Riemannian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510587" start="1252" end="1276" title="semi-Riemannian manifold" label="semi-Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="1321" end="1332" title="open set" label="open subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="1372" end="1380" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="1404" end="1418" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q207476" start="1425" end="1436" title="holomorphic function" label="holomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="1445" end="1455" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705347" start="1510" end="1525" title="antiholomorphic function" label="antiholomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="1527" end="1536" title="complex conjugate" label="conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="1922" end="1936" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q931001" start="2133" end="2157" title="inverse function theorem" label="inverse function theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q927051" start="2326" end="2349" title="Riemann mapping theorem" label="Riemann mapping theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="2382" end="2398" title="complex analysis" label="complex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q912058" start="2431" end="2447" title="simply connected" label="simply connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="2484" end="2493" title="bijection" label="bijective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390323" start="2520" end="2529" title="unit disk" label="unit disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q825857" start="2712" end="2726" title="Riemann sphere" label="Riemann sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="2727" end="2731" title="surjection" label="onto"/>
<link wikidata="Q595742" start="2775" end="2796" title="Möbius transformation" label="Möbius transformation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2909" end="2926" title="Inversive geometry#Circle inversion" label="circle inversions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="3127" end="3141" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q864145" start="3144" end="3164" title="split-complex number" label="split-complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q751048" start="3171" end="3182" title="dual number" label="dual number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3221" end="3254" title="linear fractional transformation#Conformal property" label="linear fractional transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="3333" end="3352" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="3358" end="3375" title="Riemannian metric" label="Riemannian metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058314" start="3595" end="3609" title="diffeomorphism" label="diffeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q866099" start="3755" end="3779" title="stereographic projection" label="stereographic projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="3785" end="3791" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q222032" start="3801" end="3806" title="plane (mathematics)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191139" start="3824" end="3841" title="point at infinity" label="point at infinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="3964" end="3981" title="Riemannian metric" label="Riemannian metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454976" start="4009" end="4026" title="Liouville&amp;#x27;s theorem (conformal mappings)" label="classical theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q214549" start="4030" end="4046" title="Joseph Liouville" label="Joseph Liouville"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="4179" end="4194" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q583960" start="4310" end="4319" title="homothetic transformation" label="homothety"/>
<link wikidata="Q740207" start="4324" end="4332" title="isometry" label="isometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574802" start="4340" end="4372" title="special conformal transformation" label="special conformal transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="4378" end="4400" title="Linear map" label="linear transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q583960" start="4442" end="4451" title="homothetic transformation" label="homothety"/>
<link wikidata="Q740207" start="4456" end="4464" title="isometry" label="isometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q121308015" start="4482" end="4513" title="conformal linear transformation" label="conformal linear transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="4852" end="4863" title="cartography" label="cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q186386" start="4879" end="4893" title="map projection" label="map projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q309372" start="4910" end="4929" title="Mercator projection" label="Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q866099" start="4938" end="4962" title="stereographic projection" label="stereographic projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="6242" end="6253" title="function composition" label="composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332643" start="6682" end="6704" title="boundary value problem" label="boundary value problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129460" start="6708" end="6723" title="Slosh dynamics" label="liquid sloshing"/>
<link wikidata="Q599027" start="6752" end="6760" title="harmonic function" label="harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q339444" start="6784" end="6807" title="Laplace&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Laplace&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202245" start="7021" end="7030" title="potential" label="potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="7123" end="7130" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="7179" end="7200" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q558066" start="7206" end="7225" title="gravitational field" label="gravitational field"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="7235" end="7249" title="fluid dynamics" label="fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543991" start="7251" end="7265" title="potential flow" label="potential flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="7325" end="7332" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="7339" end="7348" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588205" start="7354" end="7371" title="irrotational vector field" label="irrotational flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794703" start="7442" end="7461" title="Joukowsky transform" label="Joukowsky transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q957693" start="8052" end="8062" title="root locus" label="root locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q957693" start="8079" end="8089" title="root locus" label="root locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267097" start="8145" end="8162" title="Inversive geometry" label="inversion mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q51501" start="8197" end="8221" title="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations" label="Maxwell&amp;#x27;s equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="8239" end="8261" title="Lorentz transformation" label="Lorentz transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582218" start="8305" end="8324" title="hyperbolic rotation" label="hyperbolic rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003216" start="8495" end="8511" title="hyperbolic angle" label="hyperbolic angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366833" start="8521" end="8529" title="rapidity" label="rapidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="8564" end="8578" title="angle" label="circular angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066449" start="8620" end="8634" title="Poincaré group" label="Poincaré group"/>
<link wikidata="Q951453" start="8763" end="8782" title="Ebenezer Cunningham" label="Ebenezer Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q938558" start="8794" end="8807" title="Harry Bateman" label="Harry Bateman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372220" start="8888" end="8911" title="method of image charges" label="method of image charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q315545" start="9366" end="9385" title="James Hopwood Jeans" label="James Hopwood Jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="9486" end="9504" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q213488" start="9855" end="9863" title="geodesic" label="geodesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045231" start="9883" end="9896" title="metric tensor (general relativity)" label="metric tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q201721" start="9980" end="10003" title="Gravitational singularity" label="curvature singularities"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="10071" end="10079" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q377166" start="10097" end="10114" title="Biholomorphic map" label="Biholomorphic map"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378889" start="10117" end="10144" title="Carathéodory&amp;#x27;s theorem (conformal mapping)" label="Carathéodory&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q864015" start="10202" end="10217" title="Penrose diagram" label="Penrose diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q769569" start="10220" end="10247" title="Schwarz–Christoffel mapping" label="Schwarz–Christoffel mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140900" start="10341" end="10361" title="Special linear group" label="Special linear group"/>
<link wikidata="Q65332" start="10482" end="10505" title="Constantin Carathéodory" label="Constantin Carathéodory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632017" start="10711" end="10741" title="Wolfram Demonstrations Project" label="Wolfram Demonstrations Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50628" wikidata="Q771991" url="?curid=50628" title="James J. Hill">
<text>James Jerome Hill (September 16, 1838 – May 29, 1916) was a Canadian-American railway director. He was the chief executive officer of a family of lines headed by the Great Northern Railway, which served a substantial area of the Upper Midwest, the northern Great Plains, and the Pacific Northwest in the United States. Because of the size of this region and the economic dominance exerted by the Hill lines, Hill became known during his lifetime as &quot;The Empire Builder&quot;, and died in 1916 with a fortune of about 63 million dollars. His former home, James J. Hill House, is now a museum in Saint Paul, Minnesota.

==Biography==

===Childhood and youth===
James J. Hill was born September 16, 1838, in Eramosa Township, Upper Canada (now Ontario) to James Hill Jr. and Ann Dunbar. A childhood accident with a bow and arrow blinded him in the right eye. He had nine years of formal schooling. He attended the Rockwood Academy for a short while, where the head of the academy gave him free tuition. He was forced to leave school in 1852 after the death of his father. By that time, he was adept at math, land surveying, and English. His particular talents for English and mathematics were helpful in his career.

After working as a clerk in Kentucky (during which he learned bookkeeping), Hill decided to permanently move to the United States and settled in St. Paul, Minnesota, at the age of 18. His first job in St. Paul was with a steamboat company, where he worked as a bookkeeper. By 1860, he was working for wholesale grocers, for whom he handled freight transfers, especially dealing with railroads and steamboats. Through this work, he learned all aspects of the freight and transportation business. During this period, Hill began to work for himself for the first time. During the winter months when the Mississippi River was frozen and steamboats could not run, Hill started bidding on other contracts and won several.

===Young businessman===
Because of his previous experiences in shipping and fuel supply, Hill was able to enter both the coal and steamboat businesses. In 1870, he and his partners started the Red River Transportation Company, which offered steam boat transportation between St. Paul and Winnipeg. By 1879 he had a local monopoly by merging with Norman Kittson. In 1867, Hill entered the coal business, and by 1879 it had expanded five times over, giving Hill a local monopoly in the anthracite coal business. During this same period, Hill also entered into banking and quickly managed to become member of several major banks&#x27; boards of directors. He also bought out bankrupt businesses, built them up again, and then resold them—often gaining a substantial profit. Hill noted that the secret to his success was &quot;work, hard work, intelligent work, and then more work.&quot;

===Entry into Gilded Era railroading===
During the Panic of 1873, a number of railroads, including the St. Paul and Pacific Railroad (StP&amp;P), went bankrupt. The StP&amp;P was caught in an almost hopeless legal muddle. Hill researched the StP&amp;P for three years and finally concluded that it would be possible to turn a profit off the StP&amp;P, provided that the initial capital could be found. Hill teamed up with Norman Kittson (the man he had merged steamboat businesses with), Donald Smith, George Stephen and John Stewart Kennedy. Together they not only bought the railroad, they also vastly expanded it by bargaining for trackage rights with the Northern Pacific Railway. In May 1879, the St. Paul, Minneapolis, and Manitoba Railway Co. (StPM&amp;M) formed—with James J. Hill as general manager. His first goal was to expand and upgrade even more.

Hill was a hands-on, detail-obsessed manager. A Canadian of Scotch-Irish Protestant ancestry, he brought in many men with the same background into high management. He wanted people to settle along his rail lines, so he sold homesteads to immigrants while transporting them to their new homes using his rail lines. When he was looking for the best path for one of his tracks to take, he went on horseback and scouted it personally. Under his management, StPM&amp;M prospered. In 1880, its net worth was $728,000 (equal to $ today); in 1885 it was $25,000,000, equal to $ today.

One of his challenges at this point was the avoidance of federal action against railroads. If the federal government believed that the railroads were making too much profit, they might see this as an opportunity to force lowering of the railway tariff rates. Hill avoided this by investing a large portion of the railroad&#x27;s profit back into the railroad itself—and charged those investments to operating expense.

===&quot;Empire Builder&quot;===
Between 1883 and 1889, Hill built his railroads across Minnesota, into Wisconsin, and across North Dakota to Montana.

When there was not enough industry in the areas Hill was building, Hill brought the industry in, often by buying out a company and placing plants along his railroad lines. By 1889, Hill decided that his future lay in expanding into a transcontinental railroad.

&quot;What we want,&quot; Hill is quoted as saying, &quot;is the best possible line, shortest distance, lowest grades, and least curvature we can build. We do not care enough for Rocky Mountains scenery to spend a large sum of money developing it.&quot; Hill got what he wanted, and in January 1893 his Great Northern Railway, running from St. Paul, Minnesota to Seattle, Washington — a distance of more than — was completed. The Great Northern was the first transcontinental built without public money and just a few land grants, and was one of the few transcontinental railroads not to go bankrupt.

Hill chose to build his transcontinental railroad north of the competing Northern Pacific line, which had reached the Pacific Northwest over much more difficult terrain with more bridges, steeper grades, and tunnelling. Hill did much of the route planning himself, travelling over proposed routes on horseback. The key to the Great Northern line was Hill&#x27;s use of the previously unmapped Marias Pass. The pass had initially been described by Lewis and Clark in 1805, but no one since had been able to find it so Hill hired Santiago Jameson to find it. Jameson discovered the pass 1889 and it shortened the Great Northern&#x27;s route by almost one hundred miles. The pass had been discovered by John Frank Stevens, principal engineer of the Great Northern Railway, in December 1889, and offered an easier route across the Rockies than that taken by the Northern Pacific.

The Great Northern reached Seattle on January 7, 1893.

In 1898 Hill purchased control of large parts of the Mesabi Range iron mining district in Minnesota, along with its rail lines. The Great Northern began large-scale shipment of ore to the steel mills of the Midwest.

====Settlements====
The Great Northern energetically promoted settlement along its lines in North Dakota and Montana, especially by Germans and Scandinavians from Europe. The Great Northern bought its lands from the federal government—it received no land grants—and resold them to farmers at cheap prices. It operated agencies in Germany and Scandinavia that promoted its lands, and brought families over at low cost. Hill also invested in founding schools and churches for these communities and promoted a variety of progressive techniques to ensure they prospered. This &quot;Dakota Boom&quot; peaked in 1882 as 42,000 immigrants, largely from northern Europe, poured into the Red River Valley running through the region. The rapidly increasing settlement in North Dakota&#x27;s Red River Valley along the Minnesota border between 1871 and 1890 was a major example of large-scale &quot;bonanza&quot; farming.[8][9][10]

===Hill Lines in the 1890s===
Six months after the railroad reached Seattle came the deep nationwide depression called the Panic of 1893. Hill&#x27;s leadership became a case study in the successful management of a capital-intensive business during the economic downturn. In order to ensure that he did not lose his patronage during the crisis, Hill lowered rail tariff shipping rates for farmers, gave credit to many of the businesses he owned so they could continue paying their workers, and started a &quot;10 dollar trip&quot; (equal to $ today) for immigrants. He also took strong measures to economize—in just one year, Hill cut the railway&#x27;s expense of carrying a ton of freight by 13%. Because of these measures, Hill not only stayed in business, but also increased the net worth of his railroad by nearly $10,000,000 (equal to $ today). Meanwhile, nearly every other transcontinental railroad went bankrupt. His ability to ride out the depression garnered him fame and admiration. Hill saved money by repeatedly cutting wages, made possible by a time of deflation when prices were falling generally.

In 1893, Hill began the process of looking for a source of labor other than Chinese workers. For a brief period of time, he hired Italian and Greek laborers, but company officials were not satisfied with their performance. Hill sent emissaries to the Pacific who found that Japan had the most potential in the market of &quot;Oriental Trade,&quot; and he decided to capitalize on this opportunity.

In this time he also began to focus his energies on securing trade with Asian countries. He offered Japanese Industrialists Southern cotton and would even ship it for free if they would compare it with the short staple cotton they were using with the promise of a refund if they were dissatisfied, which they were not. With these friendly relations established, Hill managed to secure the industrializing Japanese order for 15,000 tons of rails against competition from England and Belgium. From 1886 to 1905, American exports to Japan leapt from $7.7 million a year (equal to $ today) to $51.7 million, equal to $ today.

Leonard says that after 1900 Hill exhibited poor business judgment regarding one Canadian subsidiary, the Vancouver, Westminster and Yukon Railway Company (VW&amp;Y). He ousted its president John Hendry, thereby worsening the problems, prolonging the delays, and adding to the costs of taking over the VW&amp;Y. Hill&#x27;s top aides were careless about details, bookkeeping, correspondence, and reports.

===The Northern Pacific and the &quot;short squeeze&quot; of 1901===
With 1901 and the start of the new century, James Hill now had control of both the Great Northern Railway, and the Northern Pacific (which he had obtained with the help of his friend J. P. Morgan, when that railroad went bankrupt in the depression of the mid-1890s). Hill also wanted control of the Chicago, Burlington and Quincy railroad because of its Midwestern lines and access to Chicago. The Union Pacific Railroad was the biggest competitor of Great Northern and Northern Pacific Railroads. Although Great Northern and Northern Pacific were backed by J. P. Morgan and James J. Hill, the Union Pacific was backed not only by its president, Edward H. Harriman, but by the extremely powerful William Rockefeller and Jacob Schiff.

Quietly, Harriman began buying stock in Northern Pacific with the intention of gaining control of Chicago, Burlington, and Quincy. He was within 40,000 shares of control when Hill learned of Harriman&#x27;s activities and quickly contacted J. P. Morgan, who ordered his men to buy everything they could get their hands on.

The result was chaos on Wall Street. Northern Pacific stock was forced up to $1,000 per share. Many speculators, who had sold Northern Pacific &quot;short&quot; in the anticipation of a drop in the railroad&#x27;s price, faced ruin. The threat of a real economic panic loomed. Neither side could win a distinct advantage, and the parties soon realized that a truce would have to be called. The winners of that truce were Hill and Morgan, who immediately formed the Northern Securities Company with the aim of tying together their three major rail lines. As the Hill-Morgan alliance formed the Northern Securities Company, Theodore Roosevelt became president and turned his energies against the great trusts that were monopolizing trade.

===The Hill Lines survive the trust-busting era===
Roosevelt sent his Justice Department to sue the Northern Securities Company in 1902. The Supreme Court in 1904 ordered it to be dissolved as a monopoly. (Ironically, the Burlington Route, Northern Pacific, and Great Northern would later merge in 1970 to form the Burlington Northern Railroad.) This ended Hill&#x27;s ability to maintain competitive rates in Asian countries and in the subsequent two years American trade with Japan and China dropped 40% (or $41 million). Hill moved on without the benefit of a central company, and acquired the Colorado and Southern Railway lines into Texas. He also built the Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railway. By the time of his death in 1916, James J. Hill was worth more than $63 million, equivalent to $ today, and over $200 million in related assets. When his estate was divided his widow received over $16 million, and each of his children received almost $4 million; $1.5 million was paid in income and inheritance taxes.

The Great Northern Railway and the Northern Pacific tried to merge four times, in 1896, 1901, 1927, and 1955. This last attempt lasted from 1955 until final Supreme Court approval and merger in March 1970, which created the Burlington Northern Railroad. In 1995, Burlington Northern merged with the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway to become the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway.

===Family life===
In 1867, James J. Hill married Mary Theresa Mehegan, a Roman Catholic (born 1846, New York City); they had ten children:

# Mary Frances &quot;Mamie&quot; (Hill) Hill (1869–1947), who married Samuel Hill of Washington D.C. and Seattle. Samuel Hill was an executive at the Great Northern Railway when he married Mary Hill.
# James Norman &quot;Jimmy&quot; Hill (1870–1932) of New York City, married socialite Marguerite Sawyer. His family did not attend the wedding reportedly owing to Marguerite&#x27;s status as a divorcee.
# Louis Warren Hill (1872–1948) of St. Paul, Minnesota, who was named president of the GN in 1907 and board chairman in 1912. He married Maud Van Cortlandt Taylor.
# Clara Anne (Hill) Lindley (1873–1947), who married E. C. Lindley of St. Paul, Minnesota, who was vice-president, counsel general, and a member of the board of directors of the Great Northern Railway.
# Katherine Theresa Hill (1875–1876; died in infancy)
# Charlotte Elizabeth (Hill) Slade (1877–1923), who married George T. Slade of New York City and St. Paul, Minnesota. George T. Slade was an executive at The Great Northern Railway and Yale classmate of Louis W. Hill.
# Ruth (Hill) Beard (1879–1959), who married Anson McCook Beard of New York City.
# Rachel (Hill) Boeckmann (1881–1967), who married Egil Boeckmann of St. Paul, Minnesota.
# Gertrude (Hill) Gavin (1883–1961), who married Michael Gavin of New York City.
# Walter Jerome Hill (1885–1944) of St. Paul, Minnesota. Walthill, Nebraska, was named for Walter.

==Death==
By early 1916, Hill began pouring more attention into philanthropy, donating thousands of dollars to various institutions as he privately struggled with a variety of increasingly painful ailments. His condition deteriorated quickly in mid-May, but even with the help of many respected doctors his condition worsened. After falling into a coma, he died in his home in St. Paul, Minnesota, on May 29, 1916.[14] Mary Theresa Hill died in 1922 and was buried next to her husband by the shore of Pleasant Lake on their North Oaks farm. They were later reinterred at Resurrection Cemetery in Mendota Heights.

==Hill&#x27;s legacy==
Politically, Hill was a conservative Bourbon Democrat. The Democratic Party&#x27;s continued enchantment with the populist William Jennings Bryan led Hill to support Republican presidential candidates William McKinley (1896 and 1900), Theodore Roosevelt (1904), and William Howard Taft (1908 and 1912). Hill was a supporter of free trade and was one of the few supporters of free trade with Canada.

In St. Paul, the city&#x27;s main library building and the adjoining Hill Business Library were funded by him. In addition, he donated to numerous schools, including the Saint Paul Seminary. Hill was a member of the Jekyll Island Club (aka The Millionaires Club) on Jekyll Island, Georgia, along with J. P. Morgan and William Rockefeller.


In 1891, after three years of building, construction was completed on Hill&#x27;s new family home at 240 Summit Avenue in St. Paul. Over 400 workers labored on the project. Built at a cost of $930,000 and with , the James J. Hill House was among the city&#x27;s largest. As with his business dealings, Hill supervised the construction and design himself, hiring and firing several architects in the process. The house has many early electrical and mechanical systems that predate widespread adoption in modern domestic structures. 

Upon completion of the Summit Avenue residence, Hill had the family&#x27;s old house, which he had constructed in 1878, razed. After the death of Hill&#x27;s wife in 1921, the house was donated to the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Saint Paul and Minneapolis. It was obtained by the Minnesota Historical Society in 1978 and today is operated as a museum and gallery.

Though a Protestant, Hill maintained a strong philanthropic relationship with the Catholic Church in St. Paul and throughout the northwest. Hill&#x27;s historic home is located next to the cathedral, largely due to the special relationship Hill&#x27;s wife, a practicing Catholic, had with the Diocese. The Hills maintained close ties with Archbishop John Ireland, and Hill was a major contributor to the Saint Paul Seminary, Macalester College, Hamline University, the University of St. Thomas, Carleton College, and other educational, religious and charitable organizations. He was the first major donor to the Marquette University School of Medicine.

In order to generate business for his railroad, Hill encouraged European immigrants to settle along his line, often paying for Russian and Scandinavian settlers to travel from Europe. To promote settlement and revenue for his rail business, Hill experimented with agriculture and worked to hybridize Russian wheat for Dakota soil and weather conditions. He also ran model experimental farms in Minnesota, such as North Oaks, to develop superior livestock and crop yields for the settlers locating near his railroads.

An enthusiastic conservationist, Hill was invited by President Theodore Roosevelt to a governors&#x27; conference on conservation of natural resources, and later appointed to a lands commission.

Drawing on his experience in the development of Minnesota&#x27;s Iron Range, Hill was, during 1911–1912, in close contact with Gaspard Farrer of Baring Brothers &amp; Company of London regarding the formation of the Brazilian Iron Ore Company to tap that nation&#x27;s rich mineral deposits.

Near the end of his life, Hill played what a recent biographer, Albro Martin, called his &quot;last and greatest role.&quot; After the first punishing year of World War I, the Allied Powers desperately needed financial support to continue the war effort. To that end, Hill was a major figure in the effort launched by J.P. Morgan to float the Anglo-French Bond drive of 1915, which allowed the Allies to purchase much-needed foodstuffs and other supplies. In September 1915, the first public loan, the $500,000,000 Anglo-French loan, was floated after negotiations with the Anglo-French Financial Commission. Concomitantly, the resulting trade in munitions with England and France carried the United States from a depression in 1914 to boom years in 1915 and 1916.

Hillsboro, North Dakota; Hill County, Montana; and Hillyard, Washington (now a neighborhood of Spokane), are named for him. Jim Hill Mountain near Stevens Pass in the Cascade Range is named after him, also. The introduced crop weed in Western US wheat-growing areas Sisymbrium altissimum also has a common name &quot;Jim Hill Mustard&quot;, after the belief by farmers that it was spread from contaminated seed leaking out of railway stock along the railroads he controlled.

In 1929, the Great Northern Railway inaugurated a long-distance passenger train extending from Chicago to Seattle, and named it the &quot;Empire Builder&quot; in his honor. The train served as Great Northern&#x27;s flagship train, and is still operated today by Amtrak. using former Great Northern tracks west of St. Paul. The James J. Hill House in St. Paul, is a National Historic Landmark.

In 1887, the Great Northern&#x27;s first company headquarters building was constructed in St. Paul. It was designed by James Brodie, who also built the Hill house on Summit Avenue. The 1887 building was converted between 2000 and 2004 to a 53 unit condo in the Historic Lowertown District of St. Paul. Hill had seen the devastation done downtown by the Great Chicago Fire. As a result, one feature Hill integrated into the construction of the 1887 company headquarters (the Great Northern General Office Building) was barrel-vaulted ceilings constructed of brick and railroad steel rails that held up a layer of sand several inches deep. The theory was that if a fire broke out and the ceiling caved in, the sand would drop and retard or suppress the fire.

Hill was intimately involved in the planning and construction (1914–1916) of a new company headquarters in St. Paul (to be known as the Great Northern Office Building), which was to house the corporate staffs of the Great Northern, the Northern Pacific and Hill&#x27;s banking enterprises. The 14-story building cost $14 million to construct.

Hill&#x27;s heirs established the James J. Hill Reference Library in St. Paul, which is considered by the Small Business Administration the premier source for publicly accessible practical business information in the United States, and many SBA programs rely on the Hill Library&#x27;s HillSearch service to provide business information resources to small businesses nationwide. The Hill Library has developed numerous online programs and now serves millions of small business owners worldwide.

In &quot;The Great Gatsby&quot;, Hill is the man whom Gatsby&#x27;s father says Gatsby would have equalled if he had lived long enough.

Hill and his railway are mentioned in the Harry McClintock song &quot;Hallelujah, I&#x27;m a Bum.&quot;

In 1959, Hill High in St. Paul, Minnesota, was established as a school from the funds set aside from Hill&#x27;s wife for education. The school, which was all-male, consolidated in 1971 with the all-female Archbishop Murray School to form Hill-Murray School in Maplewood, Minnesota.

Hill Capital is a venture capital fund established in 2016 &quot;aligned with James J. Hill&#x27;s belief in the cooperation of the production, distribution and exchange of wealth as outlined in his writings&quot;. The Hill library owns 75 shares. As of September 2016, the fund is not yet closed.

In 1958, he was inducted into the Hall of Great Westerners of the National Cowboy &amp; Western Heritage Museum.

A bust of Hill is located on the University of Washington campus in Seattle, Washington. It is currently situated in front of More Hall, which is adjacent to the former on campus nuclear reactor building.

==See also==

* Charles T. Hinde railroad executive, founder of the Hotel del Coronado, and long time friend of James J. Hill.
* Pierce Butler (justice)
* List of railroad executives
* James J. Hill Sapphire

==Footnotes==
==Further reading==
* Haeg, Larry, &quot;Harriman vs Hill: Wall Street&#x27;s Great Railroad War.&quot; (U of Minnesota Press, 2013)
* Holbrook, Stewart H. &quot;James J. Hill: a great life in brief&quot; (Epicenter Press, 2018).

* Joslin-Zirngible, Rachel. &quot;James J. Hill: Philanthropy and Reputation in Twentieth Century St. Paul.&quot; (PhD Diss. U of Wisconsin 2015) online.

* Malone, Michael P., &quot;James J. Hill: Empire Builder of the Northwest.&quot; (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 1996).
* Pyle, Joseph G. &quot;James J. Hill&quot; &quot;Minnesota History Bulletin&quot; 2#5 (1918), pp. 295–323. online short scholarly biography
* Pyle, Joseph Gilpin. &quot;The Life of James J. Hill&quot; (2 vol 1917) 
**online vol 1; also online vol 2; long scholarly biography
** online review
* Schonberger, Howard. &quot;James J. Hill and the Trade with the Orient.&quot; &quot;Minnesota History&quot; 41.4 (1968): 178–190. online 
* Sherman, T. Gary, &quot;Conquest and Catastrophe: The Triumph and tragedy of the Great Northern Railway Through Stevens Pass&quot;, AuthorHouse, 2004.
*
* White, W. Thomas. &quot;A Gilded Age Businessman in Politics: James J. Hill, the Northwest, and the American Presidency, 1884-1912,&quot; &quot;Pacific Historical Review,&quot; vol. 57, no. 4 (Nov. 1988), pp. 439–456. In JSTOR
* Dutiful Son: Louis W. Hill Sr. Book, Book about Louis W. Hill Sr., son and successor of empire builder James J. Hill at Ramsey County Historical Society.

===Primary Sources===
* Great Northern Railway Company Records, Minnesota Historical Society.
* Northern Pacific Railway Corporate Records, Minnesota Historical Society.

==External links==

* Mary Theresa Mehegan Hill in MNopedia, the Minnesota Encyclopedia
* James J. Hill in MNopedia, the Minnesota Encyclopedia 
* James J. Hill Washington State History
* James J. Hill Reference Library
* James J. Hill and the Building of His Railroad Empire 
* The Destruction of a Wealth and Jobs Creator by Parasitical-Elites A criticism of government intervention in the business of Hill
* Biography at the &quot;Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online&quot;
* James J. Hill Scrapbook, 1916 Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution.
* The Truth About the &quot;Robber Barons&quot; A discussion of Hill&#x27;s building of the transcontinental railroad by Thomas DiLorenzo
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q771991" start="0" end="17" title="James J. Hill" label="James Jerome Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="107" end="130" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="166" end="188" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="235" end="242" title="midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="257" end="269" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="279" end="296" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="304" end="317" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136691" start="559" end="578" title="James J. Hill House" label="James J. Hill House"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="599" end="620" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="Saint Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q695157" start="710" end="740" title="Guelph/Eramosa" label="Eramosa Township, Upper Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="746" end="753" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355698" start="916" end="932" title="Rockwood Academy (Ontario)" label="Rockwood Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="1110" end="1124" title="land surveying" label="land surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="1281" end="1292" title="bookkeeping" label="bookkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="1364" end="1383" title="St. Paul, Minnesota" label="St. Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="1440" end="1449" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q220695" start="1520" end="1529" title="wholesale" label="wholesale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="1819" end="1836" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="2224" end="2232" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="2257" end="2265" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13607397" start="2282" end="2296" title="Norman Kittson" label="Norman Kittson"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="2420" end="2435" title="anthracite" label="anthracite coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="2568" end="2587" title="boards of directors" label="boards of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q695566" start="2872" end="2885" title="Panic of 1873" label="Panic of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402059" start="2924" end="2953" title="St. Paul and Pacific Railroad" label="St. Paul and Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13607397" start="3243" end="3257" title="Norman Kittson" label="Norman Kittson"/>
<link wikidata="Q337004" start="3309" end="3321" title="Donald Smith, 1st Baron Strathcona and Mount Royal" label="Donald Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q510898" start="3323" end="3337" title="George Stephen, 1st Baron Mount Stephen" label="George Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488435" start="3342" end="3362" title="John Stewart Kennedy" label="John Stewart Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135434" start="3480" end="3504" title="Northern Pacific Railway" label="Northern Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="4359" end="4377" title="United States Government" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="4768" end="4777" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="4784" end="4793" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="4806" end="4818" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="4822" end="4829" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064041" start="5066" end="5091" title="transcontinental railroad" label="transcontinental railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="5273" end="5288" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="5397" end="5419" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217027" start="5612" end="5622" title="land grant" label="land grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897056" start="6089" end="6100" title="Marias Pass" label="Marias Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700114" start="6396" end="6414" title="John Frank Stevens" label="John Frank Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q909225" start="6682" end="6694" title="Mesabi Range" label="Mesabi Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408452" start="7627" end="7643" title="Red River Valley" label="Red River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="7891" end="7904" title="Panic of 1893" label="Panic of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135434" start="10495" end="10511" title="Northern Pacific Railway" label="Northern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="10563" end="10575" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071790" start="10679" end="10718" title="Chicago, Burlington and Quincy Railroad" label="Chicago, Burlington and Quincy railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="10778" end="10800" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292518" start="11026" end="11044" title="Edward H. Harriman" label="Edward H. Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347859" start="11076" end="11095" title="William Rockefeller" label="William Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q215801" start="11100" end="11112" title="Jacob Schiff" label="Jacob Schiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q106526" start="11588" end="11593" title="short selling" label="short"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127509" start="11904" end="11931" title="Northern Securities Company" label="Northern Securities Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="12061" end="12079" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058959" start="12332" end="12366" title="Northern Securities Co. v. United States" label="in 1904 ordered it to be dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016648" start="12492" end="12520" title="Burlington Northern Railroad" label="Burlington Northern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111538" start="12774" end="12803" title="Colorado and Southern Railway" label="Colorado and Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493705" start="12840" end="12877" title="Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railway" label="Spokane, Portland and Seattle Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272318" start="13202" end="13224" title="Great Northern Railway (U.S.)" label="Great Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135434" start="13233" end="13249" title="Northern Pacific Railway" label="Northern Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016648" start="13422" end="13450" title="Burlington Northern Railroad" label="Burlington Northern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="13497" end="13534" title="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway" label="Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="13549" end="13589" title="Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway" label="Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411692" start="13802" end="13813" title="Samuel Hill" label="Samuel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q19564271" start="14018" end="14035" title="Marguerite Sawyer Davis" label="Marguerite Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688349" start="14137" end="14154" title="Louis W. Hill" label="Louis Warren Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268284" start="15083" end="15101" title="Walthill, Nebraska" label="Walthill, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="15503" end="15522" title="St. Paul, Minnesota" label="St. Paul, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136689" start="15650" end="15665" title="North Oaks Farm" label="North Oaks farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q131759186" start="15697" end="15718" title="Resurrection Cemetery (Mendota Heights, Minnesota)" label="Resurrection Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q895181" start="15800" end="15816" title="Bourbon Democrat" label="Bourbon Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="15886" end="15908" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="15964" end="15980" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="15998" end="16016" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="16029" end="16048" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="16090" end="16100" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402052" start="16333" end="16352" title="Saint Paul Seminary School of Divinity" label="Saint Paul Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176598" start="16379" end="16397" title="Jekyll Island Club" label="Jekyll Island Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573938" start="16429" end="16442" title="Jekyll Island" label="Jekyll Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="16444" end="16451" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="16464" end="16476" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347859" start="16481" end="16500" title="William Rockefeller" label="William Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q14693069" start="16609" end="16622" title="Summit Avenue (St. Paul)" label="Summit Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136691" start="16720" end="16739" title="James J. Hill House" label="James J. Hill House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365460" start="17238" end="17294" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Saint Paul and Minneapolis" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Saint Paul and Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937351" start="17319" end="17347" title="Minnesota Historical Society" label="Minnesota Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="17413" end="17423" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q185733" start="17450" end="17463" title="philanthropic" label="philanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17486" end="17501" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q774308" start="17755" end="17767" title="John Ireland (bishop)" label="John Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141571" start="17830" end="17848" title="Macalester College" label="Macalester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366519" start="17850" end="17868" title="Hamline University" label="Hamline University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164229" start="17874" end="17898" title="University of St. Thomas (Minnesota)" label="University of St. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041671" start="17900" end="17916" title="Carleton College" label="Carleton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="18323" end="18334" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="18349" end="18358" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybridize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229230" start="18472" end="18482" title="North Oaks, Minnesota" label="North Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18900" end="18914" title="Gaspard Farrer" label="Gaspard Farrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q790455" start="18918" end="18947" title="Barings Bank" label="Baring Brothers &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904109" start="19118" end="19128" title="biographer" label="biographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19225" end="19236" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="19242" end="19255" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19409" end="19426" title="Anglo-French Bond" label="Anglo-French Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154377" start="19640" end="19673" title="Anglo-French Financial Commission" label="Anglo-French Financial Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075622" start="19832" end="19855" title="Hillsboro, North Dakota" label="Hillsboro, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q496589" start="19857" end="19877" title="Hill County, Montana" label="Hill County, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764225" start="19883" end="19903" title="Hillyard, Spokane, Washington" label="Hillyard, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q187805" start="19927" end="19934" title="Spokane, Washington" label="Spokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q49039819" start="19956" end="19973" title="Jim Hill Mountain" label="Jim Hill Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q164145" start="20098" end="20119" title="Sisymbrium altissimum" label="Sisymbrium altissimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q197764" start="20446" end="20460" title="Empire Builder" label="Empire Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="20570" end="20576" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136691" start="20635" end="20654" title="James J. Hill House" label="James J. Hill House"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="20673" end="20699" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20821" end="20833" title="James Brodie (architect)" label="James Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693984" start="20963" end="21002" title="Lowertown Historic District (Saint Paul, Minnesota)" label="Historic Lowertown District of St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q70520" start="21055" end="21073" title="Great Chicago Fire" label="Great Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692665" start="21838" end="21869" title="James J. Hill Reference Library" label="James J. Hill Reference Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q495354" start="21910" end="21939" title="Small Business Administration" label="Small Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q214371" start="22309" end="22325" title="The Great Gatsby" label="The Great Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q918848" start="22479" end="22495" title="Harry McClintock" label="Harry McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642858" start="22507" end="22533" title="Hallelujah, I&amp;#x27;m a Bum" label="Hallelujah, I&amp;#x27;m a Bum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14692645" start="22781" end="22799" title="Hill-Murray School" label="Hill-Murray School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642689" start="23159" end="23183" title="Hall of Great Westerners" label="Hall of Great Westerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971981" start="23191" end="23236" title="National Cowboy &amp;amp; Western Heritage Museum" label="National Cowboy &amp;amp; Western Heritage Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="23272" end="23296" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="23307" end="23314" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="23316" end="23326" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q28074807" start="23408" end="23442" title="More Hall Annex" label="on campus nuclear reactor building"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082818" start="23461" end="23477" title="Charles T. Hinde" label="Charles T. Hinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631096" start="23513" end="23531" title="Hotel del Coronado" label="Hotel del Coronado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395635" start="23574" end="23597" title="Pierce Butler (justice)" label="Pierce Butler (justice)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811847" start="23600" end="23627" title="List of railroad executives" label="List of railroad executives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136694" start="23630" end="23652" title="James J. Hill Sapphire" label="James J. Hill Sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q159004" start="26043" end="26059" title="Thomas DiLorenzo" label="Thomas DiLorenzo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50631" wikidata="Q537112" url="?curid=50631" title="Ford Madox Ford">
<text>Ford Madox Ford (né Joseph Leopold Ford Hermann Madox Hueffer ( ); 17 December 1873 – 26 June 1939) was an English novelist, poet, critic and editor whose journals &quot;The English Review&quot; and &quot;The Transatlantic Review&quot; were important in the development of early 20th-century English and American literature.

Ford is now remembered for his novels &quot;The Good Soldier&quot; (1915), the &quot;Parade&#x27;s End&quot; tetralogy (1924–1928) and &quot;The Fifth Queen&quot; trilogy (1906–1908). &quot;The Good Soldier&quot; is frequently included among the great literature of the 20th century, including the Modern Library&#x27;s 100 Best Novels, &quot;The Observer&quot;″s &quot;100 Greatest Novels of All Time&quot;, and &quot;The Guardian&quot;″s &quot;1,000 novels everyone must read&quot;.

==Early life==
Ford was born in Merton in Surrey to Catherine Madox Brown and Francis Hueffer, the eldest of three; his brother was Oliver Madox Hueffer and his sister was Juliet Hueffer, the wife of David Soskice and mother of Frank Soskice. Ford&#x27;s father, who became a music critic for &quot;The Times&quot;, was German and his mother English. His paternal grandfather Johann Hermann Hüffer was first to publish Westphalian poet and author Annette von Droste-Hülshoff. He was named after his maternal grandfather, the Pre-Raphaelite painter Ford Madox Brown, whose biography he would eventually write. His mother&#x27;s older half-sister was Lucy Madox Brown, the wife of William Michael Rossetti and mother of Olivia Rossetti Agresti.

In 1889, after the death of their father, Ford and Oliver went to live with their grandfather in London. Ford attended the University College School in London, but never studied at university. In November 1892, at 18, he became a Catholic, &quot;very much at the encouragement of some Hueffer relatives, but partly (he confessed) galled by the &#x27;militant atheism and anarchism&#x27; of his English cousins.&quot;

==Personal life==
In 1894, Ford eloped with his school girlfriend Elsie Martindale. The couple were married in Gloucester and moved to Bonnington in Kent. In 1901, they moved to Winchelsea. They had two daughters, Christina (born 1897) and Katharine (born 1900). Ford&#x27;s neighbours in Winchelsea included the authors Joseph Conrad, Stephen Crane, W. H. Hudson, Henry James in nearby Rye, and H. G. Wells.

In 1904, Ford suffered an agoraphobic breakdown due to financial and marital problems. He went to Germany to spend time with family there and undergo treatments.

In 1909, Ford left his wife and set up home with English writer Isobel Violet Hunt, with whom he published the literary magazine &quot;The English Review&quot;. Ford&#x27;s wife refused to divorce him and he attempted to become a German citizen to obtain a divorce in Germany. This was unsuccessful. A reference in an illustrated paper to Violet Hunt as &quot;Mrs. Ford Madox Hueffer&quot; gave rise to a successful libel action being brought by Mrs. Elsie Hueffer in 1913. Ford&#x27;s relationship with Hunt did not survive the First World War.

Ford used the name of Ford Madox Hueffer, but changed it to Ford Madox Ford after World War I in 1919, partly to fulfil the terms of a small legacy, partly &quot;because a Teutonic name is in these days disagreeable&quot;, and possibly to avoid further lawsuits from Elsie in the event of his new companion, Stella, being referred to as &quot;Mrs. Hueffer&quot;.

Between 1918 and 1927, he lived with Stella Bowen, an Australian artist 20 years his junior. In 1920, Ford and Bowen had a daughter, Julia Madox Ford.

In the summer of 1927, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that Ford had converted a mill building in Avignon, France into a home and workshop that he called &quot;Le Vieux Moulin&quot;. The article implied that Ford was reunited with his wife at this point.

In the early 1930s, Ford established a relationship with Janice Biala, a Polish-born artist from New York, who illustrated several of Ford&#x27;s later books. This relationship lasted until the late 1930s.

Ford spent the last years of his life teaching at Olivet College in Olivet, Michigan, US. He was taken ill in Honfleur, France, in June 1939 and died shortly afterward in Deauville at the age of 65.

==Literary life==
One of Ford&#x27;s most famous works is the novel &quot;The Good Soldier&quot; (1915). Set just before World War I, &quot;The Good Soldier&quot; chronicles the tragic expatriate lives of two &quot;perfect couples&quot;, one British and one American, using intricate flashbacks. In the &quot;Dedicatory Letter to Stella Ford&quot; that prefaces the novel, Ford reports that a friend pronounced &quot;The Good Soldier&quot; &quot;the finest French novel in the English language!&quot; Ford pronounced himself a &quot;Tory mad about historic continuity&quot; and believed the novelist&#x27;s function was to serve as the historian of his own time. However, he was dismissive of the Conservative Party, referring to it as &quot;the Stupid Party.&quot;

Ford was involved in British war propaganda after the beginning of World War I. He worked for the War Propaganda Bureau, managed by C. F. G. Masterman, along with Arnold Bennett, G. K. Chesterton, John Galsworthy, Hilaire Belloc and Gilbert Murray. Ford wrote two propaganda books for Masterman; &quot;When Blood is Their Argument: An Analysis of Prussian Culture&quot; (1915), with the help of Richard Aldington, and &quot;Between St. Dennis and St. George: A Sketch of Three Civilizations&quot; (1915).

After writing the two propaganda books, Ford enlisted at 41 years of age into the Welsh Regiment of the British Army on 30 July 1915. He was sent to France. Ford&#x27;s combat experiences and his previous propaganda activities inspired his tetralogy &quot;Parade&#x27;s End&quot; (1924–1928), set in England and on the Western Front before, during and after World War I.

Ford wrote dozens of novels as well as essays, poetry, memoirs and literary criticism. He collaborated with Joseph Conrad on three novels, &quot;The Inheritors&quot; (1901), &quot;Romance&quot; (1903) and &quot;The Nature of a Crime&quot; (1924, although written much earlier). During the three to five years after this direct collaboration, Ford&#x27;s best known achievement was &quot;The Fifth Queen&quot; trilogy (1906–1908), historical novels based on the life of Katharine Howard, which Conrad termed, at the time, &quot;the swan song of historical romance.&quot;
Ford&#x27;s poem &quot;Antwerp&quot; (1915) was praised by T. S. Eliot as &quot;the only good poem I have met with on the subject of the war&quot;.

Ford&#x27;s novel &quot;Ladies Whose Bright Eyes&quot; (1911, extensively revised in 1935) is a time travel novel, like Twain&#x27;s classic &quot;A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur&#x27;s Court&quot;, only dramatising the difficulties, not the rewards, of such idealised situations.

When the Spanish Civil War broke out, Ford took the side of the left Republican faction, declaring: &quot;I am unhesitatingly for the existing Spanish Government and against Franco&#x27;s attempt—on every ground of feeling and reason ... Mr Franco wishes to establish a government resting on the arms of Moors, Germans, Italians. Its success must be contrary to world conscience.&quot; His opinion of Mussolini and Hitler was likewise negative, and he offered to sign a manifesto against Nazism.

==Promotion of literature==
In 1908, Ford founded &quot;The English Review&quot;. Ford published works by Thomas Hardy, H. G. Wells, Joseph Conrad, Henry James, May Sinclair, John Galsworthy and W. B. Yeats; and debuted works of Ezra Pound, Wyndham Lewis, D. H. Lawrence and Norman Douglas. Ezra Pound and other Modernist poets in London in the teens particularly valued Ford&#x27;s poetry as exemplifying treatment of modern subjects in contemporary diction. In 1924, he founded &quot;The Transatlantic Review&quot;, a journal with great influence on modern literature. Staying with the artistic community in the Latin Quarter of Paris, Ford befriended James Joyce, Ernest Hemingway, Gertrude Stein, Ezra Pound and Jean Rhys, all of whom he would publish (Ford was the model for the character Braddocks in Hemingway&#x27;s &quot;The Sun Also Rises&quot;). Basil Bunting worked as Ford&#x27;s assistant on the magazine.

As a critic, Ford is known for remarking &quot;Open the book to page ninety-nine and read, and the quality of the whole will be revealed to you.&quot; George Seldes, in his book &quot;Witness to a Century&quot;, describes Ford (&quot;probably in 1932&quot;) recalling his writing collaboration with Joseph Conrad, and the lack of acknowledgment by publishers of his status as co-author. Seldes recounts Ford&#x27;s disappointment with Hemingway: &quot;&#x27;and he disowns me now that he has become better known than I am.&#x27; Tears now came to Ford&#x27;s eyes.&quot; Ford says, &quot;I helped Joseph Conrad, I helped Hemingway. I helped a dozen, a score of writers, and many of them have beaten me. I&#x27;m now an old man and I&#x27;ll die without making a name like Hemingway.&quot; Seldes observes, &quot;At this climax Ford began to sob. Then he began to cry.&quot;

Hemingway devoted a chapter of his Parisian memoir &quot;A Moveable Feast&quot; to an encounter with Ford at a café in Paris during the early 1920s. He describes Ford &quot;as upright as an ambulatory, well clothed, up-ended hogshead.&quot;

During a later sojourn in the United States, Ford was involved with Allen Tate, Caroline Gordon, Katherine Anne Porter and Robert Lowell (who was then a student). Ford was always a champion of new literature and literary experimentation. In 1929, he published &quot;The English Novel: From the Earliest Days to the Death of Joseph Conrad&quot;, a brisk and accessible overview of the history of English novels. He had an affair with Jean Rhys, which ended acrimoniously, which Rhys fictionalised in her novel &quot;Quartet&quot;.

==Reception==
Ford is best remembered for his novels &quot;The Good Soldier&quot; (1915), the &quot;Parade&#x27;s End&quot; tetralogy (1924–1928) and &quot;The Fifth Queen&quot; trilogy (1906–1908). &quot;The Good Soldier&quot; is frequently included among the great literature of the 20th century, including the Modern Library 100 Best Novels, &quot;The Observer&quot;′s &quot;100 Greatest Novels of All Time&quot;, and &quot;The Guardian&quot;′s &quot;1000 novels everyone must read&quot;. The &quot;Parade&#x27;s End&quot; tetralogy was made into an acclaimed BBC/HBO 5 part TV series in 2012, starring Benedict Cumberbatch and scripted by Tom Stoppard.

Anthony Burgess described Ford as the &quot;greatest British novelist&quot; of the 20th century. Graham Greene was also a great admirer, and more recently Julian Barnes who has written essays about Ford and his work. Professor Max Saunders is the author of an authoritative biography of Ford, published in two volumes by Oxford University Press in 1996, followed up by a single volume focusing on two of Ford&#x27;s novels, &quot;The Good Soldier&quot; (1915), the &quot;Parade&#x27;s End&quot; tetralogy (1924–1928), in 2023. Saunders has also edited some of Ford&#x27;s oeuvre reissued by the Carcanet Press.

== Selected works ==

* &quot;The Shifting of the Fire&quot;, as H. Ford Hueffer, Unwin, 1892.
* &quot;The Questions at the Well&quot; as Fenil Haig,1893
* &quot;The Brown Owl&quot;, as H. Ford Hueffer, Unwin, 1892.
* &quot;The Queen Who Flew: A Fairy Tale&quot;, Bliss Sands &amp; Foster, 1894.
* &quot;Ford Madox Brown : a record of his life and work&quot;, as H. Ford Hueffer, Longmans, Green, 1896.
* &quot;The Cinque Ports&quot;, Blackwood, 1900.
* &quot;The Inheritors: An Extravagant Story&quot;, Joseph Conrad and Ford M. Hueffer, Heinemann, 1901.
* &quot;Rossetti&quot;, Duckworth, [1902].
* &quot;Romance&quot;, Joseph Conrad and Ford M. Hueffer, Smith Elder, 1903.
* &quot;The Benefactor&quot;, Langham, 1905.
* &quot;The Soul of London: A Survey of the Modern City&quot;, Alston Rivers, 1905.
* &quot;The Heart of the Country: A Survey of a Modern Land&quot;, Alston Rivers, 1906.
* &quot;The Fifth Queen&quot; (Part One of &quot;The Fifth Queen&quot; trilogy), Alston Rivers, 1906.
* &quot;Privy Seal&quot; (Part Two of &quot;The Fifth Queen&quot; trilogy), Alston Rivers, 1907.
* &quot;The Spirit of the People: An Analysis of the English Mind&quot;, Alston Rivers, 1907.
* &quot;An English Girl&quot;, Methuen, 1907.
* &quot;The Fifth Queen Crowned&quot; (Part Three of &quot;The Fifth Queen&quot; trilogy), Nash, 1908.
* &quot;Mr Apollo&quot;, Methuen, 1908.
* &quot;The Half Moon&quot;, Nash, 1909.
* &quot;A Call&quot;, Chatto, 1910.
* &quot;The Portrait&quot;, Methuen, 1910.
* &quot;The Critical Attitude&quot;, as Ford Madox Hueffer, Duckworth 1911.
* &quot;The Simple Life Limited&quot;, as Daniel Chaucer, Lane, 1911.
* &quot;Ladies Whose Bright Eyes&quot;, Constable, 1911 (extensively revised in 1935).
* &quot;The Panel: A Sheer Comedy&quot;, Constable, 1912 (published in the U.S. as &quot;Ring for Nancy: A Sheer Comedy&quot;).
* &quot;The New Humpty Dumpty&quot;, as Daniel Chaucer, Lane, 1912.
* &quot;Henry James&quot;, Secker, 1913.
* &quot;Mr Fleight&quot;, Latimer, 1913.
* &quot;The Young Lovell&quot;, Chatto, 1913.
* &quot;Antwerp&quot; (eight-page poem), The Poetry Bookshop, 1915.
* &quot;Henry James, A Critical Study&quot; (1915).
* &quot;Between St. Dennis and St. George&quot;, Hodder, 1915.
* &quot;The Good Soldier&quot;, Lane, 1915.
* &quot;Zeppelin Nights&quot;, with Violet Hunt, Lane, 1915.
* &quot;The Marsden Case&quot;, Duckworth, 1923.
* &quot;Women and Men&quot;, Paris, 1923.
* &quot;Mr Bosphorous&quot;, Duckworth, 1923.
* &quot;The Nature of a Crime&quot;, with Joseph Conrad, Duckworth, 1924.
* &quot;Joseph Conrad, A Personal Remembrance&quot;, Little, Brown and Company, 1924.
* &quot;Some Do Not . . .&quot;, (First in &quot;Parade&#x27;s End&quot; tetralogy) Duckworth, 1924.
* &quot;No More Parades&quot;, Duckworth, 1925.
* &quot;A Man Could Stand Up --&quot;, Duckworth, 1926.
* &quot; A Mirror To France. Duckworth. 1926
* &quot;New York is Not America&quot;, Duckworth, 1927.
* &quot;New York Essays&quot;, Rudge, 1927.
* &quot;New Poems&quot;, Rudge, 1927.
* &quot;Last Post&quot;, (Fourth in &quot;Parade&#x27;s End&quot; tetralogy) Duckworth, 1928.
* &quot;A Little Less Than Gods&quot;, Duckworth, [1928].
* &quot;No Enemy&quot;, Macaulay, 1929.
* &quot;The English Novel: From the Earliest Days to the Death of Joseph Conrad&quot; (One Hour Series), Lippincott, 1929; Constable, 1930.
* &quot;Return to Yesterday&quot;, Liveright, 1932.
* &quot;When the Wicked Man&quot;, Cape, 1932.
* &quot;The Rash Act&quot;, Cape, 1933.
* &quot;It Was the Nightingale&quot;, Lippincott, 1933.
* &quot;Henry for Hugh&quot;, Lippincott, 1934.
* &quot;Provence&quot;, Unwin, 1935.
* &quot;Ladies Whose Bright Eyes&quot; (revised version), 1935
* &quot;Portraits from Life: Memories and Criticism of Henry James, Joseph Conrad, Thomas Hardy, H.G. Wells, Stephen Crane, D. H. Lawrence, John Galsworthy, Ivan Turgenev, W. H. Hudson, Theodore Dreiser, A. C. Swinburne&quot;, Houghton Mifflin Company Boston, 1937.
* &quot;Great Trade Route&quot;, OUP, 1937.
* &quot;Vive Le Roy&quot;, Unwin, 1937.
* &quot;The March of Literature&quot;, Dial, 1938.
* &quot;Selected Poems&quot;, Randall, 1971.
* &quot;Your Mirror to My Times&quot;, Holt, 1971.
* &quot;A History of Our Own Times&quot;, Indiana University Press, 1988.
==References==
==Further reading==
* Attridge, John, &quot;Steadily and Whole: Ford Madox Ford and Modernist Sociology,&quot; in &quot;Modernism/modernity&quot; 15:2 ( April 2008), 297–315.
* Contains a sharp, critical biographical sketch of Ford.
* Goldring, Douglas, &quot;The Last Pre-Raphaelite: A Record of the Life and Writings of Ford Madox Ford&quot;. Macdonald &amp; Co., 1948
* Hawkes, Rob, &quot;Ford Madox Ford and the Misfit Moderns: Edwardian Fiction and the First World War&quot;. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2012. 
* Judd, Alan, &quot;Ford Madox Ford&quot;. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1991.
* MacShane, Frank (ed.), &quot;Ford Madox Ford: The Critical Heritage&quot;. Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul, 1972
* Mizener, Arthur, &quot;The Saddest Story: A Biography of Ford Madox Ford&quot;. World Publishing Co., 1971
* Saunders, Max, &quot;Ford Madox Ford: A Dual Life&quot;, 2 vols. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1996. and 
* Thirlwell, Angela, &quot;Into the Frame: The Four Loves of Ford Madox Brown&quot;. London, Chatto &amp; Windus, 2010. 

== External links ==
* 
* 
* 
* Ford Madox Ford Society
* Literary Encyclopedia entry on Ford
* &quot;The Good Soldier&quot; complete; 
* LitWeb.net: Ford Madox Ford Biography
* International Ford Madox Ford Studies
* The Ford Madox Ford Papers at Washington University in St. Louis
* The Papers of Ford Madox Ford at Dartmouth College Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q537112" start="0" end="15" title="Ford Madox Ford" label="Ford Madox Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q537112" start="20" end="61" title="Ford Madox Ford" label="Joseph Leopold Ford Hermann Madox Hueffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732245" start="170" end="188" title="The English Review" label="The English Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769933" start="205" end="229" title="The Transatlantic Review (1924)" label="The Transatlantic Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q767802" start="370" end="386" title="The Good Soldier" label="The Good Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579026" start="411" end="428" title="Parade&amp;#x27;s End" label="Parade&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443637" start="435" end="444" title="tetralogy" label="tetralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733772" start="467" end="482" title="The Fifth Queen" label="The Fifth Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q149010" start="489" end="496" title="trilogy" label="trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q671613" start="624" end="661" title="Modern Library&amp;#x27;s 100 Best Novels" label="Modern Library&amp;#x27;s 100 Best Novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="669" end="681" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="745" end="757" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030640" start="864" end="885" title="Catherine Madox Brown" label="Catherine Madox Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502845" start="890" end="905" title="Francis Hueffer" label="Francis Hueffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087680" start="944" end="964" title="Oliver Madox Hueffer" label="Oliver Madox Hueffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43400958" start="984" end="998" title="Juliet Soskice" label="Juliet Hueffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q333387" start="1040" end="1053" title="Frank Soskice" label="Frank Soskice"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="1111" end="1120" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1188" end="1209" title=":de:Johann Hermann Hüffer" label="Johann Hermann Hüffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8614" start="1231" end="1241" title="Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57307" start="1259" end="1286" title="Annette von Droste-Hülshoff" label="Annette von Droste-Hülshoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="1337" end="1351" title="Pre-Raphaelite" label="Pre-Raphaelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q319843" start="1360" end="1376" title="Ford Madox Brown" label="Ford Madox Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15449332" start="1461" end="1477" title="Lucy Madox Brown" label="Lucy Madox Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q719428" start="1491" end="1515" title="William Michael Rossetti" label="William Michael Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088095" start="1530" end="1553" title="Olivia Rossetti Agresti" label="Olivia Rossetti Agresti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894634" start="1679" end="1704" title="University College School" label="University College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q121720480" start="2040" end="2056" title="Elsie Martindale Hueffer" label="Elsie Martindale"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="2085" end="2095" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q642884" start="2109" end="2119" title="Bonnington" label="Bonnington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026871" start="2152" end="2162" title="Winchelsea" label="Winchelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="2295" end="2308" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q206534" start="2310" end="2323" title="Stephen Crane" label="Stephen Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359140" start="2325" end="2337" title="W. H. Hudson" label="W. H. Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="2339" end="2350" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="2370" end="2381" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q174589" start="2410" end="2421" title="agoraphobic" label="agoraphobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677011" start="2611" end="2629" title="Violet Hunt" label="Isobel Violet Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732245" start="2682" end="2700" title="The English Review" label="The English Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607043" start="3495" end="3507" title="Stella Bowen" label="Stella Bowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154209" start="3931" end="3943" title="Janice Biala" label="Janice Biala"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087996" start="4131" end="4145" title="Olivet College" label="Olivet College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710192" start="4149" end="4155" title="Olivet, Michigan" label="Olivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q231720" start="4191" end="4199" title="Honfleur" label="Honfleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q209021" start="4252" end="4261" title="Deauville" label="Deauville"/>
<link wikidata="Q767802" start="4355" end="4371" title="The Good Soldier" label="The Good Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q473432" start="4565" end="4574" title="flashback (literary technique)" label="flashback"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689" start="4738" end="4750" title="French literature" label="French novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="4814" end="4818" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="4978" end="4996" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5115" end="5126" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765280" start="5146" end="5167" title="War Propaganda Bureau" label="War Propaganda Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898523" start="5180" end="5198" title="C. F. G. Masterman" label="C. F. G. Masterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q314158" start="5211" end="5225" title="Arnold Bennett" label="Arnold Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="5227" end="5243" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q82248" start="5245" end="5260" title="John Galsworthy" label="John Galsworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333106" start="5262" end="5276" title="Hilaire Belloc" label="Hilaire Belloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q538478" start="5281" end="5295" title="Gilbert Murray" label="Gilbert Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q514998" start="5443" end="5460" title="Richard Aldington" label="Richard Aldington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980559" start="5636" end="5650" title="Welsh Regiment" label="Welsh Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443637" start="5794" end="5803" title="tetralogy" label="tetralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579026" start="5810" end="5827" title="Parade&amp;#x27;s End" label="Parade&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="5873" end="5886" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="6034" end="6047" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742035" start="6071" end="6085" title="The Inheritors (Joseph Conrad and Ford Madox Ford)" label="The Inheritors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362392" start="6106" end="6113" title="Romance (novel)" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161614" start="6137" end="6158" title="The Nature of a Crime" label="The Nature of a Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733772" start="6313" end="6328" title="The Fifth Queen" label="The Fifth Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188926" start="6395" end="6411" title="Katherine Howard" label="Katharine Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="6555" end="6566" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15033313" start="6669" end="6693" title="Ladies Whose Bright Eyes" label="Ladies Whose Bright Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="6741" end="6752" title="time travel" label="time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="6765" end="6770" title="Mark Twain" label="Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q848612" start="6792" end="6840" title="A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur&amp;#x27;s Court" label="A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur&amp;#x27;s Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="6940" end="6957" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456351" start="7000" end="7018" title="Republican faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Republican faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732245" start="7484" end="7502" title="The English Review" label="The English Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="7534" end="7546" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="7548" end="7559" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="7561" end="7574" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="7576" end="7587" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131497" start="7589" end="7601" title="May Sinclair" label="May Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q82248" start="7603" end="7618" title="John Galsworthy" label="John Galsworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="7623" end="7634" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="7657" end="7667" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q780102" start="7669" end="7682" title="Wyndham Lewis" label="Wyndham Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="7684" end="7698" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243973" start="7703" end="7717" title="Norman Douglas" label="Norman Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="8059" end="8064" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="8082" end="8093" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="8095" end="8111" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q188385" start="8113" end="8127" title="Gertrude Stein" label="Gertrude Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q230598" start="8144" end="8153" title="Jean Rhys" label="Jean Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q501351" start="8258" end="8276" title="The Sun Also Rises" label="The Sun Also Rises"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886803" start="8285" end="8298" title="Basil Bunting" label="Basil Bunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508248" start="8500" end="8513" title="George Seldes" label="George Seldes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8533" end="8553" title="Witness to a Century" label="Witness to a Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052363" start="9281" end="9297" title="A Moveable Feast" label="A Moveable Feast"/>
<link wikidata="Q975706" start="9534" end="9544" title="Allen Tate" label="Allen Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045085" start="9546" end="9561" title="Caroline Gordon" label="Caroline Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q236958" start="9563" end="9584" title="Katherine Anne Porter" label="Katherine Anne Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q981448" start="9589" end="9602" title="Robert Lowell" label="Robert Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q230598" start="9899" end="9908" title="Jean Rhys" label="Jean Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359041" start="9981" end="9988" title="Quartet (Jean Rhys novel)" label="Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q767802" start="10056" end="10072" title="The Good Soldier" label="The Good Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579026" start="10097" end="10114" title="Parade&amp;#x27;s End" label="Parade&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443637" start="10121" end="10130" title="tetralogy" label="tetralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733772" start="10153" end="10168" title="The Fifth Queen" label="The Fifth Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q149010" start="10175" end="10182" title="trilogy" label="trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081513" start="10575" end="10584" title="Parade&amp;#x27;s End (TV series)" label="TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q244674" start="10603" end="10623" title="Benedict Cumberbatch" label="Benedict Cumberbatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q294773" start="10640" end="10652" title="Tom Stoppard" label="Tom Stoppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q217619" start="10655" end="10670" title="Anthony Burgess" label="Anthony Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="10752" end="10765" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q295431" start="10810" end="10823" title="Julian Barnes" label="Julian Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q58306088" start="10882" end="10894" title="Max Saunders" label="Max Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q767802" start="11085" end="11101" title="The Good Soldier" label="The Good Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579026" start="11126" end="11143" title="Parade&amp;#x27;s End" label="Parade&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443637" start="11150" end="11159" title="tetralogy" label="tetralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038119" start="11250" end="11264" title="Carcanet Press" label="Carcanet Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742035" start="11727" end="11741" title="The Inheritors (Joseph Conrad and Ford Madox Ford)" label="The Inheritors"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="11771" end="11784" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362392" start="11874" end="11881" title="Romance (novel)" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="11889" end="11902" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735870" start="12051" end="12064" title="Alston Rivers" label="Alston Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733772" start="12209" end="12224" title="The Fifth Queen" label="The Fifth Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733772" start="12306" end="12321" title="The Fifth Queen" label="The Fifth Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733772" start="12558" end="12573" title="The Fifth Queen" label="The Fifth Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15033313" start="12916" end="12940" title="Ladies Whose Bright Eyes" label="Ladies Whose Bright Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q767802" start="13510" end="13526" title="The Good Soldier" label="The Good Soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677011" start="13582" end="13593" title="Violet Hunt" label="Violet Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161614" start="13752" end="13773" title="The Nature of a Crime" label="The Nature of a Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="13786" end="13799" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559385" start="13912" end="13929" title="Some Do Not . . ." label="Some Do Not . . ."/>
<link wikidata="Q7044569" start="14013" end="14028" title="No More Parades (novel)" label="No More Parades"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658064" start="14061" end="14084" title="A Man Could Stand Up --" label="A Man Could Stand Up --"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494582" start="14300" end="14309" title="Last Post (novel)" label="Last Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889120" start="15673" end="15692" title="Modernism/modernity" label="Modernism/modernity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50637" wikidata="Q149851" url="?curid=50637" title="Sequoiadendron giganteum">
<text>Sequoiadendron giganteum (also known as the giant sequoia, giant redwood, Sierra redwood or Wellingtonia) is a species of coniferous tree, classified in the family Cupressaceae in the subfamily Sequoioideae. Giant sequoia specimens are the most massive trees on Earth. They are native to the groves on the western slopes of the Sierra Nevada mountain range of California but have been introduced, planted, and grown around the world.

The giant sequoia is listed as an endangered species by the IUCN with fewer than 80,000 remaining in its native California. The tree was introduced to the U.K. in 1853, and by now might have 5,000 trees growing there where it is more commonly known as Wellingtonia after the Duke of Wellington. 

The giant sequoia grow to an average height of 50–85 m (164–279 ft) with trunk diameters ranging from 6–8 m (20–26 ft). Record trees have been measured at 94.8 m (311 ft) tall. The specimen known to have the greatest diameter at breast height is the General Grant tree at 8.8 m (28.9 ft). Giant sequoias are among the oldest living organisms on Earth. The oldest known giant sequoia is 3,200–3,266 years old.

Wood from mature giant sequoias is fibrous and brittle; trees would often shatter after they were felled. The wood is unsuitable for construction and instead is used for fence posts or match sticks. The giant sequoia is a very popular ornamental tree in many parts of the world.

==Etymology==
The etymology of the genus name was long presumedinitially in &quot;The Yosemite Book&quot; by Josiah Whitney in 1868to be in honor of Sequoyah (1767–1843), who was the inventor of the Cherokee syllabary. An etymological study published in 2012 debunked that &quot;American myth,&quot; concluding that Austrian Stephen L. Endlicher derived the name from the Latin word &quot;sequi&quot; (meaning &quot;to follow&quot;), because the number of seeds per cone in the newly classified genus aligned in mathematical sequence with the other four genera in the suborder.

==Description==
Giant sequoia specimens are the most massive individual trees in the world. They grow to an average height of with trunk diameters ranging from . Record trees have been measured at tall. Trunk diameters of have been claimed via research figures taken out of context. The specimen known to have the greatest diameter at breast height is the General Grant tree at . Between 2014 and 2016, it is claimed that specimens of coast redwood were found to have greater trunk diameters than all known giant sequoias – though this has not been independently verified or affirmed in any academic literature. The trunks of coast redwoods taper at lower heights than those of giant sequoias which have more columnar trunks that maintain larger diameters to greater heights.

The oldest known giant sequoia is 3,200–3,266 years old based on dendrochronology. That tree has been verified to have the fourth-largest lifespan of any tree, after individuals of Great Basin bristlecone pine and alerce. Giant sequoia bark is fibrous, furrowed, and may be thick at the base of the columnar trunk. The sap contains tannic acid, which provides significant protection from fire damage. The leaves are evergreen, awl-shaped, long, and arranged spirally on the shoots.
The giant sequoia regenerates by seed. The seed cones are long and mature in 18–20 months, though they typically remain green and closed for as long as 20 years. Each cone has 30–50 spirally arranged scales, with several seeds on each scale, giving an average of 230 seeds per cone. Seeds are dark brown, long, and broad, with a wide, yellow-brown wing along each side. Some seeds shed when the cone scales shrink during hot weather in late summer, but most are liberated by insect damage or when the cone dries from the heat of fire. The trees do not begin to bear cones until they are 12 years old.

Trees may produce sprouts from their stumps subsequent to injury, until about 20 years old; however, shoots do not form on the stumps of more mature trees as they do on coast redwoods. Giant sequoias of all ages may sprout from their boles when branches are lost to fire or breakage.

A large tree may have as many as 11,000 cones. Cone production is greatest in the upper portion of the canopy. A mature giant sequoia disperses an estimated 300,000–400,000 seeds annually. The winged seeds may fly as far as from the parent tree.

Lower branches die readily from being shaded, but trees younger than 100 years retain most of their dead branches. Trunks of mature trees in groves are generally free of branches to a height of , but solitary trees retain lower branches.
==Distribution==

The natural distribution of giant sequoias is restricted to a limited area of the western Sierra Nevada, California. As a paleoendemic species, they occur in scattered groves, with a total of 81 groves (see list of sequoia groves for a full inventory), comprising a total area of only . Nowhere does it grow in pure stands, although in a few small areas, stands do approach a pure condition. The northern two-thirds of its range, from the American River in Placer County southward to the Kings River, has only eight disjunct groves. The remaining southern groves are concentrated between the Kings River and the Deer Creek Grove in southern Tulare County. Groves range in size from with 20,000 mature trees, to small groves with only six living trees. Many are protected in Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks and Giant Sequoia National Monument.

The giant sequoia is usually found in a humid climate characterized by dry summers and snowy winters. Most giant sequoia groves are on granitic-based residual and alluvial soils. The elevation of the giant sequoia groves generally ranges from in the north, to to the south. Giant sequoias generally occur on the south-facing sides of northern mountains, and on the northern faces of more southerly slopes.

High levels of reproduction are not necessary to maintain the present population levels. Few groves, however, have sufficient young trees to maintain the present density of mature giant sequoias for the future. The majority of giant sequoia groves are currently undergoing a gradual decline in density since European settlement.

===Pre-historic range===
While the present day distribution of this species is limited to a small area of California, it was once much more widely distributed in prehistoric times, and was a reasonably common species in North American and Eurasian coniferous forests until its range was greatly reduced by the last ice age. Older fossil specimens reliably identified as giant sequoia have been found in Cretaceous era sediments from a number of sites in North America and Europe, and even as far afield as New Zealand and Australia.

===Artificial groves===

In 1974, a group of giant sequoias was planted by the United States Forest Service in the San Jacinto Mountains of Southern California in the immediate aftermath of a wildfire that left the landscape barren. The giant sequoias were rediscovered in 2008 by botanist Rudolf Schmid and his daughter Mena Schmidt while hiking on Black Mountain Trail through Hall Canyon. Black Mountain Grove is home to over 150 giant sequoias, some of which stand over tall. This grove is not to be confused with the Black Mountain Grove in the southern Sierra. Nearby Lake Fulmor Grove is home to seven giant sequoias, the largest of which is tall. The two groves are located approximately southeast of the southernmost naturally occurring giant sequoia grove, Deer Creek Grove.

It was later discovered that the United States Forest Service had planted giant sequoias across Southern California. However, the giant sequoias of Black Mountain Grove and nearby Lake Fulmor Grove are the only ones known to be reproducing and propagating free of human intervention. The conditions of the San Jacinto Mountains mimic those of the Sierra Nevada, allowing the trees to naturally propagate throughout the canyon.

==Ecology==
Giant sequoias are in many ways adapted to forest fires. Their bark is unusually fire resistant, and their cones will normally open immediately after a fire. Giant sequoias are a pioneer species, and are having difficulty reproducing in their original habitat (and very rarely reproduce in cultivation) due to the seeds only being able to grow successfully in full sun and in mineral-rich soils, free from competing vegetation. Although the seeds can germinate in moist needle humus in the spring, these seedlings will die as the duff dries in the summer. They therefore require periodic wildfire to clear competing vegetation and soil humus before successful regeneration can occur. Without fire, shade-loving species will crowd out young sequoia seedlings, and sequoia seeds will not germinate. These trees require large amounts of water and are often concentrated near streams. Their growth is dependent on soil moisture. Squirrels, chipmunks, finches and sparrows consume the freshly sprouted seedlings, preventing their growth.

Fires also bring hot air high into the canopy via convection, which in turn dries and opens the cones. The subsequent release of large quantities of seeds coincides with the optimal postfire seedbed conditions. Loose ground ash may also act as a cover to protect the fallen seeds from ultraviolet radiation damage. Due to fire suppression efforts and livestock grazing during the early and mid-20th century, low-intensity fires no longer occurred naturally in many groves, and still do not occur in some groves today. The suppression of fires leads to ground fuel build-up and the dense growth of fire-sensitive white fir, which increases the risk of more intense fires that can use the firs as ladders to threaten mature giant sequoia crowns. Natural fires may also be important in keeping carpenter ants in check.
In 1970, the National Park Service began controlled burns of its groves to correct these problems. Current policies also allow natural fires to burn. One of these untamed burns severely damaged the second-largest tree in the world, the Washington tree, in September 2003, 45 days after the fire started. This damage made it unable to withstand the snowstorm of January 2005, leading to the collapse of over half the trunk.

In addition to fire, two animal agents also assist giant sequoia seed release. The more significant of the two is a longhorn beetle (&quot;Phymatodes nitidus&quot;) that lays eggs on the cones, into which the larvae then bore holes. Reduction of the vascular water supply to the cone scales allows the cones to dry and open for the seeds to fall. Cones damaged by the beetles during the summer will slowly open over the next several months. Some research indicates many cones, particularly higher in the crowns, may need to be partially dried by beetle damage before fire can fully open them. The other agent is the Douglas squirrel (&quot;Tamiasciurus douglasi&quot;) that gnaws on the fleshy green scales of younger cones. The squirrels are active year-round, and some seeds are dislodged and dropped as the cone is eaten.

More than 30 identified species of bird have been observed living in giant sequoia groves.

==Genome==
The genome of the giant sequoia was published in 2020. The size of the giant sequoia genome is 8.125 Gbp (8.125 billion base pairs) which were assembled into eleven chromosome-scale scaffolds, the largest of any organism at the time of publication.

This is the first genome sequenced in the Cupressaceae family, and it provides insights into disease resistance and survival for this robust species on a genetic basis. The genome was found to contain over 900 complete or partial predicted NLR genes used by plants to prevent the spread of infection by microbial pathogens.

The genome sequence was extracted from a single fertilized seed harvested from a 1,360-year-old tree specimen in Sequoia/Kings Canyon National Park identified as SEGI 21. It was sequenced over a three-year period by researchers at University of California, Davis, Johns Hopkins University, University of Connecticut, and Northern Arizona University and was supported by grants from Save the Redwoods League and the National Institute of Food and Agriculture as part of a species conservation, restoration and management effort.

==Discovery and naming==

===Discovery===
The giant sequoia first gained widespread attention in 1852 when grizzly hunter Augustus T. Dowd discovered the Discovery Tree in Calaveras Grove, marking the species&#x27; first widely publicized discovery by non-natives. The tree was cut down in 1853 and exhibited across the United States. The story of Dowd&#x27;s discovery gained further notoriety following a 1859 feature in &quot;Hutchings&#x27; Illustrated California Magazine&quot;, which promoted tourism to the grove.

Before Augustus T. Dowd&#x27;s well-known discovery in 1852, there were three earlier encounters with giant sequoias. The first known mention of the giant sequoia by a European American was in 1833 by explorer J.K. Leonard, who recorded it in his diary. While Leonard did not specify a location, his travels likely took him through Calaveras Grove, but this observation remained unnoticed.

In 1850, John M. Wooster encountered a giant sequoia at Calaveras Grove and carved his initials into the bark of the &quot;Hercules&quot; tree. A year later, in 1851, Robert Eccleston traveled through Nelder Grove with a small detachment of the Mariposa Battalion during the Mariposa War. Similar to Leonard&#x27;s experience, these encounters also received no publicity.

===Naming===
The first scientific naming of the species was by John Lindley in December 1853, who named it &quot;Wellingtonia gigantea&quot;, without realizing this was an invalid name under the botanical code as the name &quot;Wellingtonia&quot; had already been used earlier for another unrelated plant (&quot;Wellingtonia arnottiana&quot; in the family Sabiaceae). The name &quot;Wellingtonia&quot; has persisted in England as a common name. The following year, Joseph Decaisne transferred it to the same genus as the coast redwood, naming it &quot;Sequoia gigantea&quot;, but this name was also invalid, having been applied earlier (in 1847, by Endlicher) to the coast redwood. The name &quot;Washingtonia californica&quot; was also applied to it by Winslow in 1854; this name too is invalid, since it was already used for the palm genus &quot;Washingtonia&quot;.

In 1907, it was placed by Carl Ernst Otto Kuntze in the otherwise fossil genus &quot;Steinhauera&quot;, but doubt as to whether the giant sequoia is related to the fossil originally so named makes this name invalid.

These nomenclatural oversights were corrected in 1939 by John Theodore Buchholz, who also pointed out the giant sequoia is distinct from the coast redwood at the genus level and coined the name &quot;Sequoiadendron giganteum&quot; for it.

The etymology of the genus name has been presumedinitially in &quot;The Yosemite Book&quot; by Josiah Whitney in 1868to be in honor of Sequoyah (1767–1843), who was the inventor of the Cherokee syllabary. An etymological study published in 2012, however, concluded that the name was more likely to have originated from the Latin &quot;sequi&quot; (meaning &quot;to follow&quot;) since the number of seeds per cone in the newly classified genus fell in mathematical sequence with the other four genera in the suborder.

John Muir wrote of the species in about 1870:
&quot;Do behold the King in his glory, King Sequoia! Behold! Behold! seems all I can say. Some time ago I left all for Sequoia and have been and am at his feet, fasting and praying for light, for is he not the greatest light in the woods, in the world? Where are such columns of sunshine, tangible, accessible, terrestrialized?&#x27;

==Uses==

Wood from mature giant sequoias is highly resistant to decay, but due to being fibrous and brittle, it is generally unsuitable for construction. From the 1880s through the 1920s, logging took place in many groves in spite of marginal commercial returns. The Hume-Bennett Lumber Company was the last to harvest giant sequoia, going out of business in 1924. Due to their weight and brittleness, trees would often shatter when they hit the ground, wasting much of the wood. Loggers attempted to cushion the impact by digging trenches and filling them with branches. Still, as little as 50% of the timber is estimated to have made it from groves to the mill. The wood was used mainly for shingles and fence posts, or even for matchsticks.

Pictures of the once majestic trees broken and abandoned in formerly pristine groves, and the thought of the giants put to such modest use, spurred the public outcry that caused most of the groves to be preserved as protected land. The public can visit an example of 1880s clear-cutting at Big Stump Grove near General Grant Grove. As late as the 1980s, some immature trees were logged in Sequoia National Forest, publicity of which helped lead to the creation of Giant Sequoia National Monument.

The wood from immature trees is less brittle, with recent tests on young plantation-grown trees showing it similar to coast redwood wood in quality. This is resulting in some interest in cultivating giant sequoia as a very high-yielding timber crop tree, both in California and also in parts of western Europe, where it may grow more efficiently than coast redwoods. In the northwest United States, some entrepreneurs have also begun growing giant sequoias for Christmas trees. Besides these attempts at tree farming, the principal economic uses for giant sequoia today are tourism and horticulture.

== Cultural symbol ==
Giant sequoias, native to California and discovered during the final phase of frontier expansion, hold a distinctive place in American culture. They embody the complex interplay of human ambition, environmental exploitation, and the emergence of the modern conservation movement.

In the 19th century, sequoias such as the Discovery Tree and Forest King were cut down and transported to urban centers and world expositions as exhibition trees. These displays highlighted the grandeur of the American frontier while exposing humanity’s capacity to exploit nature. The paradox of celebrating these giants’ majesty while destroying them sparked debates that eventually led to the establishment of Sequoia and Yosemite National Parks.

The creation of tunnel trees, including the iconic Wawona Tree, further cemented the cultural legacy of the sequoias. By carving pathways through their immense trunks, Americans celebrated their ability to master the wilderness, embodying the spirit of exploration and progress that defined the nation&#x27;s expansion. These trees became popular tourist attractions during the rise of the automobile age, embodying the frontier spirit of exploration and progress. However, as the weakened trees began to collapse, they came to symbolize the unintended consequences of human ambition. Today, the California Tunnel Tree, the last surviving tunnel tree, protected in Mariposa Grove, stands as a relic of the past and a symbol of changing values.

Americans have also imbued the giant sequoia with sacred meaning. The General Grant Tree, for example, was named the &quot;Nation&#x27;s Christmas Tree&quot; by Calvin Coolidge in 1926 and later declared a national shrine by Dwight Eisenhower to honor the country’s war dead. It remains the only living object designated as a national shrine.

== Threats ==

Giant sequoias, once primarily threatened by logging, now face their greatest danger from the absence of regular fires. Fire suppression, severe wildfires, and competition from shade-tolerant species have disrupted the natural cycle that once relied on periodic wildfires to release seeds and clear undergrowth. 

Natural wildfires historically played a key role in sequoia reproduction, releasing seeds from cones and clearing undergrowth to create the open, nutrient-rich conditions needed for seedlings. Fire suppression over the last century has disrupted this cycle, limiting reproduction in many groves. Without regular fires, the buildup of fuel and the excessive growth of more fire-sensitive trees, like white fir, have increased the risk of devastating crown fires, which have already destroyed significant portions of the sequoia population.

Many destructive wildfires have hit giant sequoia groves in recent decades, including the McNally Fire in 2002, the Rough Fire in 2015, and the Railroad Fire in 2017. The Castle Fire in 2020 is estimated to have wiped out 10–14% of the giant sequoia population, or about 7,500 to 10,600 mature trees, possibly including the King Arthur Tree, one of the tallest known sequoias. In 2021, the KNP Complex and Windy Fire added to the damage, killing an estimated 3 to 5% more of the population. 

Controlled burns have been effective in protecting giant sequoias. In the 2022 Washburn Fire, officials credited prescribed burns in Yosemite National Park with limiting the fire’s intensity and sparing Mariposa Grove from major harm. Experts warn that to preserve healthy groves and prevent future destruction, the use of prescribed burns must increase significantly—by about 30 times the current levels.

==Around the world==
Giant sequoia is a very popular ornamental tree in many areas. It is successfully grown in most of western and southern Europe, the Pacific Northwest of North America, north to southwest British Columbia, the southern United States, southeast Australia, New Zealand and central-southern Chile. It is also grown, though less successfully, in parts of eastern North America.

Trees can withstand temperatures of −31 °C (−25 °F) or colder for short periods of time, provided the ground around the roots is insulated with either heavy snow or mulch. Outside its natural range, the foliage can suffer from damaging windburn.

A wide range of horticultural varieties have been selected, especially in Europe, including blue, compact blue, powder blue, hazel smith, pendulumor weepingvarieties, and grafted cultivars.
===France===
The tallest giant sequoia ever measured outside of the United States is a specimen planted near Ribeauvillé in France in 1856 and measured in 2014 at a height between and at age 158 years.

===United Kingdom===

The giant sequoia was first brought into cultivation in Britain in 1853 by the horticulturist Patrick Matthew of Perthshire from seeds sent by his botanist son John in California. A much larger shipment of seed collected from the Calaveras Grove by William Lobb, acting for the Veitch Nursery near Exeter, arrived in England in December 1853; seed from this batch was widely distributed throughout Europe.

Growth in Britain is very fast, with the tallest tree, at Benmore in southwest Scotland, reaching in 2014 at age 150 years, and several others from tall; the stoutest is around in girth and in diameter, in Perthshire. The Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, and in their second campus at Wakehurst, contain multiple large specimens of the species. Biddulph Grange Garden in Staffordshire holds a fine collection of both &quot;Sequoiadendron giganteum&quot; and &quot;Sequoia sempervirens&quot; (coast redwood). The General Sherman of California has a volume of ; by way of comparison, the largest giant sequoias in Great Britain have volumes no greater than , one example being the specimen in the New Forest.

&quot;Sequoiadendron giganteum&quot; has gained the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit.

An avenue of 218 giant sequoias was planted in 1865 near the town of Camberley, Surrey, England. The trees have since been surrounded by modern real estate development.

In 2024, there were 4,949 notable sequoias in the UK. There is uncertainty if this is an undercount or overcount of the trees. In addition there are an estimated 500,000 younger &quot;Sequoiadendron giganteum&quot; and &quot;Sequoia sempervirens&quot;. Growing conditions are generally more conducive for these trees than in their native range in the US.

===Germany===

Probably the oldest sequoia in Germany and possibly of continental Europe was planted in 1852 as a gift of the British Royal Family to the Landgraviate of Hesse-Darmstadt in a park near Bensheim. In 2015 it reached a height of 44.35 metres and a circumfereence of 5.94 metres and is praised for its beauty. It is also the largest sequoia in Germany.

King William I of Württemberg (1816–1864) imported seeds shortly before his death. In the greenhouses of the Wilhelma in Stuttgart grew between 5000 and 8000 seedlings. Thirty-five of those trees are still present in the Wilhelma. The seedlings got distributed to the whole country of Württemberg and elsewhere and planted on different soils, under various conditions and elevations for a long-time evaluation to find out if they are suitable for forestry. At least 135 of them still can be traced back to these seedlings.

Since then the tree is well established as ornamental tree in public parks and cemeteries, but also on private properties and can be found planted in small groups in the woods.

Two members of the German Dendrology Society, E. J. Martin and Illa Martin, introduced the giant sequoia into German forestry at the Sequoiafarm Kaldenkirchen in 1952.

===Italy===
Numerous giant sequoia were planted in Italy from 1860 through 1905. Several regions contain specimens that range from in height. The largest tree is in Roccavione, in the Piedmont, with a basal circumference of . One notable tree survived a tall flood wave in 1963 that was caused by a landslide at Vajont Dam. There are numerous giant sequoia in parks and reserves.

Growth rates in some areas of Europe are remarkable. One young tree in Italy reached tall and trunk diameter in 17 years.

===Northern and Central Europe===
Growth further northeast in Europe is limited by winter cold. In Denmark, where extreme winters can reach , the largest tree was tall and diameter in 1976 and is bigger today. One in Poland has purportedly survived temperatures down to with heavy snow cover.

Twenty-nine giant sequoias, measuring around in height, grow in Belgrade&#x27;s municipality of Lazarevac in Serbia.

The oldest &quot;Sequoiadendron&quot; in the Czech Republic, at , grows in Ratměřice u Votic castle garden.

In Slatina, Croatia, 32.5 m (107ft) tall giant sequoia grows in city park. Presumably seeded in 1890 and proclaimed as nature monument in 1967, now stands as a centerpiece in town&#x27;s educational, presentational and informational center with tourist facilities available. 

===United States and Canada===

Giant sequoias are grown successfully in the Pacific Northwest and southern US, and less successfully in eastern North America. Giant sequoia cultivation is very successful in the Pacific Northwest from western Oregon north to southwest British Columbia, with fast growth rates. In Washington and Oregon, it is common to find giant sequoias that have been successfully planted in both urban and rural areas. There are hundreds of sequoias planted on the Olympic Peninsula over the last 100 years and farms that have 50 or more planted 40 years ago or longer.

In Seattle, a sequoia stands as a prominent landmark at the entrance to Seattle&#x27;s downtown retail core. Other large specimens exceeding are located on the University of Washington and Seattle University campuses, in the Evergreen Washelli Memorial Park cemetery, and in the Leschi, Madrona, and Magnolia neighborhoods.

In the northeastern US there has been some limited success in growing the species, but growth is much slower there, and it is prone to &quot;Cercospora&quot; and &quot;Kabatina&quot; fungal diseases due to the hot, humid summer climate there. A tree at Blithewold Gardens, in Bristol, Rhode Island, is reported to be tall, reportedly the tallest in the New England states. The tree at the Tyler Arboretum in Delaware County, Pennsylvania, at may be the tallest in the northeast. Specimens also grow in the Arnold Arboretum in Boston, Massachusetts (planted 1972, 18 m tall in 1998), at Longwood Gardens near Wilmington, Delaware, in the New Jersey State Botanical Garden at Skylands in Ringwood State Park, Ringwood, New Jersey, and in the Finger Lakes region of New York. Private plantings of giant sequoias around the Middle Atlantic States are not uncommon, and other publicly accessible specimens can be visited at the U.S. National Arboretum in Washington, D.C. A few trees have been established in Colorado as well. Additionally, numerous sequoias have been planted with success in the state of Michigan.

A cold-tolerant cultivar &#x27;Hazel Smith&#x27; selected in about 1960 is proving more successful in the northeastern US. This clone was the sole survivor of several hundred seedlings grown at a nursery in New Jersey. The U.S. National Arboretum has a specimen grown from a cutting in 1970 that can be seen in the Gotelli Conifer Collection.

Since its last assessment as an endangered species in 2011, it was estimated that another 13–19% of the population (or 9,761–13,637 mature trees) were destroyed during the Castle Fire of 2020 and the KNP Complex &amp; Windy Fire in 2021, events attributed to fire suppression and drought. Prescribed burns to reduce available fuel load may be crucial for saving the species.

As of 2021, there are approximately 60,000 living in its native California.

===Australia===
The Ballarat Botanical Gardens contain a significant collection, many of them about 150 years old. Jubilee Park and the Hepburn Mineral Springs Reserve in Daylesford, Cook Park in Orange, New South Wales and Carisbrook&#x27;s Deep Creek park in Victoria both have specimens. Jamieson Township in the Victorian high country has two specimens which were planted in the early 1860s.

In Tasmania, specimens can be seen in private and public gardens, as sequoias were popular in the mid-Victorian era. The Westbury Village Green has specimens with more in Deloraine. The Tasmanian Arboretum contains both &quot;Sequoiadendron giganteum&quot; and &quot;Sequoia sempervirens&quot; specimens.

The Pialligo Redwood Forest consists of 3,000 surviving redwood specimens, of 122,000 planted, 500 meters east of the Canberra Airport. The forest was laid out by the city&#x27;s designer Walter Burley Griffin, though the city&#x27;s arborist, Thomas Charles Weston, advised against it. The National Arboretum Canberra began a grove of &quot;Sequoiadendron giganteum&quot; in 2008. They also grow in the abandoned arboretum at Mount Banda Banda in New South Wales.

===New Zealand===

Several impressive specimens of Sequoiadendron giganteum can be found in the South Island of New Zealand. Notable examples include a set of trees in a public park of Picton, as well as robust specimens in the public and botanical parks of Christchurch and Queenstown. There are also several in private gardens in Wānaka. Other locations in Christchurch and nearby include a number of trees at the Riccarton Park Racecourse, three large trees on the roadside bordering private properties on Clyde Road, near Wai-Iti Terrace—these are at least 150 years old. The suburb of ‘Redwood’ is named after a 160 years old Giant Redwood tree in the grounds of a local hotel. At St James Church, Harewood, is a protected very large specimen believed to be about 160 years old. A grove of about sixteen Redwood trees of varying ages is in Sheldon Park in the Belfast, New Zealand suburb. Some of these trees are in poor condition because of indifferent care. There is also a very large tree at Rangiora High School, which was planted for Queen Victoria&#x27;s Golden Jubilee and is thus over 130 years old.

==Record trees==
===Largest by trunk volume===

As of 2009, the top ten largest giant sequoias sorted by volume of their trunks are:

* The General Sherman tree is estimated to weigh about 2100 tonnes.
* The Washington Tree was previously arguably the second largest tree with a volume of (although the upper half of its trunk was hollow, making the calculated volume debatable), but after losing the hollow upper half of its trunk in January 2005 following a fire, it is no longer of great size.
* The largest giant sequoia ever recorded was the Father of the Forest from Calaveras Grove, an exceedingly massive tree which fell many centuries ago in the North Grove. Reportedly, the tree was once over 435 ft tall, and 110 ft in circumference, with a minimum height of 365 feet. Now, what is left of the tree is a popular tourist attraction.

===Tallest===
* Redwood – Redwood Mountain Grove – 
* tallest outside the United States: specimen near Ribeauvillé, France, measured in 2014 at a height of at age 158 years.

===Oldest===
* Muir Snag – Converse Basin Grove – more than 3500 years

===Greatest girth===
* Waterfall Tree – Alder Creek Grove – – tree with enormous basal buttress on very steep ground.

===Greatest base diameter===
* Waterfall Tree – Alder Creek Grove – – tree with enormous basal buttress on very steep ground.
* Tunnel Tree – Atwell Mill Grove – – tree with a huge flared base that has burned all the way through.

===Greatest mean diameter at breast height===
* General Grant – General Grant Grove – 

===Largest limb===
* Arm Tree – Atwell Mill, East Fork Grove – in diameter

===Thickest bark===
* or more

==See also==

* Mother of the Forest
* Discovery Tree
* The House (trees)
* Largest organisms
* Kings Canyon National Park
* Yosemite National Park
* Calaveras Big Trees State Park
* Old growth forest
* List of superlative trees
==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

* Listed as Vulnerable (VU A1cd v2.3)
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==

* ARKive: &quot;Sequoiadendron giganteum&quot;, arkive.org
* Arboretum de Villardebelle – photos of cones &amp; shoots with phenology notes, pinetum.org
* Giant Sequoia Fire History in Mariposa Grove, Yosemite National Park, nps.gov
* Save-the-Redwoods League, savethewoods.org
* &quot;Sequoias of Yosemite National Park&quot; 1949 by James W. McFarland
* Redwoodworld.co.uk giant redwoods in the U.K.
* Scenes of Wonder and Curiosity in California (1862) – The Mammoth Trees Of Calaveras, yosemite.ca.us
* Short radio episode Woody Gospel Letter in which John Muir extols &quot;King Sequoia&quot; from &quot;The Life and Letters of John Muir&quot;, 1924. California Legacy Project.
* Conifers Around the World: Sequoiadendron giganteum – Giant Sequoia.
* Giants of Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Park, On &quot;YouTube&quot; by Sequoia Parks Conservancy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="44" end="57" title="Sequoiadendron giganteum" label="giant sequoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="59" end="72" title="Sequoiadendron giganteum" label="giant redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="74" end="88" title="Sequoiadendron giganteum" label="Sierra redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q149851" start="92" end="105" title="Sequoiadendron giganteum" label="Wellingtonia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="122" end="129" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="133" end="137" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q146037" start="164" end="176" title="Cupressaceae" label="Cupressaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q149335" start="194" end="206" title="Sequoioideae" label="Sequoioideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="328" end="341" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="469" end="487" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="495" end="499" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501618" start="982" end="1000" title="General Grant (tree)" label="General Grant tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="1377" end="1392" title="ornamental tree" label="ornamental tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493080" start="1531" end="1545" title="Josiah Whitney" label="Josiah Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q313595" start="1571" end="1579" title="Sequoyah" label="Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q26549" start="1621" end="1639" title="Cherokee syllabary" label="Cherokee syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q78605" start="1747" end="1767" title="Stephan Endlicher" label="Stephen L. Endlicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q973582" start="2324" end="2349" title="diameter at breast height" label="diameter at breast height"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501618" start="2357" end="2375" title="General Grant (tree)" label="General Grant tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q150129" start="2436" end="2449" title="Sequoia sempervirens" label="coast redwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="2843" end="2859" title="dendrochronology" label="dendrochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116374" start="2959" end="2987" title="Pinus longaeva" label="Great Basin bristlecone pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q847304" start="2992" end="2998" title="Fitzroya cupressoides" label="alerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q427956" start="3110" end="3121" title="tannic acid" label="tannic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="3194" end="3203" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="3293" end="3297" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q22710" start="3308" end="3313" title="Conifer cone" label="cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q193472" start="4096" end="4100" title="Trunk (botany)" label="bole"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="4740" end="4753" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="4755" end="4765" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220269" start="4772" end="4784" title="Paleoendemism" label="paleoendemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621694" start="4857" end="4879" title="list of sequoia groves" label="list of sequoia groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q466699" start="5089" end="5103" title="American River" label="American River"/>
<link wikidata="Q156353" start="5107" end="5120" title="Placer County, California" label="Placer County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264687" start="5138" end="5149" title="Kings River (California)" label="Kings River"/>
<link wikidata="Q109686" start="5291" end="5304" title="Tulare County, California" label="Tulare County"/>
<link wikidata="Q152660" start="5424" end="5431" title="Sequoia National Park" label="Sequoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q936623" start="5436" end="5462" title="Kings Canyon National Park" label="Kings Canyon National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522734" start="5468" end="5499" title="Giant Sequoia National Monument" label="Giant Sequoia National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="5589" end="5593" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="5665" end="5673" title="alluvium" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="6554" end="6561" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="6642" end="6652" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="6852" end="6880" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337721" start="6888" end="6909" title="San Jacinto Mountains" label="San Jacinto Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="6913" end="6932" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q105721236" start="7165" end="7185" title="Black Mountain Grove (Southern California)" label="Black Mountain Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921341" start="7295" end="7315" title="Black Mountain Grove" label="Black Mountain Grove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7347" end="7364" title="Lake Fulmor#Flora" label="Lake Fulmor Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q49328255" start="7540" end="7556" title="Deer Creek Grove" label="Deer Creek Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="7592" end="7620" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q105721236" start="7707" end="7727" title="Black Mountain Grove (Southern California)" label="Black Mountain Grove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7739" end="7756" title="Lake Fulmor#Flora" label="Lake Fulmor Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337721" start="7865" end="7886" title="San Jacinto Mountains" label="San Jacinto Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="7906" end="7919" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q927054" start="8178" end="8193" title="pioneer species" label="pioneer species"/>
<link wikidata="Q172645" start="8476" end="8481" title="humus" label="humus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="8587" end="8595" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q160329" start="9083" end="9093" title="convection" label="convection"/>
<link wikidata="Q155180" start="9224" end="9231" title="seedbed" label="seedbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="9318" end="9339" title="ultraviolet radiation" label="ultraviolet radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q145939" start="9645" end="9654" title="white fir" label="white fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q157875" start="9824" end="9837" title="carpenter ant" label="carpenter ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="9862" end="9883" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967325" start="10085" end="10100" title="Washington tree" label="Washington tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q205295" start="10389" end="10404" title="longhorn beetle" label="longhorn beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189457" start="10412" end="10430" title="Phymatodes nitidus" label="Phymatodes nitidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q386410" start="10889" end="10905" title="Douglas squirrel" label="Douglas squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q146037" start="11494" end="11506" title="Cupressaceae" label="Cupressaceae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11692" end="11701" title="Hypersensitive response#NLR pairs and networks" label="NLR genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068526" start="11781" end="11796" title="Whole genome sequencing" label="genome sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452535" start="11890" end="11924" title="Sequoia and Kings Canyon National Parks" label="Sequoia/Kings Canyon National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="12008" end="12039" title="University of California, Davis" label="University of California, Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="12041" end="12065" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="12067" end="12092" title="University of Connecticut" label="University of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q139901" start="12098" end="12125" title="Northern Arizona University" label="Northern Arizona University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427973" start="12159" end="12183" title="Save the Redwoods League" label="Save the Redwoods League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11683311" start="12192" end="12234" title="National Institute of Food and Agriculture" label="National Institute of Food and Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q116769399" start="12460" end="12474" title="Discovery Tree" label="Discovery Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018624" start="12478" end="12493" title="Calaveras Grove" label="Calaveras Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q131143815" start="12605" end="12614" title="Exhibition_tree" label="exhibited"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12729" end="12788" title="Hutchings%27_Illustrated_California_Magazine" label="&amp;quot;Hutchings&amp;#x27; Illustrated California Magazine&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="12996" end="13013" title="European American" label="European American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018624" start="13160" end="13175" title="Calaveras Grove" label="Calaveras Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q16885571" start="13386" end="13402" title="Robert_A._Eccleston" label="Robert Eccleston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989954" start="13420" end="13432" title="Nelder Grove" label="Nelder Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765523" start="13464" end="13482" title="Mariposa Battalion" label="Mariposa Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765531" start="13494" end="13506" title="Mariposa War" label="Mariposa War"/>
<link wikidata="Q378629" start="13655" end="13667" title="John Lindley" label="John Lindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q693148" start="13787" end="13801" title="International Code of Botanical Nomenclature" label="botanical code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13904" end="13927" title="Wellingtonia arnottiana" label="Wellingtonia arnottiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q581490" start="13948" end="13957" title="Sabiaceae" label="Sabiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q966069" start="14057" end="14072" title="Joseph Decaisne" label="Joseph Decaisne"/>
<link wikidata="Q78605" start="14241" end="14250" title="Stephan Ladislaus Endlicher" label="Endlicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="14423" end="14427" title="Arecaceae" label="palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q158793" start="14440" end="14452" title="Washingtonia" label="Washingtonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62853" start="14487" end="14509" title="Carl Ernst Otto Kuntze" label="Carl Ernst Otto Kuntze"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="14527" end="14533" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q131360" start="14546" end="14557" title="Steinhauera" label="Steinhauera"/>
<link wikidata="Q302925" start="14735" end="14757" title="John Theodore Buchholz" label="John Theodore Buchholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493080" start="15013" end="15027" title="Josiah Whitney" label="Josiah Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q313595" start="15053" end="15061" title="Sequoyah" label="Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q26549" start="15103" end="15121" title="Cherokee syllabary" label="Cherokee syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q379580" start="15437" end="15446" title="John Muir" label="John Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q21593067" start="16086" end="16113" title="Hume-Bennett Lumber Company" label="Hume-Bennett Lumber Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q49325598" start="16854" end="16869" title="Big Stump Grove" label="Big Stump Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531929" start="16875" end="16894" title="General Grant Grove" label="General Grant Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079145" start="16953" end="16976" title="Sequoia National Forest" label="Sequoia National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522734" start="17028" end="17059" title="Giant Sequoia National Monument" label="Giant Sequoia National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="17135" end="17145" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="17446" end="17459" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q47128" start="17523" end="17537" title="Christmas tree" label="Christmas tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="17636" end="17643" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="17648" end="17660" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q548599" start="17882" end="17908" title="Exploitation_of_natural_resources" label="environmental exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="17942" end="17963" title="conservation movement" label="conservation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q116769399" start="18008" end="18022" title="Discovery Tree" label="Discovery Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q49412310" start="18027" end="18038" title="Forest King" label="Forest King"/>
<link wikidata="Q131143815" start="18111" end="18127" title="Exhibition_tree" label="exhibition trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917318" start="18176" end="18193" title="Frontier_Thesis" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q152660" start="18379" end="18386" title="Sequoia_National_Park" label="Sequoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="18391" end="18414" title="Yosemite_National_Park" label="Yosemite National Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q99752621" start="18433" end="18445" title="Tunnel_tree" label="tunnel trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106707" start="18468" end="18479" title="Wawona Tree" label="Wawona Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="18764" end="18783" title="Tourist_attraction" label="tourist attractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917318" start="18837" end="18852" title="Frontier_Thesis" label="frontier spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717697" start="19082" end="19096" title="Mariposa Grove" label="Mariposa Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q12373247" start="19212" end="19226" title="sacred_tree" label="sacred meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501618" start="19232" end="19250" title="General_Grant_(tree)" label="General Grant Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="19323" end="19338" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="19387" end="19404" title="Dwight_D._Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659355" start="19641" end="19657" title="Wildfire suppression" label="Fire suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q145939" start="20234" end="20243" title="white fir" label="white fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="20284" end="20295" title="crown fire" label="crown fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802458" start="20465" end="20477" title="McNally Fire" label="McNally Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978930" start="20491" end="20501" title="Rough Fire" label="Rough Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q38936133" start="20519" end="20532" title="Railroad Fire" label="Railroad Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856854" start="20546" end="20557" title="SQF Lightning Complex fires" label="Castle Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411250" start="20699" end="20715" title="King Arthur (tree)" label="King Arthur Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q105555497" start="20765" end="20776" title="2021 California wildfires" label="KNP Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q105555497" start="20781" end="20791" title="2021 California wildfires" label="Windy Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q113244810" start="20947" end="20960" title="Washburn Fire" label="Washburn Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="21001" end="21023" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717697" start="21071" end="21085" title="Mariposa Grove" label="Mariposa Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589818" start="21191" end="21207" title="Controlled burn" label="prescribed burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="21328" end="21343" title="ornamental tree" label="ornamental tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="21483" end="21499" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="21583" end="21588" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="21933" end="21956" title="cultivar" label="horticultural varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q222958" start="22088" end="22095" title="Grafting" label="grafted"/>
<link wikidata="Q148483" start="22216" end="22227" title="Ribeauvillé" label="Ribeauvillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="22231" end="22237" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345956" start="22426" end="22441" title="Patrick Matthew" label="Patrick Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="22445" end="22455" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018624" start="22562" end="22577" title="Calaveras Big Trees State Park" label="Calaveras Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579760" start="22581" end="22593" title="William Lobb" label="William Lobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512151" start="22610" end="22624" title="Veitch Nursery" label="Veitch Nursery"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="22630" end="22636" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371650" start="22797" end="22804" title="Benmore Botanic Garden" label="Benmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q188617" start="22961" end="22982" title="Kew Gardens" label="Royal Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740301" start="22986" end="22989" title="Kew" label="Kew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904075" start="23081" end="23096" title="Biddulph Grange" label="Biddulph Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q23105" start="23107" end="23120" title="Staffordshire" label="Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150129" start="23200" end="23220" title="Sequoia sempervirens" label="Sequoia sempervirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q277755" start="23431" end="23441" title="New Forest" label="New Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="23496" end="23523" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="23531" end="23552" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543083" start="23558" end="23564" title="Avenue (landscape)" label="avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q741400" start="23624" end="23633" title="Camberley" label="Camberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="23635" end="23641" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q150129" start="23950" end="23970" title="Sequoia sempervirens" label="Sequoia sempervirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271909" start="25282" end="25307" title="Sequoiafarm Kaldenkirchen" label="Sequoiafarm Kaldenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="25369" end="25374" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20422" start="25483" end="25493" title="Roccavione" label="Roccavione"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216" start="25502" end="25510" title="Piedmont" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q22335" start="25630" end="25640" title="Vajont Dam" label="Vajont Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="25770" end="25775" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="25921" end="25928" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="26039" end="26045" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="26180" end="26188" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q714606" start="26212" end="26221" title="Lazarevac" label="Lazarevac"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="26225" end="26231" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="26279" end="26293" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26309" end="26318" title="Sekvojovce v Ratměřicích" label="Ratměřice"/>
<link wikidata="Q991263" start="26346" end="26353" title="Slatina, Croatia" label="Slatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="26832" end="26849" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="26863" end="26869" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="26889" end="26905" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="26934" end="26944" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="27372" end="27396" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q615873" start="27401" end="27419" title="Seattle University" label="Seattle University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417254" start="27437" end="27469" title="Evergreen Washelli Memorial Park" label="Evergreen Washelli Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066868" start="27678" end="27688" title="Cercospora" label="Cercospora"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="27720" end="27726" title="fungus" label="fungal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926930" start="27790" end="27808" title="Blithewold Mansion, Gardens and Arboretum" label="Blithewold Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q917809" start="27813" end="27834" title="Bristol, Rhode Island" label="Bristol, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="27890" end="27908" title="New England" label="New England states"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241319" start="27926" end="27941" title="Tyler Arboretum" label="Tyler Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q27844" start="27945" end="27974" title="Delaware County, Pennsylvania" label="Delaware County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q568666" start="28043" end="28059" title="Arnold Arboretum" label="Arnold Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="28063" end="28069" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="28071" end="28084" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129930" start="28123" end="28139" title="Longwood Gardens" label="Longwood Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q174224" start="28145" end="28165" title="Wilmington, Delaware" label="Wilmington, Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486457" start="28174" end="28207" title="New Jersey State Botanical Garden" label="New Jersey State Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486457" start="28211" end="28219" title="Skylands (estate)" label="Skylands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335027" start="28223" end="28242" title="Ringwood State Park" label="Ringwood State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086229" start="28244" end="28264" title="Ringwood, New Jersey" label="Ringwood, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416994" start="28277" end="28289" title="Finger Lakes" label="Finger Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="28300" end="28308" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="28541" end="28549" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="28638" end="28646" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="28856" end="28866" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856854" start="29165" end="29176" title="Castle Fire" label="Castle Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q105555497" start="29193" end="29204" title="2021 California wildfires" label="KNP Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q105555497" start="29211" end="29221" title="2021 California wildfires" label="Windy Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659355" start="29252" end="29268" title="Wildfire suppression" label="fire suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058413" start="29273" end="29280" title="Droughts in California" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851467" start="29466" end="29492" title="Ballarat Botanical Gardens" label="Ballarat Botanical Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019340" start="29617" end="29627" title="Daylesford, Victoria" label="Daylesford"/>
<link wikidata="Q580973" start="29642" end="29665" title="Orange, New South Wales" label="Orange, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768144" start="30025" end="30048" title="The Tasmanian Arboretum" label="The Tasmanian Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190038" start="30153" end="30161" title="Pialligo, Australian Capital Territory" label="Pialligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14300" start="30267" end="30283" title="Canberra Airport" label="Canberra Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q559852" start="30337" end="30358" title="Walter Burley Griffin" label="Walter Burley Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q776268" start="30383" end="30391" title="arborist" label="arborist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795012" start="30393" end="30414" title="Charles Weston (horticulturalist)" label="Thomas Charles Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q737132" start="30440" end="30467" title="National Arboretum Canberra" label="National Arboretum Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919607" start="30576" end="30593" title="Mount Banda Banda" label="Mount Banda Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="30597" end="30612" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="30711" end="30723" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362879" start="30800" end="30806" title="Picton, New Zealand" label="Picton"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="30873" end="30885" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="30890" end="30900" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q930344" start="30947" end="30953" title="Wānaka" label="Wānaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322948" start="31031" end="31056" title="Riccarton Park Racecourse" label="Riccarton Park Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656944" start="31318" end="31326" title="Harewood, New Zealand" label="Harewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459122" start="31480" end="31500" title="Belfast, New Zealand" label="Belfast, New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064156" start="31615" end="31635" title="Rangiora High School" label="Rangiora High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579597" start="31659" end="31695" title="Queen Victoria&amp;#x27;s Golden Jubilee" label="Queen Victoria&amp;#x27;s Golden Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193472" start="31850" end="31856" title="trunk (botany)" label="trunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="31923" end="31928" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967325" start="31937" end="31952" title="Washington Tree" label="Washington Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306520" start="32599" end="32621" title="Redwood Mountain Grove" label="Redwood Mountain Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q148483" start="32676" end="32687" title="Ribeauvillé" label="Ribeauvillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="32689" end="32695" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166450" start="32775" end="32795" title="Converse Basin" label="Converse Basin Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713613" start="32860" end="32877" title="Alder Creek Grove" label="Alder Creek Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713613" start="32987" end="33004" title="Alder Creek Grove" label="Alder Creek Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818851" start="33081" end="33098" title="Atwell Mill Grove" label="Atwell Mill Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501618" start="33218" end="33231" title="General Grant (tree)" label="General Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531929" start="33234" end="33253" title="General Grant Grove" label="General Grant Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818851" start="33290" end="33301" title="Atwell Mill Grove" label="Atwell Mill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33303" end="33318" title="East Fork Grove" label="East Fork Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865527" start="33381" end="33401" title="Mother of the Forest" label="Mother of the Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q116769399" start="33404" end="33418" title="Discovery Tree" label="Discovery Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647964" start="33421" end="33438" title="The House (trees)" label="The House (trees)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385300" start="33441" end="33458" title="Largest organisms" label="Largest organisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q936623" start="33461" end="33487" title="Kings Canyon National Park" label="Kings Canyon National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q180402" start="33490" end="33512" title="Yosemite National Park" label="Yosemite National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018624" start="33515" end="33545" title="Calaveras Big Trees State Park" label="Calaveras Big Trees State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="33548" end="33565" title="Old growth forest" label="Old growth forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q897471" start="33568" end="33593" title="List of superlative trees" label="List of superlative trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q379580" start="34284" end="34293" title="John Muir" label="John Muir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34384" end="34409" title="California Legacy Project" label="California Legacy Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50640" wikidata="Q390214" url="?curid=50640" title="Texas Longhorn">
<text>The Texas Longhorn is an American breed of beef cattle, characterized by its long horns, which can span more than from tip to tip. It derives from cattle brought from the Iberian Peninsula to the Americas by Spanish conquistadors from the time of the Second Voyage of Christopher Columbus until about 1512. For hundreds of years the cattle lived a semi-feral existence on the rangelands; they have a higher tolerance of heat and drought than most European breeds. The coat can be of any color or mix of colors; in some 40% of the cattle it is some shade of red, often a light red.

In the twenty-first century the Longhorn is considered a part of the cultural heritage of Texas.

== History ==

The Texas Longhorn derives from cattle brought to the Americas by Spanish conquistadors from the time of the Second Voyage of Christopher Columbus until about 1512. The first cattle were landed in 1493 on the Caribbean island of La Isla Española (now known as Hispaniola) to provide food for the colonists.

Over the next two centuries, the Spaniards used the cattle in Mexico and gradually moved them north to accompany their expanding settlements. The Spaniards reached the area that became known as &quot;Texas&quot; near the end of the 17th century. Eventually, some cattle escaped or were turned loose on the open range, where they remained mostly feral for the next two centuries. Over several generations, descendants of these cattle developed to have high feed- and drought-stress tolerances and other &quot;hardy&quot; characteristics that have given Longhorns their reputation as livestock.

The Texas Longhorn stock slowly dwindled, but in 1927, the breed was saved from near extinction by enthusiasts from the United States Forest Service. They collected a small herd of stock to breed on the Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge in Lawton, Oklahoma. The breed also received significant attention after a Texas Longhorn named &quot;Bevo&quot; was adopted as the mascot of The University of Texas at Austin in 1917. The animal&#x27;s image became commonly associated with the school&#x27;s sports teams, known as the Texas Longhorns. A few years later, J. Frank Dobie and others gathered small herds to keep in Texas state parks. Oilman Sid W. Richardson helped finance the project. The Longhorns were cared for largely as curiosities, but the stock&#x27;s longevity, resistance to disease, and ability to thrive on marginal pastures resulted in a revival of the breed as beef stock and for their link to Texas history.

In 1957, Charles Schreiner III began creating a Longhorn herd on his ranch, the &quot;Y O&quot;, in Mountain Home, Texas, as a tribute to the ranching legacy of his grandfather, Captain Charles Armand Schreiner, and the Longhorns he ran on his ranches. Schreiner purchased five heifers and one bull calf for $75 each from the Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge near Lawton. In 1964, Schreiner founded the Texas Longhorn Breeders Association of America. The YO herd were the first cattle registered with the association. To draw attention to the Longhorn and its new association, in 1966, Schreiner organized a cattle drive of Longhorn steers from San Antonio, Texas to Dodge City, Kansas. The drive was promoted as a centennial commemoration of the earlier Chisholm Trail drives. Schreiner arranged for local members of the Quanah sheriff&#x27;s posse to stage a simulated “Indian attack” as the steers crossed the Red River at Doan&#x27;s Crossing. The attack was so authentic that the steers stampeded with cowboys in close pursuit. Four hours were needed to reassemble the herd. In 1976, Texas Tech University in Lubbock persuaded Schreiner to stage a cattle trail drive to celebrate its new National Ranching Heritage Center.

In 1995, the Texas Legislature designated the Texas Longhorn as the state large mammal. In the 21st century, Texas Longhorns from elite bloodlines can sell for $40,000 or more at auction. The record of $380,000 on March 18, 2017, was for a cow, 3S Danica, and heifer calf at side, during the Legacy XIII sale in Fort Worth, Texas.

Registries for the breed include: the Texas Longhorn Breeders Association of America, founded in 1964 by the Kerr County rancher Charles Schreiner III; the International Texas Longhorn Association; and the Cattlemen&#x27;s Texas Longhorn Registry. The online National Texas Longhorn Museum displays the diversity of horns found in the breed, stories about notable individual cattle of the breed, and a gallery of furniture made from cattle horns.

== Characteristics ==

The Longhorn is genetically close to Iberian cattle breeds such as the De Lidia and Retinta of Spain and the Alentejana and Mertolenga of Portugal. Like other Criollo cattle of the Americas and many breeds of southern Europe, it is principally of taurine (European) derivation, but has a small admixture of indicine genetic heritage; this may be a consequence of gene flow across the Strait of Gibraltar from cattle of African origin dating to before the time of the Spanish Conquest.

The horns are in some cases very long. In general, the horns of bulls are of moderate length, while those of steers may be much longer. In 2022 the Guinness Book of Records reported the longest spread of cattle horns (on a living animal) to be: for a steer called Poncho Via; for a cow named 3S Danica; and for a bull named Cowboy Tuff Chex. All three were Texas Longhorns.

Coat color is extremely variable. In some 40% of the cattle it is some shade of red, often a light red; the only shade of red not seen is the deep colour typical of the Hereford. The finching pattern is common; when the base color is black it is called , from the Spanish word for &#x27;skunk&#x27;. Other colors include variations of black, blue, brown, cream, dun, grey, yellow or white, either with or without brindling (called , from the Spanish word for &#x27;cat&#x27;), speckling or spotting. Speckled and solid-coloured animals are in roughly equal proportion.

== Use ==

The Longhorn was traditionally reared for beef. In the 21st century it is considered part of the cultural heritage of Texas; it is the official large mammal of the state.

It may be kept for conservation reasons, or bred for greater horn length. It is occasionally used for steer riding.

== References ==
==Further reading==
*Will C. Barnes, &quot;Wichita Forest Will Be Lair of Longhorns&quot;, &quot;The Cattleman,&quot; April 1926.
*Dan Kilgore, &quot;Texas Cattle Origins&quot;, &quot;The Cattleman,&quot; January 1983.
*James Westfall Thompson, &quot;History of Livestock Raising in the United States&quot;, 1607–1860 (Washington: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1942).
*James Frank Dobie, &quot;The Longhorns&quot; (Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press, 1980) ().
*Don Worcester, &quot;The Texas Longhorn: Relic of the Past, Asset for the Future&quot; (College Station: Texas A&amp;M University Press, 1987) ().
*Neal Barrett, Jr., &quot;Long Days and Short Nights, A Century of Texas Ranching on the Y O 1880-1980&quot; (Y O Press, Mountain Home, Texas, 1980)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q390214" start="4" end="18" title="Texas Longhorn" label="Texas Longhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501517" start="34" end="39" title="list of cattle breeds" label="breed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208989" start="43" end="54" title="beef cattle" label="beef cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q65284752" start="82" end="87" title="Horn (anatomy)" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="171" end="188" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="216" end="229" title="conquistadors" label="conquistadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578423" start="251" end="264" title="Second Voyage of Columbus" label="Second Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="268" end="288" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478412" start="348" end="358" title="semi-feral" label="semi-feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364870" start="376" end="386" title="rangelands" label="rangelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="651" end="668" title="cultural heritage" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="672" end="677" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="769" end="782" title="conquistadors" label="conquistadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578423" start="804" end="817" title="Second Voyage of Columbus" label="Second Voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="821" end="841" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="904" end="913" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="955" end="965" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1065" end="1071" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096405" start="1309" end="1319" title="open range" label="open range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="1348" end="1353" title="feral" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="1585" end="1594" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="1717" end="1745" title="United States Forest Service" label="United States Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q743584" start="1800" end="1833" title="Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge" label="Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q503336" start="1837" end="1853" title="Lawton, Oklahoma" label="Lawton, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899689" start="1936" end="1940" title="Bevo (mascot)" label="Bevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="1980" end="2009" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615493" start="2120" end="2135" title="Texas Longhorns" label="Texas Longhorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156800" start="2156" end="2170" title="J. Frank Dobie" label="J. Frank Dobie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4263296" start="2240" end="2257" title="Sid W. Richardson" label="Sid W. Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711079" start="2624" end="2644" title="Mountain Home, Texas" label="Mountain Home, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q743584" start="2850" end="2883" title="Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge" label="Wichita Mountains Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307301" start="3133" end="3145" title="Cattle drives in the United States" label="cattle drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="3170" end="3181" title="San Antonio" label="San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q647127" start="3192" end="3202" title="Dodge City, Kansas" label="Dodge City"/>
<link wikidata="Q477217" start="3280" end="3294" title="Chisholm Trail" label="Chisholm Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q974733" start="3347" end="3353" title="Quanah, Texas" label="Quanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q643273" start="3354" end="3374" title="Posse comitatus" label="sheriff&amp;#x27;s posse"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="3438" end="3447" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423756" start="3614" end="3635" title="Texas Tech University" label="Texas Tech University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="3639" end="3646" title="Lubbock,_Texas" label="Lubbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975200" start="3718" end="3751" title="National Ranching Heritage Center" label="National Ranching Heritage Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653964" start="3767" end="3784" title="Texas Legislature" label="Texas Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q16558" start="4066" end="4083" title="Fort Worth, Texas" label="Fort Worth, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328072" start="4086" end="4096" title="breed registry" label="Registries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707817" start="4124" end="4170" title="Texas Longhorn Breeders Association of America" label="Texas Longhorn Breeders Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q26528" start="4195" end="4206" title="Kerr County, Texas" label="Kerr County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249724" start="4628" end="4636" title="De Lidia" label="De Lidia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4641" end="4648" title="Retinta" label="Retinta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832667" start="4666" end="4676" title="Alentejana cattle" label="Alentejana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306660" start="4681" end="4691" title="Mertolenga cattle" label="Mertolenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185786" start="4716" end="4730" title="Criollo cattle" label="Criollo cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="4804" end="4811" title="taurine (cattle)" label="taurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46889" start="4864" end="4872" title="indicine" label="indicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36124" start="4941" end="4960" title="Strait of Gibraltar" label="Strait of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="5152" end="5157" title="steer (cattle)" label="steer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="5191" end="5215" title="Guinness Book of Records" label="Guinness Book of Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q737173" start="5587" end="5595" title="Hereford (cattle)" label="Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449833" start="5601" end="5609" title="finching (cattle)" label="finching"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="5705" end="5710" title="skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969557" start="5831" end="5840" title="brindle" label="brindling"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="6041" end="6045" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="6096" end="6113" title="cultural heritage" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="6190" end="6202" title="Conservation movement" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605947" start="6273" end="6285" title="steer riding" label="steer riding"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50649" wikidata="Q425694" url="?curid=50649" title="Home economics">
<text>Home economics, also called domestic science or family and consumer sciences (often shortened to FCS or FACS), is a subject concerning human development, personal and family finances, consumer issues, housing and interior design, nutrition and food preparation, as well as textiles and apparel. Although historically mostly taught in secondary school or high school, dedicated home economics courses are much less common today.

Home economics courses are offered around the world and across multiple educational levels. Historically, the purpose of these courses was to professionalize housework, to provide intellectual fulfillment for women, to emphasize the value of &quot;women&#x27;s work&quot; in society, and to prepare them for the traditional roles of sexes. Family and consumer sciences are taught as an elective or required course in secondary education, as a continuing education course in institutions, and at the primary level.  

Beginning in Scotland in the 1850s, it was a woman-dominated course, teaching women to be homemakers with sewing being the lead skill. The American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences at the beginning of the 20th century saw Americans desiring youth to learn vocational skills as well. Politics played a role in home economics education, and it wasn&#x27;t until later in the century that the course shifted from being woman-dominated to now required for both sexes.  

Now family and consumer science have been included in the broader subject of Career Technical Education, a program that teaches skilled trades, applied sciences, modern technologies, and career preparation. Despite the widening of the subject matter over the past century, there has been a major decline in home economics courses offered by educational institutions.

==Terminology==

Family and consumer sciences were previously known in the United States as home economics, often abbreviated as &quot;home ec&quot; or &quot;HE&quot;. In 1994, various organizations, including the American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences, adopted the new term &quot;Family and Consumer Sciences (FCS)&quot; to reflect the fact that the field covers aspects outside of home life and wellness. FCS is taught worldwide, as an elective or a required course in secondary education, and in many tertiary and continuing education institutions. Sometimes it is also taught in primary education. International cooperation in the field is coordinated by the International Federation for Home Economics, established in 1908.

These programs have been called human sciences, home science, domestic economy, and the domestic arts, the domestic sciences, or the domestic arts and sciences, and may still be referred to as such depending on the academic institution. Home economics has a strong historic relationship to the field of human ecology, and since the 1960s a number of university-level home economics programs have been renamed &quot;human ecology&quot; programs, including Cornell University&#x27;s program.

==By country==

Internationally, Home Economics education is coordinated by the International Federation for Home Economics (Fédération internationale pour l&#x27;économie familiale).

=== Canada ===

In the majority of elementary (K-6) and public (K-8) schools in Canada, home economics is not taught. General health education is provided as part of a physical education class. In high schools or secondary schools, there is no specific home economics course, but students may choose related courses to take, such as Family Studies, Food and Nutrition, or Health and Safety.

=== Finland ===
Finland has a 110 year history in home economics teacher education. Household economics and nutrition have been taught at university level since the 1940s. Finland has made home economics a required course for boys and girls. When at university, home economics courses fall under categories of the culture and education of nutrition and food, consumer education, environmental education, and family education. The Finnish National Core Curriculum for Basic Education in 2014 also states to reach sustainable development, home economics must be one of the key elements throughout curriculum.

=== Germany ===

Between 1880 and 1900, the Reifenstein schools concept was initiated by Ida von Kortzfleisch, a Prussian noble woman and early German feminist. Reifenstein refers to Reifenstein im Eichsfeld, a municipality in Thuringia and site of the first permanent school. Reifensteiner Verband comprised from 1897 till 1990 about 15 own schools and cooperated with further operators. About 40 wirtschaftliche Frauenschulen, rural economist women schools were connected to the Reifensteiner concept and movement and allowed higher education for women already in the German Kaiserreich. The 1913 doctorate of Johannes Kramer compared different concepts of home economic education worldwide and praised the system e.g. in Iowa.
Additionally, home economics are taught as an optional course in lower- and mid-level secondary schools (Haupt- und Realschule).

===India===
Many education boards in India such as NIOS, CBSE, ICSE, CISCE and various state boards offer home science as a subject in their courses, sometimes called Human Ecology and Family Sciences.

===Indonesia===
Home economics are known in Indonesia as Family Training and Welfare (). It is rooted on a 1957 conference on home economics held in Bogor; it became state policy in 1972.

===Iran===
The new books are Family management and planning lifestyle for girls in secondary high schools and a similar book for boys just as well.

===Ireland===
Home economics was taught to girls in the junior cycle of secondary school in the 20th century. It was added to the senior cycle Leaving Certificate in 1971, at a time when elimination of school fees was increasing participation. In subsequent decades new co-educational community schools saw more boys studying the subject. Increased third-level education participation from the 1990s saw a decline in practical subjects not favoured for third-level entry requirements, including home economics.

===Italy===

In 1945, just days before the Liberation of World War II, Ada Gobetti stated, &quot;The most difficult problem will be that of the housewife. It will be one of the most difficult to resolve if one wants to create a new society.&quot; She wanted women, family, work, and society to form a new relationship through education and organization of the housewives. Although people were not taught formal classes of home economics, during the 1950s and 1960s home economics manuals had been fully published. These manuals were compulsory for children to read in school. These manuals focused heavily on how to be a good housewife during a new era of transformation and how to adapt to new behaviors and habits.

Starting from the Gentile reform of 1923, home economics was taught in the lower middle school and in the new unified middle school established in 1963. The name changed to Technical Applications, differentiated into male and female, which was taught until 1977 when it changed to the title of Technical Education, which no longer differed in relation to the sex of the pupils.

===South Korea===
In South Korea, the field is most commonly known as &quot;consumer science&quot; (소비자학, sobija-hak). The field began in schools taught by Western missionaries in the late 19th century. The first college-level department of family science was established at Ewha Womans University in Seoul in 1929.

===Sweden===
In Sweden, Home economics is commonly known as &quot;home- and consumer studies&quot; (&quot;hem- och konsumentkunskap&quot;).
The subject is mandatory from middle years until high school in both public and private schools but is regarded as one of the smallest subjects in the Swedish school system.
For many decades, the subject was only called &quot;hemkunskap&quot; and had a strong focus on the traditional common tasks of a home, family and practical cooking and cleaning. After the 2011 Swedish school reform, the curriculum have been restructured with more focus on the topics of health, economy and environment which includes Consumer economics as well as Consumer awareness.

===United Kingdom===
In 1852 Louisa Hope and others created the Scottish Ladies Association for Promoting Female Industrial Education. The intention was to ensure that females would learn sewing and in time other domestic subjects in separate gender based education. The Church of Scotland had decided in 1849 that it wanted female &quot;schools of industry&quot;. Women were seen as centres of moral and religious values for families and upper class ladies in the new association saw it as their role to provide it.

In 1853 Hope published, &quot;The Female Teacher: Ideas Suggestive of Her Qualifications and Duties&quot; where she notes that women should be &quot;keepers at home&quot; and men should see to his &quot;labour and his work until the evening&quot;. Education of females would elevate the &quot;lower classes&quot; and this was the &quot;aim of the Scottish Ladies Association for Promoting Female Industrial Education&quot;.

Hope organised a petition of 130 signatures of &quot;principal ladies of Scotland&quot; demanding improved sewing lesson for girls in Scottish schools. The petition was supported by letters sent to newspapers and this was of underestimated influence. By 1861 grants were available to support this objective and in 1870 70% of schools were including sewing in their curriculum according to inspectors.

Thereza Charlotte, Lady Rucker (1863 – 1941) was a promoter of household science teaching. She helped establish Domestic Science as a university subject but only at one university in England.

In the UK, Home Economics was a GCSE qualification offered to secondary school pupils, but since 2015 been replaced with a course entitled Food and Nutrition which focuses more on the nutritional side of food to economics.

In Scotland, Home Economics was replaced by Hospitality: Practical Cooking at National 3, 4 and 5 level and Health and Food Technology at National 3, 4, 5, Higher and Advanced Higher. The awarding body is the SQA.

===United States===
==== Nineteenth century ====

Over the years, homemaking in the United States has been a foundational piece of the education system, particularly for women. These homemaking courses, called home economics, have had a prevalent presence in secondary and higher education since the 19th century. By definition, home economics is &quot;the art and science of home management&quot;, meaning that the discipline incorporates both creative and technical aspects into its teachings. Home economics courses often consist of learning how to cook, how to do taxes, and how to perform child care tasks. In the United States, home economics courses have been a key part of learning the art of taking care of a household. One of the first to champion the economics of running a home was Catherine Beecher, sister to Harriet Beecher Stowe.

Since the nineteenth century, schools have been incorporating home economics courses into their education programs. In its early years, home economics began with the goal of professionalizing domestic labor for women whilst also uplifting the idea of &quot;women&#x27;s work&quot;. In the United States, the teaching of home economics courses in higher education greatly increased with the Morrill Act of 1862. Signed by Abraham Lincoln, the Act granted land to each state or territory in America for higher educational programs in vocational arts, specifically mechanical arts, agriculture, and home economics. Such land grants allowed for people of a wider array of social classes to receive better education in important trade skills.

Home economics courses mainly taught students how to cook, sew, garden, and take care of children. The vast majority of these programs were dominated by women. Home economics allowed for women to receive a better education while also preparing them for a life of settling down, doing the chores, and taking care of the children while their husbands became the breadwinners. At this time, homemaking was largely accessible to middle and upper class white women whose families could afford secondary schooling.

In the late 19th century, the Lake Placid Conferences took place. The conferences consisted of a group of educators working together to elevate the discipline to a legitimate profession. Originally, they wanted to call this profession &quot;oekology&quot;, the science of right living. However, &quot;home economics&quot; was ultimately chosen as the official term in 1899.

The first book on home economics was &quot;Mrs. Welch&#x27;s Cookbook&quot;, published in 1884 at Iowa State by Mary Beaumont Welch. Welch&#x27;s classes on domestic economy were the first in the nation to give college credit on the subject.

==== Twentieth century ====

Home economics in the United States education system increased in popularity in the early twentieth century. It emerged as a movement to train women to be more efficient household managers. At the same moment, American families began to consume many more goods and services than they produced. To guide women in this transition, professional home economics had two major goals: to teach women to assume their new roles as modern consumers and to communicate homemakers&#x27; needs to manufacturers and political leaders. The development of the profession progressed from its origins as an educational movement to its identity as a source of consumer expertise in the interwar period to its virtual disappearance by the 1970s. An additional goal of the field was to &quot;rationalize housework&quot;, or lend the social status of a profession to it, based on a theory that housework could be intellectually fulfilling to women engaged in it, along with any emotional or relational benefits.

Pioneers of the field included numerous female figures, such as Ellen Swallow Richards, who had profound impacts on the home economics profession. In 1909, Richards founded the American Home Economics Association (now called the American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences). From 1900 to 1917, more than thirty bills discussed in Congress dealt with issues of American vocational education and, by association, home economics. Americans wanted more opportunities for their young people to learn vocational skills and to learn valuable home and life skills. However, home economics was still dominated by women and women had little access to other vocational trainings. As stated by the National Education Association (NEA) on the distribution of males and females in vocations, &quot;one-third of our menfolk are in agriculture, and one-third in non-agricultural productive areas; while two-thirds of our women are in the vocation of homemaking&quot;.

Practice homes were added to American universities in the early 1900s in order to model a living situation, with the first facility built for home management practice constructed in the early 1920s at North Dakota Agricultural College. The all-women &#x27;team&#x27; model used for students was different from prevailing expectations of housewives. For example, women were graded on collaboration, while households at the time assumed that women would be working independently. Nevertheless, the practice homes were valued. These practicum courses took place in a variety of environments including single-family homes, apartments, and student dorm-style blocks. For a duration of a number of weeks, students lived together while taking on different roles and responsibilities, such as cooking, cleaning, interior decoration, hosting, and budgeting. Some classes also involved caring for young infants, temporarily adopted from orphanages. Children&#x27;s service organizations helped supply the babies who were awaiting adoption. At Cornell University, the first practice baby was called Dicky Domecon, named after the phrase &quot;domestic economy&quot;. Dicky was borrowed by Cornell in 1920 when he was three weeks old. Practice babies belonged to the students and to the department and were considered central to the proper training and development of home economics students. Many fields of high acuity use simulation to enhance training in complicated situations. Childcare practicums were often included at the same time as other classwork, requiring students to configure their intellectual and home lives as compatible with one another. Home economics programs were using practice babies nationwide, however by 1959 less than one percent of programs still ran full-time operations. The practice was discontinued altogether by the early 1970s. According to Megan Elias, &quot;in the ideal, domestic work was as important as work done outside the home and it was performed by teams of equals who rotated roles. Each member of the team was able to live a life outside the home as well as inside the home, ideally, one that both informed her domestic work and was informed by it. This balance between home and the wider world was basic to the movement.&quot;

There was a great need across the United States to continue improving the vocational and homemaking education systems because demand for work was apparent after World War I and II. Therefore, in 1914 and 1917, women&#x27;s groups, political parties, and labor coalitions worked together in order to pass the Smith-Lever Act and the Smith-Hughes Act. The Smith-Lever Act of 1914 and the Smith-Hughes Act of 1917 created federal funds for &quot;vocational education agriculture, trades and industry, and homemaking&quot; and created the Office of Home Economics. With this funding, the United States was able to create more homemaking educational courses all across the country.

Throughout the 1940s, Iowa State College (later University) was the only program granting a master of science in household equipment. However, this program was centered on the ideals that women should acquire practical skills and a scientifically based understanding of how technology in the household works. For example, women were required to disassemble and then reassemble kitchen machinery so they could understand basic operations and understand how to repair the equipment. In doing so, Iowa State effectively created culturally acceptable forms of physics and engineering for women in an era when these pursuits were not generally accessible to them.

Throughout the latter part of the twentieth century, home economics courses became more inclusive. In 1963, Congress passed the Vocational Education Act, which granted funds to vocational education job training. Home economics courses started being taught across the nation to both boys and girls by way of the rise of second-wave feminism. This movement pushed for gender equality, leading to equality in education. Starting in 1994, home economics courses in the United States began being referred to as &quot;family and consumer sciences&quot; in order to make the class appear more inclusive. With desegregation and the Civil Rights Act of 1964, men and women of all backgrounds could equally learn how to sew, cook, and balance a checkbook.

In the 1980s, &quot;domestic celebrities&quot; rose to stardom. Celebrities, such as Martha Stewart, created television programs, books, magazines, and websites about homemaking and home economics, which attested to the continued importance of independent experts and commercial mass-media organizations in facilitating technological and cultural change in consumer products and services industries.

Despite many secondary education establishments still referring to these enrichment classes as &quot;home economics&quot;, the name was officially changed in 1994 by the American Association of Family &amp; Consumer Sciences to &quot;family and consumer sciences&quot; to more accurately represent the profession and field as a whole. As society changed over time, so did the needs of students in these classes. Topics such as nutrition, family finance, and other social justice issues have been added to family and consumer sciences classes, most frequently taught in high schools and colleges.

==== Twenty-first century ====
Today FCS is part of the broader Career Technical Education (CTE) umbrella. Career and technical education is a term applied to programs that specialize in skilled trades, applied sciences, modern technologies, and career preparation.  While traditional home economics focused on preparing women to care for a family and home, family consumer science continues to adapt its course offerings to meet the needs of students both for personal growth and professional opportunities. Students can take classes in culinary arts, education, food science, nutrition, health and wellness, interior design, child development, personal finance, textiles, apparel, and retailing. Students who take FCS classes can join the student organization Family, Career, and Community Leaders of America.

FCS and CTE courses help prepare students for careers rather than university. Also, homemaking and home economics courses have developed a negative connotation because of the negative gender bias associated with home economics courses. Despite this, homemaking is now socially acceptable for both men and women to partake in. In the United States, both men and women are expected to take care of the home, the children, and the finances. More women are pursuing higher education rather than homemaking. In 2016, 56.4% of college students were female as opposed to 34.5% in 1956. Some schools are starting to incorporate life skill courses back into their curriculum, but as a whole, home economics courses have been in major decline in the past century.

In 2012 there were only 3.5 million students enrolled in FCS secondary programs, a decrease of 38 percent over a decade. In 2020 the AAFCS estimates that there are 5 million students enrolled in FCS programs, a significant increase from past years that is still growing.

==See also==

* Consumer economics
* Domestic technology
* Ellen Swallow Richards
* Euthenics
* Family (economics)
* Homemaker
* Human ecology
* &quot;The Secret History of Home Economics&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* Apple, Rima D., and Joyce Coleman, &quot; &#x27;As Members of the Social Whole&#x27;: A History of Social Reform as a Focus of Home Economics, 1895–1940.&quot; &quot;Family and Consumer Sciences Research Journal 32.2&quot; (2003): 104-126. 
* Dreilinger Danielle, &quot;The secret history of home economics: How trailblazing women harnessed the power of home and changed the way we live&quot; (Norton, 2021) online 

* Elias, Megan J. &quot;No place like home: A survey of American home economics history.&quot; &quot;History Compass&quot; 9.1 (2011): 97-105. online
* 
* 
* Stage, Sarah, and Virginia Bramble Vincenti, eds. &quot;Rethinking home economics: Women and the history of a profession&quot; (Cornell University Press, 1997) [https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&amp;lr=&amp;id=o_jL-Uf1s1UC&amp;oi=fnd&amp;pg=PR9&amp;dq=%22History+of+home+economics%22&amp;ots=_9UuxKv6WL&amp;sig=ts4VCRUWcWNC8YqBSh8102EbfKo online. 
* 
* Nutrition Education - Making it work By Dr. Janet Reynolds 
* People and Practice: International Issues for Home Economists by Elanour Vaines, Doris Badir and Dianne Kieren 
* Toward an Ideal of the Person Educated in Home Economics: An Invitation to Dialogue by Jane Thomas and Gale Smith 
* Sustainable food futures: Lessons for home economics pedagogy and practice by Martin Caraher and Janet Reynolds 

==External links==

Societies and associations
* International Federation for Home Economics (IFHE)
* American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences
* National Extension Association of Family and Consumer Sciences
* Teachers of Home Economics Specialist Association 

Resources
* &quot;What Was Home Economics?&quot; web pages at the Cornell University library on the history and influence of home economics
* USDA Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service 
* Home Economics Archive: Tradition, Research, History (HEARTH)
* Family Consumer Science Lesson Plans
* National Standards for Family and Consumer Sciences Education (India)
* Family, Career and Community Leaders of America (FCCLA)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="0" end="14" title="Home economics" label="Home economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="28" end="44" title="Home economics" label="domestic science"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="48" end="76" title="Home economics" label="family and consumer sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="97" end="100" title="Home economics" label="FCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q425694" start="104" end="108" title="Home economics" label="FACS"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="846" end="865" title="secondary education" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q828748" start="872" end="892" title="continuing education" label="continuing education"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="928" end="935" title="Primary education" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743062" start="1081" end="1137" title="American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences" label="The American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743062" start="2006" end="2058" title="American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences" label="American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q13006147" start="2277" end="2296" title="secondary education" label="secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q828748" start="2323" end="2343" title="continuing education" label="continuing education"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="2389" end="2406" title="primary education" label="primary education"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2469" end="2512" title="International Federation for Home Economics" label="International Federation for Home Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q720858" start="2839" end="2852" title="human ecology" label="human ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171563" start="2991" end="3024" title="Cornell University College of Human Ecology" label="Cornell University&amp;#x27;s program"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3107" end="3150" title="International Federation for Home Economics" label="International Federation for Home Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q243253" start="3380" end="3398" title="physical education" label="physical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q27737" start="3963" end="3981" title="consumer education" label="consumer education"/>
<link wikidata="Q23787374" start="4256" end="4275" title="Reifenstein schools" label="Reifenstein schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393258" start="4641" end="4656" title="rural economics" label="rural economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5109" end="5114" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351151" start="5123" end="5127" title="National Institute of Open Schooling" label="NIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347350" start="5129" end="5133" title="Central Board of Secondary Education" label="CBSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350855" start="5135" end="5139" title="Indian Certificate of Secondary Education" label="ICSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176336" start="5141" end="5146" title="CISCE" label="CISCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q10393" start="5424" end="5429" title="Bogor" label="Bogor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310228" start="5756" end="5775" title="Leaving Certificate (Ireland)" label="Leaving Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155054" start="5898" end="5915" title="community school (Ireland)" label="community schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q923165" start="5962" end="5983" title="third-level education in the Republic of Ireland" label="third-level education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604924" start="6196" end="6207" title="Ada Gobetti" label="Ada Gobetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935345" start="6861" end="6875" title="Gentile reform" label="Gentile reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q41114" start="7497" end="7519" title="Ewha Womans University" label="Ewha Womans University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="7523" end="7528" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072" start="8187" end="8205" title="Consumer economics" label="Consumer economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q301468" start="8217" end="8235" title="Consumer behaviour" label="Consumer awareness"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576648" start="8267" end="8278" title="Louisa Hope" label="Louisa Hope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8302" end="8371" title="Scottish Ladies Association for Promoting Female Industrial Education" label="Scottish Ladies Association for Promoting Female Industrial Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q18922308" start="9583" end="9613" title="Thereza Rucker" label="Thereza Charlotte, Lady Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9783" end="9785" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501560" start="9808" end="9812" title="GCSE" label="GCSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="10003" end="10011" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919096" start="10209" end="10212" title="Scottish Qualifications Authority" label="SQA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="10281" end="10291" title="homemaking" label="homemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q462169" start="11009" end="11026" title="Catherine Beecher" label="Catherine Beecher"/>
<link wikidata="Q102513" start="11038" end="11059" title="Harriet Beecher Stowe" label="Harriet Beecher Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066087" start="11452" end="11463" title="Morrill Land-Grant Acts" label="Morrill Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="11483" end="11498" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q117475061" start="12341" end="12364" title="Lake Placid Conferences" label="Lake Placid Conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="12784" end="12794" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State"/>
<link wikidata="Q108459392" start="12798" end="12817" title="Mary Beaumont Welch" label="Mary Beaumont Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273" start="14013" end="14035" title="Ellen Swallow Richards" label="Ellen Swallow Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743062" start="14178" end="14230" title="American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences" label="American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="14288" end="14296" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111510" start="14644" end="14674" title="National Education Association" label="National Education Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17337" end="17348" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17353" end="17355" title="World War II" label="II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545704" start="17484" end="17499" title="Smith–Lever Act of 1914" label="Smith-Lever Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545702" start="17508" end="17524" title="Smith–Hughes Act" label="Smith-Hughes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="17876" end="17894" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977453" start="18833" end="18853" title="second-wave feminism" label="second-wave feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48532" start="19116" end="19129" title="Desegregation in the United States" label="desegregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="19138" end="19162" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q234606" start="19346" end="19360" title="Martha Stewart" label="Martha Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072" start="22115" end="22133" title="Consumer economics" label="Consumer economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107761" start="22136" end="22155" title="Domestic technology" label="Domestic technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273" start="22158" end="22180" title="Ellen Swallow Richards" label="Ellen Swallow Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378891" start="22183" end="22192" title="Euthenics" label="Euthenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q623006" start="22195" end="22213" title="Family (economics)" label="Family (economics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406668" start="22216" end="22225" title="Homemaker" label="Homemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q720858" start="22228" end="22241" title="Human ecology" label="Human ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548669" start="22250" end="22286" title="The Secret History of Home Economics" label="The Secret History of Home Economics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50650" wikidata="Q333" url="?curid=50650" title="Astronomy">
<text>Astronomy is a natural science that studies celestial objects and the phenomena that occur in the cosmos. It uses mathematics, physics, and chemistry in order to explain their origin and their overall evolution. Objects of interest include planets, moons, stars, nebulae, galaxies, meteoroids, asteroids, and comets. Relevant phenomena include supernova explosions, gamma ray bursts, quasars, blazars, pulsars, and cosmic microwave background radiation. More generally, astronomy studies everything that originates beyond Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. Cosmology is a branch of astronomy that studies the universe as a whole.

Astronomy is one of the oldest natural sciences. The early civilizations in recorded history made methodical observations of the night sky. These include the Egyptians, Babylonians, Greeks, Indians, Chinese, Maya, and many ancient indigenous peoples of the Americas. In the past, astronomy included disciplines as diverse as astrometry, celestial navigation, observational astronomy, and the making of calendars.

Professional astronomy is split into observational and theoretical branches. Observational astronomy is focused on acquiring data from observations of astronomical objects. This data is then analyzed using basic principles of physics. Theoretical astronomy is oriented toward the development of computer or analytical models to describe astronomical objects and phenomena. These two fields complement each other. Theoretical astronomy seeks to explain observational results and observations are used to confirm theoretical results.

Astronomy is one of the few sciences in which amateurs play an active role. This is especially true for the discovery and observation of transient events. Amateur astronomers have helped with many important discoveries, such as finding new comets.

== Etymology ==
&quot;Astronomy&quot; (from the Greek from &quot;astron&quot;, &quot;star&quot; and -νομία &quot;&quot; from &quot;nomos&quot;, &quot;law&quot; or &quot;culture&quot;) means &quot;law of the stars&quot; (or &quot;culture of the stars&quot; depending on the translation). Astronomy should not be confused with astrology, the belief system which claims that human affairs are correlated with the positions of celestial objects. Although the two fields share a common origin, they are now entirely distinct.

=== Use of terms &quot;astronomy&quot; and &quot;astrophysics&quot; ===
&quot;Astronomy&quot; and &quot;astrophysics&quot; are synonyms. Based on strict dictionary definitions, &quot;astronomy&quot; refers to &quot;the study of objects and matter outside the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere and of their physical and chemical properties&quot;, while &quot;astrophysics&quot; refers to the branch of astronomy dealing with &quot;the behavior, physical properties, and dynamic processes of celestial objects and phenomena&quot;. In some cases, as in the introduction of the introductory textbook &quot;The Physical Universe&quot; by Frank Shu, &quot;astronomy&quot; may be used to describe the qualitative study of the subject, whereas &quot;astrophysics&quot; is used to describe the physics-oriented version of the subject. However, since most modern astronomical research deals with subjects related to physics, modern astronomy could actually be called astrophysics. Some fields, such as astrometry, are purely astronomy rather than also astrophysics. Various departments in which scientists carry out research on this subject may use &quot;astronomy&quot; and &quot;astrophysics&quot;, partly depending on whether the department is historically affiliated with a physics department, and many professional astronomers have physics rather than astronomy degrees. Some titles of the leading scientific journals in this field include &quot;The Astronomical Journal&quot;, &quot;The Astrophysical Journal&quot;, and &quot;Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics&quot;.

== History ==


=== Pre-historic astronomy ===
In early historic times, astronomy only consisted of the observation and predictions of the motions of objects visible to the naked eye. In some locations, early cultures assembled massive artifacts that may have had some astronomical purpose. In addition to their ceremonial uses, these observatories could be employed to determine the seasons, an important factor in knowing when to plant crops and in understanding the length of the year.

===Classical astronomy===
As civilizations developed, most notably in Egypt, Mesopotamia, Greece, Persia, India, China, and Central America, astronomical observatories were assembled and ideas on the nature of the Universe began to develop. Most early astronomy consisted of mapping the positions of the stars and planets, a science now referred to as astrometry. From these observations, early ideas about the motions of the planets were formed, and the nature of the Sun, Moon and the Earth in the Universe were explored philosophically.

Mesopotamia is worldwide the place of the earliest known astronomer and poet by name: Enheduanna, Akkadian high priestess to the lunar deity Nanna/Sin and princess, daughter of Sargon the Great ( – BCE). She had the Moon tracked in her chambers and wrote poems about her divine Moon.

A particularly important early development was the beginning of mathematical and scientific astronomy, which began among the Babylonians, who laid the foundations for the later astronomical traditions that developed in many other civilizations. The Babylonians discovered that lunar eclipses recurred in a repeating cycle known as a saros.

Following the Babylonians, significant advances in astronomy were made in ancient Greece and the Hellenistic world. Greek astronomy is characterized from the start by seeking a rational, physical explanation for celestial phenomena. In the 3rd century BC, Aristarchus of Samos estimated the size and distance of the Moon and Sun, and he proposed a model of the Solar System where the Earth and planets rotated around the Sun, now called the heliocentric model. In the 2nd century BC, Hipparchus discovered precession, calculated the size and distance of the Moon and invented the earliest known astronomical devices such as the astrolabe. Hipparchus also created a comprehensive catalog of 1020 stars, and most of the constellations of the northern hemisphere derive from Greek astronomy. The Antikythera mechanism (–80 BC) was an early analog computer designed to calculate the location of the Sun, Moon, and planets for a given date. Technological artifacts of similar complexity did not reappear until the 14th century, when mechanical astronomical clocks appeared in Europe.

The Earth was believed to be the center of the Universe with the Sun, the Moon and the stars rotating around it. This is known as the geocentric model of the Universe, or the Ptolemaic system, named after Ptolemy.

=== Post-classical astronomy ===
Astronomy flourished in the Islamic world and other parts of the world. This led to the emergence of the first astronomical observatories in the Muslim world by the early 9th century. In 964, the Andromeda Galaxy, the largest galaxy in the Local Group, was described by the Persian Muslim astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi in his &quot;Book of Fixed Stars&quot;. The SN 1006 supernova, the brightest apparent magnitude stellar event in recorded history, was observed by the Egyptian Arabic astronomer Ali ibn Ridwan and Chinese astronomers in 1006. Iranian scholar Al-Biruni observed that, contrary to Ptolemy, the Sun&#x27;s apogee (highest point in the heavens) was mobile, not fixed. Some of the prominent Islamic (mostly Persian and Arab) astronomers who made significant contributions to the science include Al-Battani, Thebit, Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi, Biruni, Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī, Al-Birjandi, and the astronomers of the Maragheh and Samarkand observatories. Astronomers during that time introduced many Arabic names now used for individual stars.

It is also believed that the ruins at Great Zimbabwe and Timbuktu may have housed astronomical observatories. In Post-classical West Africa, Astronomers studied the movement of stars and relation to seasons, crafting charts of the heavens as well as precise diagrams of orbits of the other planets based on complex mathematical calculations. Songhai historian Mahmud Kati documented a meteor shower in August 1583.
Europeans had previously believed that there had been no astronomical observation in sub-Saharan Africa during the pre-colonial Middle Ages, but modern discoveries show otherwise.

For over six centuries (from the recovery of ancient learning during the late Middle Ages into the Enlightenment), the Roman Catholic Church gave more financial and social support to the study of astronomy than probably all other institutions. Among the Church&#x27;s motives was finding the date for Easter.

Medieval Europe housed a number of important astronomers. Richard of Wallingford (1292–1336) made major contributions to astronomy and horology, including the invention of the first astronomical clock, the Rectangulus which allowed for the measurement of angles between planets and other astronomical bodies, as well as an equatorium called the &quot;Albion&quot; which could be used for astronomical calculations such as lunar, solar and planetary longitudes and could predict eclipses. Nicole Oresme (1320–1382) and Jean Buridan (1300–1361) first discussed evidence for the rotation of the Earth, furthermore, Buridan also developed the theory of impetus (predecessor of the modern scientific theory of inertia) which was able to show planets were capable of motion without the intervention of angels. Georg von Peuerbach (1423–1461) and Regiomontanus (1436–1476) helped make astronomical progress instrumental to Copernicus&#x27;s development of the heliocentric model decades later.

=== Early telescopic astronomy ===
During the Renaissance, Nicolaus Copernicus proposed a heliocentric model of the solar system. His work was defended by Galileo Galilei and expanded upon by Johannes Kepler. Kepler was the first to devise a system that correctly described the details of the motion of the planets around the Sun. However, Kepler did not succeed in formulating a theory behind the laws he wrote down. It was Isaac Newton, with his invention of celestial dynamics and his law of gravitation, who finally explained the motions of the planets. Newton also developed the reflecting telescope.

Improvements in the size and quality of the telescope led to further discoveries. The English astronomer John Flamsteed catalogued over 3000 stars. More extensive star catalogues were produced by Nicolas Louis de Lacaille. The astronomer William Herschel made a detailed catalog of nebulosity and clusters, and in 1781 discovered the planet Uranus, the first new planet found.

During the 18–19th centuries, the study of the three-body problem by Leonhard Euler, Alexis Claude Clairaut, and Jean le Rond d&#x27;Alembert led to more accurate predictions about the motions of the Moon and planets. This work was further refined by Joseph-Louis Lagrange and Pierre Simon Laplace, allowing the masses of the planets and moons to be estimated from their perturbations.

Significant advances in astronomy came about with the introduction of new technology, including the spectroscope and photography. Joseph von Fraunhofer discovered about 600 bands in the spectrum of the Sun in 1814–15, which, in 1859, Gustav Kirchhoff ascribed to the presence of different elements. Stars were proven to be similar to the Earth&#x27;s own Sun, but with a wide range of temperatures, masses, and sizes.

=== Deep space astronomy ===

The existence of the Earth&#x27;s galaxy, the Milky Way, as its own group of stars was only proven in the 20th century, along with the existence of &quot;external&quot; galaxies. The observed recession of those galaxies led to the discovery of the expansion of the Universe. In 1919, when the Hooker Telescope was completed, the prevailing view was that the universe consisted entirely of the Milky Way Galaxy. Using the Hooker Telescope, Edwin Hubble identified Cepheid variables in several spiral nebulae and in 1922–1923 proved conclusively that Andromeda Nebula and Triangulum among others, were entire galaxies outside our own, thus proving that the universe consists of a multitude of galaxies. With this Hubble formulated the Hubble constant, which allowed for the first time a calculation of the age of the Universe and size of the Observable Universe, which became increasingly precise with better meassurements, starting at 2 billion years and 280 million light-years, until 2006 when data of the Hubble Space Telescope allowed a very accurate calculation of the age of the Universe and size of the Observable Universe.

Theoretical astronomy led to speculations on the existence of objects such as black holes and neutron stars, which have been used to explain such observed phenomena as quasars, pulsars, blazars, and radio galaxies. Physical cosmology made huge advances during the 20th century. In the early 1900s the model of the Big Bang theory was formulated, heavily evidenced by cosmic microwave background radiation, Hubble&#x27;s law, and the cosmological abundances of elements. Space telescopes have enabled measurements in parts of the electromagnetic spectrum normally blocked or blurred by the atmosphere. In February 2016, it was revealed that the LIGO project had detected evidence of gravitational waves in the previous September.

== Observational astronomy ==
The main source of information about celestial bodies and other objects is visible light, or more generally electromagnetic radiation. Observational astronomy may be categorized according to the corresponding region of the electromagnetic spectrum on which the observations are made. Some parts of the spectrum can be observed from the Earth&#x27;s surface, while other parts are only observable from either high altitudes or outside the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. Specific information on these subfields is given below.

===Radio astronomy===
Radio astronomy uses radiation with wavelengths greater than approximately one millimeter, outside the visible range. Radio astronomy is different from most other forms of observational astronomy in that the observed radio waves can be treated as waves rather than as discrete photons. Hence, it is relatively easier to measure both the amplitude and phase of radio waves, whereas this is not as easily done at shorter wavelengths.

Although some radio waves are emitted directly by astronomical objects, a product of thermal emission, most of the radio emission that is observed is the result of synchrotron radiation, which is produced when electrons orbit magnetic fields. Additionally, a number of spectral lines produced by interstellar gas, notably the hydrogen spectral line at 21 cm, are observable at radio wavelengths.

A wide variety of other objects are observable at radio wavelengths, including supernovae, interstellar gas, pulsars, and active galactic nuclei.

=== Infrared astronomy ===
Infrared astronomy is founded on the detection and analysis of infrared radiation, wavelengths longer than red light and outside the range of our vision. The infrared spectrum is useful for studying objects that are too cold to radiate visible light, such as planets, circumstellar disks or nebulae whose light is blocked by dust. The longer wavelengths of infrared can penetrate clouds of dust that block visible light, allowing the observation of young stars embedded in molecular clouds and the cores of galaxies. Observations from the Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) have been particularly effective at unveiling numerous galactic protostars and their host star clusters.
With the exception of infrared wavelengths close to visible light, such radiation is heavily absorbed by the atmosphere, or masked, as the atmosphere itself produces significant infrared emission. Consequently, infrared observatories have to be located in high, dry places on Earth or in space. Some molecules radiate strongly in the infrared. This allows the study of the chemistry of space; more specifically it can detect water in comets.

=== Optical astronomy ===
Historically, optical astronomy, which has been also called visible light astronomy, is the oldest form of astronomy. Images of observations were originally drawn by hand. In the late 19th century and most of the 20th century, images were made using photographic equipment. Modern images are made using digital detectors, particularly using charge-coupled devices (CCDs) and recorded on modern medium. Although visible light itself extends from approximately 4000 Å to 7000 Å (400 nm to 700 nm), that same equipment can be used to observe some near-ultraviolet and near-infrared radiation.

=== Ultraviolet astronomy ===
Ultraviolet astronomy employs ultraviolet wavelengths between approximately 100 and 3200 Å (10 to 320 nm). Light at those wavelengths is absorbed by the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, requiring observations at these wavelengths to be performed from the upper atmosphere or from space. Ultraviolet astronomy is best suited to the study of thermal radiation and spectral emission lines from hot blue stars (OB stars) that are very bright in this wave band. This includes the blue stars in other galaxies, which have been the targets of several ultraviolet surveys. Other objects commonly observed in ultraviolet light include planetary nebulae, supernova remnants, and active galactic nuclei. However, as ultraviolet light is easily absorbed by interstellar dust, an adjustment of ultraviolet measurements is necessary.

=== X-ray astronomy ===
X-ray astronomy uses X-ray wavelengths. Typically, X-ray radiation is produced by synchrotron emission (the result of electrons orbiting magnetic field lines), thermal emission from thin gases above 107 (10 million) kelvins, and thermal emission from thick gases above 107 Kelvin. Since X-rays are absorbed by the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, all X-ray observations must be performed from high-altitude balloons, rockets, or X-ray astronomy satellites. Notable X-ray sources include X-ray binaries, pulsars, supernova remnants, elliptical galaxies, clusters of galaxies, and active galactic nuclei.

=== Gamma-ray astronomy ===

Gamma ray astronomy observes astronomical objects at the shortest wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum. Gamma rays may be observed directly by satellites such as the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory or by specialized telescopes called atmospheric Cherenkov telescopes. The Cherenkov telescopes do not detect the gamma rays directly but instead detect the flashes of visible light produced when gamma rays are absorbed by the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere.

Most gamma-ray emitting sources are actually gamma-ray bursts, objects which only produce gamma radiation for a few milliseconds to thousands of seconds before fading away. Only 10% of gamma-ray sources are non-transient sources. These steady gamma-ray emitters include pulsars, neutron stars, and black hole candidates such as active galactic nuclei.

=== Fields not based on the electromagnetic spectrum ===
In addition to electromagnetic radiation, a few other events originating from great distances may be observed from the Earth.

In neutrino astronomy, astronomers use heavily shielded underground facilities such as SAGE, GALLEX, and Kamioka II/III for the detection of neutrinos. The vast majority of the neutrinos streaming through the Earth originate from the Sun, but 24 neutrinos were also detected from supernova 1987A. Cosmic rays, which consist of very high energy particles (atomic nuclei) that can decay or be absorbed when they enter the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, result in a cascade of secondary particles which can be detected by current observatories. Some future neutrino detectors may also be sensitive to the particles produced when cosmic rays hit the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere.

Gravitational-wave astronomy is an emerging field of astronomy that employs gravitational-wave detectors to collect observational data about distant massive objects. A few observatories have been constructed, such as the &quot;Laser Interferometer Gravitational Observatory&quot; LIGO. LIGO made its first detection on 14 September 2015, observing gravitational waves from a binary black hole. A second gravitational wave was detected on 26 December 2015 and additional observations should continue but gravitational waves require extremely sensitive instruments.

The combination of observations made using electromagnetic radiation, neutrinos or gravitational waves and other complementary information, is known as multi-messenger astronomy.

=== Astrometry and celestial mechanics ===
One of the oldest fields in astronomy, and in all of science, is the measurement of the positions of celestial objects. Historically, accurate knowledge of the positions of the Sun, Moon, planets and stars has been essential in celestial navigation (the use of celestial objects to guide navigation) and in the making of calendars.

Careful measurement of the positions of the planets has led to a solid understanding of gravitational perturbations, and an ability to determine past and future positions of the planets with great accuracy, a field known as celestial mechanics. More recently the tracking of near-Earth objects will allow for predictions of close encounters or potential collisions of the Earth with those objects.

The measurement of stellar parallax of nearby stars provides a fundamental baseline in the cosmic distance ladder that is used to measure the scale of the Universe. Parallax measurements of nearby stars provide an absolute baseline for the properties of more distant stars, as their properties can be compared. Measurements of the radial velocity and proper motion of stars allow astronomers to plot the movement of these systems through the Milky Way galaxy. Astrometric results are the basis used to calculate the distribution of speculated dark matter in the galaxy.

During the 1990s, the measurement of the stellar wobble of nearby stars was used to detect large extrasolar planets orbiting those stars.

== Theoretical astronomy ==
Theoretical astronomers use several tools including analytical models and computational numerical simulations; each has its particular advantages. Analytical models of a process are better for giving broader insight into the heart of what is going on. Numerical models reveal the existence of phenomena and effects otherwise unobserved.

Theorists in astronomy endeavor to create theoretical models that are based on existing observations and known physics, and to predict observational consequences of those models. The observation of phenomena predicted by a model allows astronomers to select between several alternative or conflicting models. Theorists also modify existing models to take into account new observations. In some cases, a large amount of observational data that is inconsistent with a model may lead to abandoning it largely or completely, as for geocentric theory, the existence of luminiferous aether, and the steady-state model of cosmic evolution.

Phenomena modeled by theoretical astronomers include:
* stellar dynamics and evolution
* galaxy formation
* large-scale distribution of matter in the Universe
* the origin of cosmic rays
* general relativity and physical cosmology, including string cosmology and astroparticle physics.

Modern theoretical astronomy reflects dramatic advances in observation since the 1990s, including studies of the cosmic microwave background, distant supernovae and galaxy redshifts, which have led to the development of a standard model of cosmology. This model requires the universe to contain large amounts of dark matter and dark energy whose nature is currently not well understood, but the model gives detailed predictions that are in excellent agreement with many diverse observations.

== Specific subfields ==

=== Astrophysics ===

Astrophysics is the branch of astronomy that employs the principles of physics and chemistry &quot;to ascertain the nature of the astronomical objects, rather than their positions or motions in space&quot;. Among the objects studied are the Sun, other stars, galaxies, extrasolar planets, the interstellar medium and the cosmic microwave background. Their emissions are examined across all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, and the properties examined include luminosity, density, temperature, and chemical composition. Because astrophysics is a very broad subject, &quot;astrophysicists&quot; typically apply many disciplines of physics, including mechanics, electromagnetism, statistical mechanics, thermodynamics, quantum mechanics, relativity, nuclear and particle physics, and atomic and molecular physics.

In practice, modern astronomical research often involves a substantial amount of work in the realms of theoretical and observational physics. Some areas of study for astrophysicists include their attempts to determine the properties of dark matter, dark energy, and black holes; whether or not time travel is possible, wormholes can form, or the multiverse exists; and the origin and ultimate fate of the universe. Topics also studied by theoretical astrophysicists include Solar System formation and evolution; stellar dynamics and evolution; galaxy formation and evolution; magnetohydrodynamics; large-scale structure of matter in the universe; origin of cosmic rays; general relativity and physical cosmology, including string cosmology and astroparticle physics.

=== Astrochemistry ===

Astrochemistry is the study of the abundance and reactions of molecules in the Universe, and their interaction with radiation. The discipline is an overlap of astronomy and chemistry. The word &quot;astrochemistry&quot; may be applied to both the Solar System and the interstellar medium. The study of the abundance of elements and isotope ratios in Solar System objects, such as meteorites, is also called cosmochemistry, while the study of interstellar atoms and molecules and their interaction with radiation is sometimes called molecular astrophysics. The formation, atomic and chemical composition, evolution and fate of molecular gas clouds is of special interest, because it is from these clouds that solar systems form. Studies in this field contribute to the understanding of the formation of the Solar System, Earth&#x27;s origin and geology, abiogenesis, and the origin of climate and oceans.

=== Astrobiology ===

Astrobiology is an interdisciplinary scientific field concerned with the origins, early evolution, distribution, and future of life in the universe. Astrobiology considers the question of whether extraterrestrial life exists, and how humans can detect it if it does. The term exobiology is similar.

Astrobiology makes use of molecular biology, biophysics, biochemistry, chemistry, astronomy, physical cosmology, exoplanetology and geology to investigate the possibility of life on other worlds and help recognize biospheres that might be different from that on Earth. The origin and early evolution of life is an inseparable part of the discipline of astrobiology. Astrobiology concerns itself with interpretation of existing scientific data, and although speculation is entertained to give context, astrobiology concerns itself primarily with hypotheses that fit firmly into existing scientific theories.

This interdisciplinary field encompasses research on the origin of planetary systems, origins of organic compounds in space, rock-water-carbon interactions, abiogenesis on Earth, planetary habitability, research on biosignatures for life detection, and studies on the potential for life to adapt to challenges on Earth and in outer space.

=== Physical cosmology ===

Cosmology (from the Greek () &quot;world, universe&quot; and () &quot;word, study&quot; or literally &quot;logic&quot;) could be considered the study of the Universe as a whole.

Observations of the large-scale structure of the Universe, a branch known as physical cosmology, have provided a deep understanding of the formation and evolution of the cosmos. Fundamental to modern cosmology is the well-accepted theory of the Big Bang, wherein our Universe began at a single point in time, and thereafter expanded over the course of 13.8 billion years to its present condition. The concept of the Big Bang can be traced back to the discovery of the microwave background radiation in 1965.

In the course of this expansion, the Universe underwent several evolutionary stages. In the very early moments, it is theorized that the Universe experienced a very rapid cosmic inflation, which homogenized the starting conditions. Thereafter, nucleosynthesis produced the elemental abundance of the early Universe. (See also nucleocosmochronology.)

When the first neutral atoms formed from a sea of primordial ions, space became transparent to radiation, releasing the energy viewed today as the microwave background radiation. The expanding Universe then underwent a Dark Age due to the lack of stellar energy sources.

A hierarchical structure of matter began to form from minute variations in the mass density of space. Matter accumulated in the densest regions, forming clouds of gas and the earliest stars, the Population III stars. These massive stars triggered the reionization process and are believed to have created many of the heavy elements in the early Universe, which, through nuclear decay, create lighter elements, allowing the cycle of nucleosynthesis to continue longer.

Gravitational aggregations clustered into filaments, leaving voids in the gaps. Gradually, organizations of gas and dust merged to form the first primitive galaxies. Over time, these pulled in more matter, and were often organized into groups and clusters of galaxies, then into larger-scale superclusters.

Fundamental to the structure of the Universe is the existence of dark matter and dark energy. These are now thought to be its dominant components, forming 96% of the mass of the Universe. For this reason, much effort is expended in trying to understand the physics of these components.

=== Extragalactic astronomy ===

The study of objects outside our galaxy is a branch of astronomy concerned with the formation and evolution of galaxies, their morphology (description) and classification, the observation of active galaxies, and at a larger scale, the groups and clusters of galaxies. Finally, the latter is important for the understanding of the large-scale structure of the cosmos.

Most galaxies are organized into distinct shapes that allow for classification schemes. They are commonly divided into spiral, elliptical and Irregular galaxies.

As the name suggests, an elliptical galaxy has the cross-sectional shape of an ellipse. The stars move along random orbits with no preferred direction. These galaxies contain little or no interstellar dust, few star-forming regions, and older stars. Elliptical galaxies may have been formed by other galaxies merging.

A spiral galaxy is organized into a flat, rotating disk, usually with a prominent bulge or bar at the center, and trailing bright arms that spiral outward. The arms are dusty regions of star formation within which massive young stars produce a blue tint. Spiral galaxies are typically surrounded by a halo of older stars. Both the Milky Way and one of our nearest galaxy neighbors, the Andromeda Galaxy, are spiral galaxies.

Irregular galaxies are chaotic in appearance, and are neither spiral nor elliptical. About a quarter of all galaxies are irregular, and the peculiar shapes of such galaxies may be the result of gravitational interaction.

An active galaxy is a formation that emits a significant amount of its energy from a source other than its stars, dust and gas. It is powered by a compact region at the core, thought to be a supermassive black hole that is emitting radiation from in-falling material. A radio galaxy is an active galaxy that is very luminous in the radio portion of the spectrum, and is emitting immense plumes or lobes of gas. Active galaxies that emit shorter frequency, high-energy radiation include Seyfert galaxies, quasars, and blazars. Quasars are believed to be the most consistently luminous objects in the known universe.

The large-scale structure of the cosmos is represented by groups and clusters of galaxies. This structure is organized into a hierarchy of groupings, with the largest being the superclusters. The collective matter is formed into filaments and walls, leaving large voids between.

=== Galactic astronomy ===

The Solar System orbits within the Milky Way, a barred spiral galaxy that is a prominent member of the Local Group of galaxies. It is a rotating mass of gas, dust, stars and other objects, held together by mutual gravitational attraction. As the Earth is located within the dusty outer arms, there are large portions of the Milky Way that are obscured from view.

In the center of the Milky Way is the core, a bar-shaped bulge with what is believed to be a supermassive black hole at its center. This is surrounded by four primary arms that spiral from the core. This is a region of active star formation that contains many younger, population I stars. The disk is surrounded by a spheroid halo of older, population II stars, as well as relatively dense concentrations of stars known as globular clusters.

Between the stars lies the interstellar medium, a region of sparse matter. In the densest regions, molecular clouds of molecular hydrogen and other elements create star-forming regions. These begin as a compact pre-stellar core or dark nebulae, which concentrate and collapse (in volumes determined by the Jeans length) to form compact protostars.

As the more massive stars appear, they transform the cloud into an H II region (ionized atomic hydrogen) of glowing gas and plasma. The stellar wind and supernova explosions from these stars eventually cause the cloud to disperse, often leaving behind one or more young open clusters of stars. These clusters gradually disperse, and the stars join the population of the Milky Way.

Kinematic studies of matter in the Milky Way and other galaxies have demonstrated that there is more mass than can be accounted for by visible matter. A dark matter halo appears to dominate the mass, although the nature of this dark matter remains undetermined.

=== Stellar astronomy ===

The study of stars and stellar evolution is fundamental to our understanding of the Universe. The astrophysics of stars has been determined through observation and theoretical understanding; and from computer simulations of the interior. Star formation occurs in dense regions of dust and gas, known as giant molecular clouds. When destabilized, cloud fragments can collapse under the influence of gravity, to form a protostar. A sufficiently dense, and hot, core region will trigger nuclear fusion, thus creating a main-sequence star.

Almost all elements heavier than hydrogen and helium were created inside the cores of stars.

The characteristics of the resulting star depend primarily upon its starting mass. The more massive the star, the greater its luminosity, and the more rapidly it fuses its hydrogen fuel into helium in its core. Over time, this hydrogen fuel is completely converted into helium, and the star begins to evolve. The fusion of helium requires a higher core temperature. A star with a high enough core temperature will push its outer layers outward while increasing its core density. The resulting red giant formed by the expanding outer layers enjoys a brief life span, before the helium fuel in the core is in turn consumed. Very massive stars can also undergo a series of evolutionary phases, as they fuse increasingly heavier elements.

The final fate of the star depends on its mass, with stars of mass greater than about eight times the Sun becoming core collapse supernovae; while smaller stars blow off their outer layers and leave behind the inert core in the form of a white dwarf. The ejection of the outer layers forms a planetary nebula. The remnant of a supernova is a dense neutron star, or, if the stellar mass was at least three times that of the Sun, a black hole. Closely orbiting binary stars can follow more complex evolutionary paths, such as mass transfer onto a white dwarf companion that can potentially cause a supernova. Planetary nebulae and supernovae distribute the &quot;metals&quot; produced in the star by fusion to the interstellar medium; without them, all new stars (and their planetary systems) would be formed from hydrogen and helium alone.

=== Solar astronomy ===

At a distance of about eight light-minutes, the most frequently studied star is the Sun, a typical main-sequence dwarf star of stellar class G2 V, and about 4.6 billion years (Gyr) old. The Sun is not considered a variable star, but it does undergo periodic changes in activity known as the sunspot cycle. This is an 11-year oscillation in sunspot number. Sunspots are regions of lower-than-average temperatures that are associated with intense magnetic activity.

The Sun has steadily increased in luminosity by 40% since it first became a main-sequence star. The Sun has also undergone periodic changes in luminosity that can have a significant impact on the Earth. The Maunder minimum, for example, is believed to have caused the Little Ice Age phenomenon during the Middle Ages.

At the center of the Sun is the core region, a volume of sufficient temperature and pressure for nuclear fusion to occur. Above the core is the radiation zone, where the plasma conveys the energy flux by means of radiation. Above that is the convection zone where the gas material transports energy primarily through physical displacement of the gas known as convection. It is believed that the movement of mass within the convection zone creates the magnetic activity that generates sunspots. The visible outer surface of the Sun is called the photosphere. Above this layer is a thin region known as the chromosphere. This is surrounded by a transition region of rapidly increasing temperatures, and finally by the super-heated corona.

A solar wind of plasma particles constantly streams outward from the Sun until, at the outermost limit of the Solar System, it reaches the heliopause. As the solar wind passes the Earth, it interacts with the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field (magnetosphere) and deflects the solar wind, but traps some creating the Van Allen radiation belts that envelop the Earth. The aurora are created when solar wind particles are guided by the magnetic flux lines into the Earth&#x27;s polar regions where the lines then descend into the atmosphere.

=== Planetary science ===
Planetary science is the study of the assemblage of planets, moons, dwarf planets, comets, asteroids, and other bodies orbiting the Sun, as well as extrasolar planets. The Solar System has been relatively well-studied, initially through telescopes and then later by spacecraft. This has provided a good overall understanding of the formation and evolution of the Sun&#x27;s planetary system, although many new discoveries are still being made.

The Solar System is divided into the inner Solar System (subdivided into the inner planets and the asteroid belt), the outer Solar System (subdivided into the outer planets and centaurs), comets, the trans-Neptunian region (subdivided into the Kuiper belt, and the scattered disc) and the farthest regions (e.g., boundaries of the heliosphere, and the Oort Cloud, which may extend as far as a light-year). The inner terrestrial planets consist of Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. The outer giant planets are the gas giants (Jupiter and Saturn) and the ice giants (Uranus and Neptune).

The planets were formed 4.6 billion years ago in the protoplanetary disk that surrounded the early Sun. Through a process that included gravitational attraction, collision, and accretion, the disk formed clumps of matter that, with time, became protoplanets. The radiation pressure of the solar wind then expelled most of the unaccreted matter, and only those planets with sufficient mass retained their gaseous atmosphere. The planets continued to sweep up, or eject, the remaining matter during a period of intense bombardment, evidenced by the many impact craters on the Moon. During this period, some of the protoplanets may have collided and one such collision may have formed the Moon.

Once a planet reaches sufficient mass, the materials of different densities segregate within, during planetary differentiation. This process can form a stony or metallic core, surrounded by a mantle and an outer crust. The core may include solid and liquid regions, and some planetary cores generate their own magnetic field, which can protect their atmospheres from solar wind stripping.

A planet or moon&#x27;s interior heat is produced from the collisions that created the body, by the decay of radioactive materials (&quot;e.g.&quot; uranium, thorium, and 26Al), or tidal heating caused by interactions with other bodies. Some planets and moons accumulate enough heat to drive geologic processes such as volcanism and tectonics. Those that accumulate or retain an atmosphere can also undergo surface erosion from wind or water. Smaller bodies, without tidal heating, cool more quickly; and their geological activity ceases with the exception of impact cratering.

== Interdisciplinary studies ==
Astronomy and astrophysics have developed significant interdisciplinary links with other major scientific fields. Archaeoastronomy is the study of ancient or traditional astronomies in their cultural context, utilizing archaeological and anthropological evidence. Astrobiology is the study of the advent and evolution of biological systems in the Universe, with particular emphasis on the possibility of non-terrestrial life. Astrostatistics is the application of statistics to astrophysics to the analysis of a vast amount of observational astrophysical data.

The study of chemicals found in space, including their formation, interaction and destruction, is called astrochemistry. These substances are usually found in molecular clouds, although they may also appear in low-temperature stars, brown dwarfs and planets. Cosmochemistry is the study of the chemicals found within the Solar System, including the origins of the elements and variations in the isotope ratios. Both of these fields represent an overlap of the disciplines of astronomy and chemistry. As &quot;forensic astronomy&quot;, finally, methods from astronomy have been used to solve problems of art history and occasionally of law.

== Amateur astronomy ==

Astronomy is one of the sciences to which amateurs can contribute the most.

Collectively, amateur astronomers observe a variety of celestial objects and phenomena sometimes with consumer-level equipment or equipment that they build themselves. Common targets of amateur astronomers include the Sun, the Moon, planets, stars, comets, meteor showers, and a variety of deep-sky objects such as star clusters, galaxies, and nebulae. Astronomy clubs are located throughout the world and many have programs to help their members set up and complete observational programs including those to observe all the objects in the Messier (110 objects) or Herschel 400 catalogues of points of interest in the night sky. One branch of amateur astronomy, astrophotography, involves the taking of photos of the night sky. Many amateurs like to specialize in the observation of particular objects, types of objects, or types of events that interest them.

Most amateurs work at visible wavelengths, but many experiment with wavelengths outside the visible spectrum. This includes the use of infrared filters on conventional telescopes, and also the use of radio telescopes. The pioneer of amateur radio astronomy was Karl Jansky, who started observing the sky at radio wavelengths in the 1930s. A number of amateur astronomers use either homemade telescopes or use radio telescopes which were originally built for astronomy research but which are now available to amateurs (&quot;e.g.&quot; the One-Mile Telescope).

Amateur astronomers continue to make scientific contributions to the field of astronomy and it is one of the few scientific disciplines where amateurs can still make significant contributions. Amateurs can make occultation measurements that are used to refine the orbits of minor planets. They can also discover comets, and perform regular observations of variable stars. Improvements in digital technology have allowed amateurs to make impressive advances in the field of astrophotography.

== Unsolved problems in astronomy ==

In the 21st century there remain important unanswered questions in astronomy. Some are cosmic in scope: for example, what are dark matter and dark energy? These dominate the evolution and fate of the cosmos, yet their true nature remains unknown. What will be the ultimate fate of the universe? Why is the abundance of lithium in the cosmos four times lower than predicted by the standard Big Bang model? Others pertain to more specific classes of phenomena. For example, is the Solar System normal or atypical? What is the origin of the stellar mass spectrum? That is, why do astronomers observe the same distribution of stellar masses—the initial mass function—apparently regardless of the initial conditions? Likewise, questions remain about the formation of the first galaxies, the origin of supermassive black holes, the source of ultra-high-energy cosmic rays, and more.

Is there other life in the Universe? Especially, is there other intelligent life? If so, what is the explanation for the Fermi paradox? The existence of life elsewhere has important scientific and philosophical implications.

== See also ==
* 
* 

=== Lists ===
* 
* 

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 

== External links ==

* NASA/IPAC Extragalactic Database (NED) (NED-Distances)
* Core books and Core journals in Astronomy, from the Smithsonian/NASA Astrophysics Data System</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="0" end="9" title="Astronomy" label="Astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="15" end="30" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="44" end="61" title="astronomical object" label="celestial objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="70" end="79" title="phenomena" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="114" end="125" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="127" end="134" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="140" end="149" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="201" end="210" title="chronology of the Universe" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="240" end="247" title="planets" label="planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="249" end="254" title="natural satellite" label="moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="256" end="260" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="263" end="270" title="nebulae" label="nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="272" end="280" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012" start="282" end="291" title="meteoroid" label="meteoroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="294" end="302" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="309" end="314" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="344" end="353" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247" start="366" end="381" title="gamma ray burst" label="gamma ray burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="384" end="390" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q221221" start="393" end="399" title="blazar" label="blazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="402" end="408" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="415" end="452" title="cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="522" end="545" title="atmosphere of Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="547" end="556" title="Cosmology" label="Cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="599" end="607" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="697" end="713" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153471" start="750" end="759" title="night sky" label="night sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q751843" start="779" end="788" title="Egyptian astronomy" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="790" end="801" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="Babylonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390452" start="803" end="809" title="Greek astronomy" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292962" start="811" end="818" title="Indian astronomy" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="820" end="827" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="829" end="833" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="852" end="886" title="indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q181505" start="946" end="956" title="astrometry" label="astrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="958" end="978" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q818557" start="980" end="1003" title="observational astronomy" label="observational astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132" start="1023" end="1031" title="calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q818557" start="1072" end="1085" title="observational astronomy" label="observational"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635271" start="1090" end="1101" title="theoretical astronomy" label="theoretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093434" start="1631" end="1642" title="citizen science" label="active role"/>
<link wikidata="Q17140822" start="1705" end="1721" title="transient astronomical event" label="transient events"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="1723" end="1742" title="amateur astronomy" label="Amateur astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1865" end="1870" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="2142" end="2151" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660641" start="2272" end="2282" title="Astrology and astronomy" label="two fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="2443" end="2455" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q716516" start="2962" end="2971" title="Frank Shu" label="Frank Shu"/>
<link wikidata="Q181505" start="3321" end="3331" title="astrometry" label="astrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="3639" end="3649" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q669166" start="3770" end="3794" title="The Astronomical Journal" label="The Astronomical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q598789" start="3808" end="3833" title="The Astrophysical Journal" label="The Astrophysical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q752075" start="3851" end="3879" title="Astronomy &amp;amp; Astrophysics" label="Astronomy &amp;amp; Astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="4223" end="4236" title="Observatory" label="observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q751843" start="4448" end="4453" title="Egyptian astronomy" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="4455" end="4466" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390452" start="4468" end="4474" title="Greek astronomy" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960561" start="4476" end="4482" title="Persian astronomy" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292962" start="4484" end="4489" title="Indian astronomy" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="4491" end="4496" title="Chinese astronomy" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="4502" end="4517" title="Maya civilization" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q181505" start="4730" end="4740" title="astrometry" label="astrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q232505" start="5005" end="5015" title="Enheduanna" label="Enheduanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="5017" end="5025" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569856" start="5048" end="5059" title="lunar deity" label="lunar deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q217420" start="5060" end="5069" title="Sin (mythology)" label="Nanna/Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q199461" start="5096" end="5112" title="Sargon the Great" label="Sargon the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="5325" end="5340" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="the Babylonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="5453" end="5464" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="Babylonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="5481" end="5495" title="lunar eclipses" label="lunar eclipses"/>
<link wikidata="Q220397" start="5537" end="5542" title="Saros cycle" label="saros"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="5619" end="5633" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="5642" end="5653" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390452" start="5661" end="5676" title="Greek astronomy" label="Greek astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q140188" start="5801" end="5821" title="Aristarchus of Samos" label="Aristarchus of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091541" start="5836" end="5873" title="Aristarchus On the Sizes and Distances" label="size and distance of the Moon and Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="5906" end="5918" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="5986" end="5998" title="heliocentrism" label="heliocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="6029" end="6039" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104225" start="6051" end="6061" title="precession" label="precession"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="6173" end="6182" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="6263" end="6276" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182324" start="6338" end="6359" title="Antikythera mechanism" label="Antikythera mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q63759" start="6382" end="6397" title="analog computer" label="analog computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="6440" end="6443" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="6445" end="6449" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="6455" end="6462" title="planets" label="planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275" start="6584" end="6602" title="astronomical clock" label="astronomical clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="6759" end="6775" title="geocentric model" label="geocentric model"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="6800" end="6816" title="Ptolemaic system" label="Ptolemaic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="6830" end="6837" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="6873" end="6914" title="Astronomy in medieval Islam" label="Astronomy flourished in the Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="6997" end="7010" title="Observatory" label="observatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="7018" end="7030" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="7069" end="7085" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="7099" end="7105" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944" start="7113" end="7124" title="Local Group" label="Local Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="7173" end="7194" title="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi" label="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087785" start="7208" end="7227" title="Book of Fixed Stars" label="Book of Fixed Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q934700" start="7239" end="7246" title="SN 1006" label="SN 1006"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="7247" end="7256" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="7272" end="7290" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q287492" start="7373" end="7387" title="Ali ibn Ridwan" label="Ali ibn Ridwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268276" start="7392" end="7411" title="Chinese astronomy" label="Chinese astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="7437" end="7446" title="Al-Biruni" label="Al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="7474" end="7481" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="7498" end="7504" title="apogee" label="apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="7685" end="7695" title="Al-Battani" label="Al-Battani"/>
<link wikidata="Q250568" start="7697" end="7703" title="Thebit" label="Thebit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="7705" end="7726" title="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi" label="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="7728" end="7734" title="Abu Rayhan Biruni" label="Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133" start="7736" end="7764" title="Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī" label="Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm al-Zarqālī"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474685" start="7766" end="7777" title="Al-Birjandi" label="Al-Birjandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461462" start="7806" end="7814" title="Maragheh observatory" label="Maragheh"/>
<link wikidata="Q608580" start="7819" end="7828" title="Ulugh Beg Observatory" label="Samarkand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226611" start="7889" end="7931" title="List of Arabic star names" label="Arabic names now used for individual stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q209217" start="7972" end="7986" title="Great Zimbabwe" label="Great Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="7991" end="7999" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="8047" end="8061" title="Post-classical" label="Post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="8062" end="8073" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q202687" start="8276" end="8283" title="Songhai Empire" label="Songhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16540893" start="8294" end="8305" title="Mahmud Kati" label="Mahmud Kati"/>
<link wikidata="Q105000" start="8319" end="8332" title="meteor shower" label="meteor shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="8434" end="8452" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="8649" end="8670" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q56318457" start="8822" end="8837" title="Date of Easter" label="date for Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066873" start="8898" end="8920" title="Richard of Wallingford" label="Richard of Wallingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q186398" start="8975" end="8983" title="horology" label="horology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908192" start="9046" end="9057" title="Rectangulus" label="Rectangulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q255849" start="9163" end="9173" title="equatorium" label="equatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="9262" end="9267" title="moon" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="9269" end="9274" title="sun" label="solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="9279" end="9285" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="9289" end="9298" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="9318" end="9325" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q310777" start="9328" end="9341" title="Nicole Oresme" label="Nicole Oresme"/>
<link wikidata="Q275500" start="9358" end="9370" title="Jean Buridan" label="Jean Buridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q122508" start="9545" end="9552" title="inertia" label="inertia"/>
<link wikidata="Q84289" start="9644" end="9663" title="Georg von Peuerbach" label="Georg von Peuerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q76365" start="9680" end="9693" title="Regiomontanus" label="Regiomontanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="9874" end="9885" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="9887" end="9906" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="9983" end="9998" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="10020" end="10035" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="10253" end="10265" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="10289" end="10307" title="celestial dynamics" label="celestial dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="10316" end="10334" title="gravity" label="law of gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35221" start="10412" end="10432" title="reflecting telescope" label="reflecting telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q242388" start="10540" end="10554" title="John Flamsteed" label="John Flamsteed"/>
<link wikidata="Q202703" start="10631" end="10656" title="Nicolas Louis de Lacaille" label="Nicolas Louis de Lacaille"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="10673" end="10689" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="10776" end="10782" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q607699" start="10860" end="10878" title="three-body problem" label="three-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="10882" end="10896" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q28937" start="10898" end="10920" title="Alexis Claude Clairaut" label="Alexis Claude Clairaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q153232" start="10926" end="10954" title="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert" label="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="11064" end="11085" title="Joseph-Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph-Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="11090" end="11110" title="Pierre Simon Laplace" label="Pierre Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="11300" end="11312" title="spectroscope" label="spectroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q280855" start="11317" end="11328" title="Astrophotography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q43948" start="11330" end="11351" title="Joseph von Fraunhofer" label="Joseph von Fraunhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="11434" end="11450" title="Gustav Kirchhoff" label="Gustav Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="11585" end="11596" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="11599" end="11603" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="11695" end="11704" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="11914" end="11922" title="Universe" label="Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="11942" end="11958" title="Hooker Telescope" label="Hooker Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="12088" end="12100" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="12112" end="12128" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheid variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="12198" end="12214" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q506389" start="12219" end="12229" title="Triangulum Nebula" label="Triangulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="12382" end="12397" title="Hubble constant" label="Hubble constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2513" start="12656" end="12678" title="Hubble Space Telescope" label="Hubble Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="12858" end="12868" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="12874" end="12886" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="12948" end="12954" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="12957" end="12963" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q221221" start="12966" end="12972" title="blazar" label="blazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q217012" start="12979" end="12993" title="radio galaxy" label="radio galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="12995" end="13013" title="Physical cosmology" label="Physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="13094" end="13102" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="13147" end="13184" title="cosmic microwave background radiation" label="cosmic microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="13186" end="13203" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q837317" start="13213" end="13248" title="Big Bang nucleosynthesis" label="cosmological abundances of elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="13250" end="13265" title="Space telescope" label="Space telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="13424" end="13428" title="LIGO" label="LIGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683173" start="13441" end="13458" title="first observation of gravitational waves" label="detected evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="13462" end="13481" title="gravitational waves" label="gravitational waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="13577" end="13593" title="celestial body" label="celestial bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="13615" end="13628" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="13648" end="13673" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="13763" end="13787" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="14118" end="14128" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="14299" end="14309" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="14329" end="14333" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="14359" end="14365" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159190" start="14419" end="14428" title="amplitude" label="amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="14433" end="14438" title="Phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="14529" end="14539" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="14600" end="14616" title="black-body radiation" label="thermal emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q212871" start="14679" end="14700" title="synchrotron radiation" label="synchrotron radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="14725" end="14733" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="14741" end="14755" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="14784" end="14797" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="14811" end="14827" title="interstellar gas" label="interstellar gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="14841" end="14849" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="14991" end="15000" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="15021" end="15027" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="15034" end="15056" title="active galactic nuclei" label="active galactic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="15149" end="15157" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235978" start="15354" end="15372" title="circumstellar disk" label="circumstellar disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="15559" end="15574" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q693552" start="15625" end="15660" title="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer" label="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q204903" start="15732" end="15741" title="protostar" label="protostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q168845" start="15758" end="15771" title="star clusters" label="star clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="15804" end="15815" title="wavelengths" label="wavelengths"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="16583" end="16604" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="16706" end="16707" title="Ångstrom" label="Å"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="16723" end="16725" title="nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="16786" end="16802" title="near-ultraviolet" label="near-ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="16807" end="16820" title="near-infrared" label="near-infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="16893" end="16904" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="17255" end="17259" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5886" start="17262" end="17269" title="OB star" label="OB star"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="17481" end="17497" title="planetary nebula" label="planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q207436" start="17500" end="17517" title="supernova remnant" label="supernova remnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="17600" end="17617" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="17721" end="17738" title="X-radiation" label="X-ray wavelengths"/>
<link wikidata="Q212871" start="17782" end="17802" title="synchrotron emission" label="synchrotron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q655904" start="17860" end="17892" title="bremsstrahlung radiation" label="thermal emission from thin gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="17916" end="17922" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="17929" end="17962" title="blackbody radiation" label="thermal emission from thick gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="18014" end="18037" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619521" start="18085" end="18106" title="high-altitude balloon" label="high-altitude balloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="18109" end="18115" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369318" start="18121" end="18146" title="X-ray astronomy satellite" label="X-ray astronomy satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154519" start="18157" end="18170" title="Astrophysical X-ray source" label="X-ray sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961" start="18179" end="18193" title="X-ray binaries" label="X-ray binaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="18195" end="18201" title="pulsar" label="pulsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207436" start="18204" end="18221" title="supernova remnant" label="supernova remnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="18224" end="18243" title="elliptical galaxies" label="elliptical galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="18245" end="18265" title="clusters of galaxies" label="clusters of galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="18271" end="18293" title="active galactic nuclei" label="active galactic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q41519" start="18498" end="18527" title="Compton Gamma Ray Observatory" label="Compton Gamma Ray Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113008" start="18564" end="18595" title="atmospheric Cherenkov telescope" label="atmospheric Cherenkov telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="18785" end="18794" title="Gamma ray" label="gamma-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247" start="18825" end="18840" title="gamma-ray burst" label="gamma-ray burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="19059" end="19071" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="19078" end="19088" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801478" start="19320" end="19338" title="neutrino astronomy" label="neutrino astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q583152" start="19373" end="19395" title="Neutrino observatory" label="underground facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379200" start="19404" end="19408" title="SAGE (ruSsian American Gallium Experiment)" label="SAGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302608" start="19410" end="19416" title="GALLEX" label="GALLEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q363047" start="19422" end="19436" title="Kamioka Observatory" label="Kamioka II/III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="19458" end="19466" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="19551" end="19554" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q584905" start="19597" end="19612" title="supernova 1987A" label="supernova 1987A"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="19614" end="19624" title="Cosmic ray" label="Cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q583152" start="19865" end="19882" title="neutrino detector" label="neutrino detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392871" start="19983" end="20011" title="Gravitational-wave astronomy" label="Gravitational-wave astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302080" start="20059" end="20086" title="gravitational-wave detector" label="gravitational-wave detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="20263" end="20267" title="LIGO" label="LIGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683173" start="20283" end="20298" title="First observation of gravitational waves" label="first detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913879" start="20358" end="20375" title="binary black hole" label="binary black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="20386" end="20404" title="gravitational wave" label="gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="20486" end="20504" title="gravitational wave" label="gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q42294636" start="20700" end="20725" title="multi-messenger astronomy" label="multi-messenger astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="20999" end="21019" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132" start="21092" end="21100" title="calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10886678" start="21206" end="21219" title="Perturbation theory" label="perturbations"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="21328" end="21347" title="celestial mechanics" label="celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="21379" end="21396" title="near-Earth object" label="near-Earth object"/>
<link wikidata="Q906561" start="21522" end="21538" title="stellar parallax" label="stellar parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q618164" start="21594" end="21616" title="cosmic distance ladder" label="cosmic distance ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q240105" start="21834" end="21849" title="radial velocity" label="radial velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193223" start="21854" end="21867" title="proper motion" label="proper motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="22046" end="22057" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273386" start="22115" end="22129" title="stellar wobble" label="stellar wobble"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22150" end="22164" title="Methods of detecting extrasolar planets#Astrometry" label="used to detect"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="22171" end="22188" title="extrasolar planet" label="extrasolar planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="22293" end="22310" title="mathematical model" label="analytical models"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525525" start="22315" end="22326" title="computation" label="computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="22329" end="22350" title="Numerical analysis" label="numerical simulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="23107" end="23124" title="geocentric theory" label="geocentric theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q208702" start="23143" end="23162" title="luminiferous aether" label="luminiferous aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q272612" start="23172" end="23190" title="steady-state model" label="steady-state model"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333" start="23269" end="23285" title="stellar dynamics" label="stellar dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="23290" end="23299" title="Stellar evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995140" start="23302" end="23318" title="galaxy formation and evolution" label="galaxy formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="23321" end="23345" title="large-scale structure of the universe" label="large-scale distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="23363" end="23371" title="Universe" label="Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="23388" end="23398" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="23402" end="23420" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="23425" end="23443" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q279029" start="23455" end="23471" title="string cosmology" label="string cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q752174" start="23476" end="23497" title="astroparticle physics" label="astroparticle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="23613" end="23640" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="23650" end="23660" title="supernovae" label="supernovae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935817" start="23665" end="23681" title="redshift survey" label="galaxy redshifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="23722" end="23749" title="Lambda-CDM model" label="standard model of cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="23812" end="23823" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="23828" end="23839" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="24124" end="24133" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="24171" end="24190" title="astronomical object" label="astronomical object"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="24282" end="24285" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="24293" end="24297" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="24300" end="24308" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="24310" end="24327" title="extrasolar planet" label="extrasolar planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="24334" end="24353" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="24362" end="24389" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="24444" end="24468" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="24506" end="24516" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="24518" end="24525" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="24527" end="24538" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="24544" end="24552" title="chemistry" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="24695" end="24704" title="mechanics" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="24706" end="24722" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="24724" end="24745" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="24747" end="24761" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="24763" end="24780" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="24782" end="24792" title="theory of relativity" label="relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="24794" end="24801" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="24806" end="24822" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151533" start="24828" end="24856" title="atomic, molecular, and optical physics" label="atomic and molecular physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="24962" end="24973" title="Theoretical physics" label="theoretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="25095" end="25106" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="25108" end="25119" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="25125" end="25136" title="black holes" label="black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="25153" end="25164" title="time travel" label="time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544" start="25178" end="25186" title="wormhole" label="wormhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327819" start="25205" end="25215" title="multiverse" label="multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q170835" start="25232" end="25238" title="Cosmogony" label="origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q622063" start="25243" end="25272" title="ultimate fate of the universe" label="ultimate fate of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535" start="25333" end="25369" title="Formation and evolution of the Solar System" label="Solar System formation and evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333" start="25371" end="25387" title="stellar dynamics" label="stellar dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="25392" end="25401" title="Stellar evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995140" start="25403" end="25433" title="galaxy formation and evolution" label="galaxy formation and evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549249" start="25435" end="25455" title="magnetohydrodynamics" label="magnetohydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="25457" end="25478" title="large-scale structure of the universe" label="large-scale structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="25482" end="25488" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="25516" end="25526" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="25529" end="25547" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="25552" end="25570" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="25582" end="25588" title="string theory" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q752174" start="25603" end="25624" title="astroparticle physics" label="astroparticle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="25713" end="25721" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="25730" end="25738" title="Universe" label="Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="25767" end="25776" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="25824" end="25833" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="25898" end="25910" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="25919" end="25938" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="25983" end="25990" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="26031" end="26040" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q911801" start="26058" end="26072" title="cosmochemistry" label="cosmochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="26277" end="26297" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular gas clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535" start="26440" end="26469" title="formation of the Solar System" label="formation of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="26504" end="26515" title="abiogenesis" label="abiogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="26651" end="26658" title="abiogenesis" label="origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389465" start="26660" end="26675" title="Protocell" label="early evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="26705" end="26709" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="26717" end="26725" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="26774" end="26795" title="extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="26904" end="26921" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100" start="26923" end="26933" title="biophysics" label="biophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="26935" end="26947" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="26949" end="26958" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="26971" end="26989" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809431" start="26991" end="27005" title="exoplanetology" label="exoplanetology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="27010" end="27017" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="27092" end="27101" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="27147" end="27157" title="Abiogenesis" label="The origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="27305" end="27320" title="Scientific method" label="scientific data"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="27423" end="27433" title="hypotheses" label="hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239681" start="27464" end="27483" title="scientific theories" label="scientific theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="27491" end="27508" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q206717" start="27553" end="27569" title="planetary system" label="planetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985634" start="27583" end="27609" title="List of interstellar and circumstellar molecules" label="organic compounds in space"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="27643" end="27654" title="abiogenesis" label="abiogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q846030" start="27665" end="27687" title="planetary habitability" label="planetary habitability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912794" start="27701" end="27713" title="biosignature" label="biosignature"/>
<link wikidata="Q206912" start="27768" end="27795" title="extremophile" label="life to adapt to challenges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="27812" end="27823" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="27854" end="27863" title="Cosmology" label="Cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="28053" end="28090" title="large-scale structure of the Universe" label="large-scale structure of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="28110" end="28128" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="28278" end="28286" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963779" start="28327" end="28340" title="point in time" label="point in time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="28357" end="28365" title="metric expansion of space" label="expanded"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="28501" end="28531" title="Cosmic microwave background radiation" label="microwave background radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="28713" end="28729" title="cosmic inflation" label="cosmic inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q837317" start="28786" end="28801" title="Big Bang nucleosynthesis" label="nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290891" start="28868" end="28889" title="nucleocosmochronology" label="nucleocosmochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="28916" end="28920" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="29360" end="29380" title="Population III stars" label="Population III stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670901" start="29416" end="29428" title="reionization" label="reionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q14515149" start="29870" end="29889" title="Galaxy groups and clusters" label="groups and clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="30007" end="30018" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="30023" end="30034" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995140" start="30346" end="30381" title="Galaxy formation and evolution" label="formation and evolution of galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648748" start="30418" end="30432" title="Galaxy morphological classification" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="30453" end="30468" title="Active galaxy" label="active galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q14515149" start="30497" end="30528" title="Galaxy groups and clusters" label="groups and clusters of galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="30592" end="30627" title="large-scale structure of the cosmos" label="large-scale structure of the cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="30635" end="30643" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="30749" end="30755" title="spiral galaxy" label="spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="30757" end="30767" title="elliptical galaxy" label="elliptical"/>
<link wikidata="Q190397" start="30772" end="30781" title="irregular galaxy" label="Irregular"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="30872" end="30879" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q176640" start="30902" end="30908" title="randomness" label="random"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="31443" end="31452" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="31498" end="31514" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217012" start="32030" end="32042" title="radio galaxy" label="radio galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213930" start="32246" end="32262" title="Seyfert galaxy" label="Seyfert galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="32264" end="32270" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q221221" start="32277" end="32283" title="blazar" label="blazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="32380" end="32415" title="large-scale structure of the cosmos" label="large-scale structure of the cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q27521" start="32553" end="32565" title="supercluster" label="supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133705" start="32605" end="32614" title="Galaxy filament" label="filaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q845371" start="32640" end="32645" title="Void (astronomy)" label="voids"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="32688" end="32700" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="32719" end="32728" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490" start="32732" end="32752" title="barred spiral galaxy" label="barred spiral galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944" start="32787" end="32798" title="Local Group" label="Local Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="33141" end="33164" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="33317" end="33329" title="Stellar population" label="population I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="33365" end="33378" title="Galactic spheroid" label="spheroid halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="33389" end="33402" title="population II" label="population II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="33471" end="33487" title="globular cluster" label="globular cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="33518" end="33537" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="33590" end="33605" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="33610" end="33628" title="Hydrogen" label="molecular hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239270" start="33702" end="33718" title="pre-stellar core" label="pre-stellar core"/>
<link wikidata="Q204194" start="33722" end="33733" title="dark nebula" label="dark nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130216" start="33797" end="33809" title="Jeans length" label="Jeans length"/>
<link wikidata="Q11282" start="33907" end="33918" title="H II region" label="H II region"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="33976" end="33988" title="Solar wind" label="stellar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387" start="34110" end="34122" title="open cluster" label="open cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q864952" start="34375" end="34391" title="dark matter halo" label="dark matter halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="34535" end="34552" title="stellar evolution" label="stellar evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="34750" end="34764" title="Star formation" label="Star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q204194" start="34815" end="34837" title="Dark nebula" label="giant molecular clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q204903" start="34929" end="34938" title="protostar" label="protostar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="34996" end="35010" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="35028" end="35046" title="main-sequence star" label="main-sequence star"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="35082" end="35090" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="35095" end="35101" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q471702" start="35107" end="35114" title="nucleosynthesis" label="created"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="35444" end="35450" title="Stellar evolution" label="evolve"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="35636" end="35645" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="36008" end="36017" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="36117" end="36128" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="36171" end="36187" title="planetary nebula" label="planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="36227" end="36239" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="36309" end="36319" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="36540" end="36546" title="metallicity" label="metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="36828" end="36831" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q244393" start="36857" end="36867" title="dwarf star" label="dwarf star"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="36871" end="36884" title="stellar class" label="stellar class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="36958" end="36971" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q49385" start="37035" end="37048" title="sunspot cycle" label="sunspot cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277190" start="37084" end="37098" title="Wolf number" label="sunspot number"/>
<link wikidata="Q827568" start="37416" end="37431" title="Maunder minimum" label="Maunder minimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="37477" end="37491" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="37514" end="37525" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="37625" end="37639" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q127922" start="37672" end="37686" title="radiation zone" label="radiation zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q128034" start="37770" end="37785" title="convection zone" label="convection zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372" start="38073" end="38084" title="photosphere" label="photosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q190003" start="38133" end="38145" title="chromosphere" label="chromosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q113000019" start="38257" end="38263" title="solar corona" label="corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q131687" start="38405" end="38415" title="heliopause (astronomy)" label="heliopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="38475" end="38502" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915" start="38504" end="38517" title="magnetosphere" label="magnetosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q188533" start="38576" end="38600" title="Van Allen radiation belt" label="Van Allen radiation belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="38630" end="38636" title="aurora (astronomy)" label="aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="38787" end="38797" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="38878" end="38884" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="38887" end="38892" title="natural satellite" label="moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="38894" end="38906" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="38909" end="38914" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="38917" end="38925" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="38998" end="39010" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="39308" end="39326" title="inner Solar System" label="inner Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="39370" end="39383" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="39390" end="39408" title="outer Solar System" label="outer Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q10734" start="39448" end="39456" title="Centaurs (minor planets)" label="centaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="39515" end="39526" title="Kuiper belt" label="Kuiper belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q180380" start="39536" end="39550" title="scattered disc" label="scattered disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q131687" start="39602" end="39613" title="heliosphere" label="heliosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q40864" start="39623" end="39633" title="Oort Cloud" label="Oort Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="39687" end="39705" title="terrestrial planet" label="terrestrial planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="39718" end="39725" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="39727" end="39732" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="39745" end="39749" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q21857994" start="39761" end="39773" title="giant planet" label="giant planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q121750" start="39783" end="39792" title="gas giant" label="gas giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="39795" end="39802" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="39807" end="39813" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319599" start="39823" end="39832" title="ice giant" label="ice giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="39835" end="39841" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="39846" end="39853" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q505781" start="39910" end="39929" title="protoplanetary disk" label="protoplanetary disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q649036" start="40120" end="40138" title="radiation pressure" label="radiation pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="40146" end="40156" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="40409" end="40422" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q723219" start="40532" end="40547" title="giant impact hypothesis" label="formed the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q910022" start="40651" end="40676" title="planetary differentiation" label="planetary differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="40860" end="40874" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="41089" end="41096" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="41098" end="41105" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985521" start="41111" end="41115" title="26Al" label="26Al"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477230" start="41121" end="41134" title="tidal acceleration" label="tidal heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="41259" end="41268" title="volcanism" label="volcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="41319" end="41329" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="41355" end="41362" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q463923" start="41665" end="41681" title="Archaeoastronomy" label="Archaeoastronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="41770" end="41784" title="archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="41789" end="41804" title="anthropology" label="anthropological"/>
<link wikidata="Q411" start="41815" end="41827" title="Astrobiology" label="Astrobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811716" start="41977" end="41992" title="Astrostatistics" label="Astrostatistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q79529" start="42126" end="42134" title="chemical" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680018" start="42218" end="42232" title="astrochemistry" label="astrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="42272" end="42287" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q911801" start="42372" end="42386" title="Cosmochemistry" label="Cosmochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="42508" end="42515" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468700" start="42622" end="42640" title="forensic astronomy" label="forensic astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q455607" start="42986" end="43022" title="Amateur telescope making" label="equipment that they build themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q105000" start="43113" end="43126" title="meteor shower" label="meteor shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q249389" start="43146" end="43161" title="deep-sky object" label="deep-sky object"/>
<link wikidata="Q280855" start="43518" end="43534" title="astrophotography" label="astrophotography"/>
<link wikidata="Q319212" start="43978" end="43989" title="Karl Guthe Jansky" label="Karl Jansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960708" start="44256" end="44274" title="One-Mile Telescope" label="One-Mile Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="44934" end="44945" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="44950" end="44961" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622063" start="45072" end="45101" title="ultimate fate of the universe" label="ultimate fate of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="45127" end="45134" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="45197" end="45205" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="45287" end="45299" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194026" start="45449" end="45470" title="initial mass function" label="initial mass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q64286159" start="45574" end="45588" title="protogalaxy" label="first galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="45604" end="45627" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770333" start="45644" end="45672" title="ultra-high-energy cosmic ray" label="ultra-high-energy cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="45701" end="45721" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="life in the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15107669" start="45744" end="45766" title="Extraterrestrial intelligence" label="other intelligent life"/>
<link wikidata="Q33580" start="45807" end="45820" title="Fermi paradox" label="Fermi paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q752099" start="46148" end="46172" title="Astrophysics Data System" label="Astrophysics Data System"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50652" wikidata="Q1411887" url="?curid=50652" title="Uniform convergence">
<text>In the mathematical field of analysis, uniform convergence is a mode of convergence of functions stronger than pointwise convergence. A sequence of functions formula_1 converges uniformly to a limiting function formula_2 on a set formula_3 as the function domain if, given any arbitrarily small positive number formula_4, a number formula_5 can be found such that each of the functions formula_6 differs from formula_2 by no more than formula_4 &quot;at every point&quot; formula_9 &quot;in&quot; formula_3. Described in an informal way, if formula_11 converges to formula_2 uniformly, then how quickly the functions formula_11 approach formula_2 is &quot;uniform&quot; throughout formula_3 in the following sense: in order to guarantee that formula_16 differs from formula_17 by less than a chosen distance formula_4, we only need to make sure that formula_19 is larger than or equal to a certain formula_5, which we can find without knowing the value of formula_21 in advance. In other words, there exists a number formula_22 that could depend on formula_4 but is &quot;independent of formula_9&quot;, such that choosing formula_25 will ensure that formula_26 &quot;for all formula_21&quot;. In contrast, pointwise convergence of formula_11 to formula_2 merely guarantees that for any formula_21 given in advance, we can find formula_31 (i.e., formula_5 could depend on the values of both formula_4 and&quot; formula_9&quot;) such that, &quot;for that particular&quot; &quot;formula_9&quot;, formula_16 falls within formula_4 of formula_17 whenever formula_25 (and a different formula_9 may require a different, larger formula_5 for formula_25 to guarantee that formula_26).

The difference between uniform convergence and pointwise convergence was not fully appreciated early in the history of calculus, leading to instances of faulty reasoning. The concept, which was first formalized by Karl Weierstrass, is important because several properties of the functions formula_11, such as continuity, Riemann integrability, and, with additional hypotheses, differentiability, are transferred to the limit formula_2 if the convergence is uniform, but not necessarily if the convergence is not uniform.

== History ==

In 1821 Augustin-Louis Cauchy published a proof that a convergent sum of continuous functions is always continuous, to which Niels Henrik Abel in 1826 found purported counterexamples in the context of Fourier series, arguing that Cauchy&#x27;s proof had to be incorrect. Completely standard notions of convergence did not exist at the time, and Cauchy handled convergence using infinitesimal methods. When put into the modern language, what Cauchy proved is that a uniformly convergent sequence of continuous functions has a continuous limit. The failure of a merely pointwise-convergent limit of continuous functions to converge to a continuous function illustrates the importance of distinguishing between different types of convergence when handling sequences of functions.

The term uniform convergence was probably first used by Christoph Gudermann, in an 1838 paper on elliptic functions, where he employed the phrase &quot;convergence in a uniform way&quot; when the &quot;mode of convergence&quot; of a series formula_46 is independent of the variables formula_47 and formula_48 While he thought it a &quot;remarkable fact&quot; when a series converged in this way, he did not give a formal definition, nor use the property in any of his proofs.

Later Gudermann&#x27;s pupil Karl Weierstrass, who attended his course on elliptic functions in 1839–1840, coined the term &quot;gleichmäßig konvergent&quot; () which he used in his 1841 paper &quot;Zur Theorie der Potenzreihen&quot;, published in 1894. Independently, similar concepts were articulated by Philipp Ludwig von Seidel and George Gabriel Stokes. G. H. Hardy compares the three definitions in his paper &quot;Sir George Stokes and the concept of uniform convergence&quot; and remarks: &quot;Weierstrass&#x27;s discovery was the earliest, and he alone fully realized its far-reaching importance as one of the fundamental ideas of analysis.&quot;

Under the influence of Weierstrass and Bernhard Riemann this concept and related questions were intensely studied at the end of the 19th century by Hermann Hankel, Paul du Bois-Reymond, Ulisse Dini, Cesare Arzelà and others.

== Definition ==

We first define uniform convergence for real-valued functions, although the concept is readily generalized to functions mapping to metric spaces and, more generally, uniform spaces (see below). 

Suppose formula_3 is a set and formula_50 is a sequence of real-valued functions on it. We say the sequence formula_50 is uniformly convergent on formula_3 with limit formula_53 if for every formula_54 there exists a natural number formula_5 such that for all formula_56 and for all formula_57

:formula_58

The notation for uniform convergence of formula_11 to formula_2 is not quite standardized and different authors have used a variety of symbols, including (in roughly decreasing order of popularity): 

:formula_61

Frequently, no special symbol is used, and authors simply write 

:formula_62 

to indicate that convergence is uniform. (In contrast, the expression formula_63 on formula_3 without an adverb is taken to mean pointwise convergence on formula_3: for all formula_66, formula_67 as formula_68.)

Since formula_69 is a complete metric space, the Cauchy criterion can be used to give an equivalent alternative formulation for uniform convergence: formula_70 converges uniformly on formula_3 (in the previous sense) if and only if for every formula_72, there exists a natural number formula_5 such that

:formula_74.

In yet another equivalent formulation, if we define 

:formula_75

then formula_76 converges to formula_2 uniformly if and only if formula_78 as formula_68. Thus, we can characterize uniform convergence of formula_50 on formula_3 as (simple) convergence of formula_50 in the function space formula_83 with respect to the &quot;uniform metric&quot; (also called the supremum metric), defined by 

:formula_84

Symbolically, 

:formula_85.

The sequence formula_50 is said to be locally uniformly convergent with limit formula_2 if formula_88 is a metric space and for every formula_21, there exists an formula_90 such that formula_1 converges uniformly on formula_92 It is clear that uniform convergence implies local uniform convergence, which implies pointwise convergence.

=== Notes ===

Intuitively, a sequence of functions formula_11 converges uniformly to formula_2 if, given an arbitrarily small formula_95, we can find an formula_96 so that the functions formula_11 with formula_98 all fall within a &quot;tube&quot; of width formula_99 centered around formula_2 (i.e., between formula_101 and formula_102) for the &quot;entire domain&quot; of the function.

Note that interchanging the order of quantifiers in the definition of uniform convergence by moving &quot;for all formula_21&quot; in front of &quot;there exists a natural number formula_5&quot; results in a definition of pointwise convergence of the sequence. To make this difference explicit, in the case of uniform convergence, formula_22 can only depend on formula_4, and the choice of formula_5 has to work for all formula_21, for a specific value of formula_4 that is given. In contrast, in the case of pointwise convergence, formula_110 may depend on both formula_4 and formula_9, and the choice of formula_5 only has to work for the specific values of formula_4 and formula_9 that are given. Thus uniform convergence implies pointwise convergence, however the converse is not true, as the example in the section below illustrates.

=== Generalizations ===

One may straightforwardly extend the concept to functions &quot;E&quot; → &quot;M&quot;, where (&quot;M&quot;, &quot;d&quot;) is a metric space, by replacing formula_116 with formula_117.

The most general setting is the uniform convergence of nets of functions &quot;E&quot; → &quot;X&quot;, where &quot;X&quot; is a uniform space. We say that the net formula_118 &quot;converges uniformly&quot; with limit &quot;f&quot; : &quot;E&quot; → &quot;X&quot; if and only if for every entourage &quot;V&quot; in &quot;X&quot;, there exists an formula_119, such that for every &quot;x&quot; in &quot;E&quot; and every formula_120, formula_121 is in &quot;V&quot;. In this situation, uniform limit of continuous functions remains continuous.

===Definition in a hyperreal setting===
Uniform convergence admits a simplified definition in a hyperreal setting. Thus, a sequence formula_11 converges to &quot;f&quot; uniformly if for all hyperreal &quot;x&quot; in the domain of formula_123 and all infinite &quot;n&quot;, formula_124 is infinitely close to formula_125 (see microcontinuity for a similar definition of uniform continuity). In contrast, pointwise continuity requires this only for real &quot;x&quot;.

== Examples ==
For formula_126, a basic example of uniform convergence can be illustrated as follows: the sequence formula_127 converges uniformly, while formula_128 does not. Specifically, assume formula_129. Each function formula_127 is less than or equal to formula_131 when formula_132, regardless of the value of formula_9. On the other hand, formula_128 is only less than or equal to formula_131 at ever increasing values of formula_19 when values of formula_9 are selected closer and closer to 1 (explained more in depth further below).

Given a topological space &quot;X&quot;, we can equip the space of bounded real or complex-valued functions over &quot;X&quot; with the uniform norm topology, with the uniform metric defined by 

:formula_138

Then uniform convergence simply means convergence in the uniform norm topology: 

:formula_139.

The sequence of functions formula_1 

:formula_141 

is a classic example of a sequence of functions that converges to a function formula_2 pointwise but not uniformly. To show this, we first observe that the pointwise limit of formula_1 as formula_68 is the function formula_2, given by

: formula_146

&quot;Pointwise convergence:&quot; Convergence is trivial for formula_147 and formula_148, since formula_149 and formula_150, for all formula_19. For formula_152 and given formula_95, we can ensure that formula_26 whenever formula_25 by choosing formula_156, which is the minimum integer exponent of formula_9 that allows it to reach or dip below formula_4 (here the upper square brackets indicate rounding up, see ceiling function). Hence, formula_63 pointwise for all formula_160. Note that the choice of formula_5 depends on the value of formula_4 and formula_9. Moreover, for a fixed choice of formula_4, formula_5 (which cannot be defined to be smaller) grows without bound as formula_9 approaches 1. These observations preclude the possibility of uniform convergence.

&quot;Non-uniformity of convergence:&quot; The convergence is not uniform, because we can find an formula_95 so that no matter how large we choose formula_168 there will be values of formula_169 and formula_56 such that formula_171 To see this, first observe that regardless of how large formula_19 becomes, there is always an formula_173 such that formula_174 Thus, if we choose formula_175 we can never find an formula_5 such that formula_26 for all formula_160 and formula_25. Explicitly, whatever candidate we choose for formula_5, consider the value of formula_181 at formula_182. Since 

:formula_183
the candidate fails because we have found an example of an formula_160 that &quot;escaped&quot; our attempt to &quot;confine&quot; each formula_185 to within formula_4 of formula_187 for all formula_160. In fact, it is easy to see that
:formula_189
contrary to the requirement that formula_190 if formula_191.

In this example one can easily see that pointwise convergence does not preserve differentiability or continuity. While each function of the sequence is smooth, that is to say that for all &quot;n&quot;, formula_192, the limit formula_193 is not even continuous.

=== Exponential function ===
The series expansion of the exponential function can be shown to be uniformly convergent on any bounded subset formula_194 using the Weierstrass M-test.

Theorem (Weierstrass M-test). &quot;Let formula_1 be a sequence of functions formula_196 and let formula_197 be a sequence of positive real numbers such that formula_198 for all formula_21 and formula_200 If formula_201 converges, then formula_202 converges absolutely and uniformly on formula_3.&quot;

The complex exponential function can be expressed as the series:

:formula_204

Any bounded subset is a subset of some disc formula_205 of radius formula_206 centered on the origin in the complex plane. The Weierstrass M-test requires us to find an upper bound formula_207 on the terms of the series, with formula_207 independent of the position in the disc:

:formula_209

To do this, we notice

:formula_210

and take formula_211

If formula_212 is convergent, then the M-test asserts that the original series is uniformly convergent.

The ratio test can be used here:

:formula_213

which means the series over formula_207 is convergent. Thus the original series converges uniformly for all formula_215 and since formula_216, the series is also uniformly convergent on formula_217

== Properties ==

* Every uniformly convergent sequence is locally uniformly convergent.
* Every locally uniformly convergent sequence is compactly convergent.
* For locally compact spaces local uniform convergence and compact convergence coincide.
* A sequence of continuous functions on metric spaces, with the image metric space being complete, is uniformly convergent if and only if it is uniformly Cauchy.
* If formula_218 is a compact interval (or in general a compact topological space), and formula_219 is a monotone increasing sequence (meaning formula_220 for all &quot;n&quot; and &quot;x&quot;) of &quot;continuous&quot; functions with a pointwise limit formula_221 which is also continuous, then the convergence is necessarily uniform (Dini&#x27;s theorem). Uniform convergence is also guaranteed if formula_222 is a compact interval and formula_1 is an equicontinuous sequence that converges pointwise.

== Applications ==

===To continuity===

If formula_3 and formula_225 are topological spaces, then it makes sense to talk about the continuity of the functions formula_226. If we further assume that formula_225 is a metric space, then (uniform) convergence of the formula_11 to formula_2 is also well defined. The following result states that continuity is preserved by uniform convergence:

This theorem is proved by the &quot; trick&quot;, and is the archetypal example of this trick: to prove a given inequality (), one uses the definitions of continuity and uniform convergence to produce 3 inequalities (), and then combines them via the triangle inequality to produce the desired inequality.

This theorem is an important one in the history of real and Fourier analysis, since many 18th century mathematicians had the intuitive understanding that a sequence of continuous functions always converges to a continuous function. The image above shows a counterexample, and many discontinuous functions could, in fact, be written as a Fourier series of continuous functions. The erroneous claim that the pointwise limit of a sequence of continuous functions is continuous (originally stated in terms of convergent series of continuous functions) is infamously known as &quot;Cauchy&#x27;s wrong theorem&quot;. The uniform limit theorem shows that a stronger form of convergence, uniform convergence, is needed to ensure the preservation of continuity in the limit function.

More precisely, this theorem states that the uniform limit of &quot;uniformly continuous&quot; functions is uniformly continuous; for a locally compact space, continuity is equivalent to local uniform continuity, and thus the uniform limit of continuous functions is continuous.
===To differentiability===
If formula_218 is an interval and all the functions formula_11 are differentiable and converge to a limit formula_2, it is often desirable to determine the derivative function formula_233 by taking the limit of the sequence formula_234. This is however in general not possible: even if the convergence is uniform, the limit function need not be differentiable (not even if the sequence consists of everywhere-analytic functions, see Weierstrass function), and even if it is differentiable, the derivative of the limit function need not be equal to the limit of the derivatives. Consider for instance formula_235 with uniform limit formula_236. Clearly, formula_233 is also identically zero. However, the derivatives of the sequence of functions are given by formula_238 and the sequence formula_234 does not converge to formula_240 or even to any function at all. In order to ensure a connection between the limit of a sequence of differentiable functions and the limit of the sequence of derivatives, the uniform convergence of the sequence of derivatives plus the convergence of the sequence of functions at at least one point is required:

: &quot;If formula_1 is a sequence of differentiable functions on formula_242 such that formula_243 exists (and is finite) for some formula_244 and the sequence formula_245 converges uniformly on formula_242, then formula_11 converges uniformly to a function formula_2 on formula_242, and formula_250 for formula_251.&quot;

===To integrability===
Similarly, one often wants to exchange integrals and limit processes. For the Riemann integral, this can be done if uniform convergence is assumed:
: &quot;If formula_252 is a sequence of Riemann integrable functions defined on a compact interval formula_253 which uniformly converge with limit formula_221, then formula_221 is Riemann integrable and its integral can be computed as the limit of the integrals of the formula_256:&quot; formula_257
In fact, for a uniformly convergent family of bounded functions on an interval, the upper and lower Riemann integrals converge to the upper and lower Riemann integrals of the limit function. This follows because, for &quot;n&quot; sufficiently large, the graph of formula_11 is within of the graph of &quot;f&quot;, and so the upper sum and lower sum of formula_11 are each within formula_260 of the value of the upper and lower sums of formula_2, respectively.

Much stronger theorems in this respect, which require not much more than pointwise convergence, can be obtained if one abandons the Riemann integral and uses the Lebesgue integral instead.

===To analyticity===
Using Morera&#x27;s Theorem, one can show that if a sequence of analytic functions converges uniformly in a region S of the complex plane, then the limit is analytic in S. This example demonstrates that complex functions are more well-behaved than real functions, since the uniform limit of analytic functions on a real interval need not even be differentiable (see Weierstrass function).

===To series===
We say that formula_262 converges:

With this definition comes the following result:
Let &quot;x&quot;0 be contained in the set &quot;E&quot; and each &quot;f&quot;&quot;n&quot; be continuous at &quot;x&quot;0. If formula_263 converges uniformly on &quot;E&quot; then &quot;f&quot; is continuous at &quot;x&quot;0 in &quot;E&quot;. Suppose that formula_264 and each &quot;f&quot;&quot;n&quot; is integrable on &quot;E&quot;. If formula_262 converges uniformly on &quot;E&quot; then &quot;f&quot; is integrable on &quot;E&quot; and the series of integrals of &quot;f&quot;&quot;n&quot; is equal to integral of the series of fn.

==Almost uniform convergence==
If the domain of the functions is a measure space &quot;E&quot; then the related notion of almost uniform convergence can be defined. We say a sequence of functions formula_1 converges almost uniformly on &quot;E&quot; if for every formula_267 there exists a measurable set formula_268 with measure less than formula_269 such that the sequence of functions formula_1 converges uniformly on formula_271. In other words, almost uniform convergence means there are sets of arbitrarily small measure for which the sequence of functions converges uniformly on their complement.

Note that almost uniform convergence of a sequence does not mean that the sequence converges uniformly almost everywhere as might be inferred from the name. However, Egorov&#x27;s theorem does guarantee that on a finite measure space, a sequence of functions that converges almost everywhere also converges almost uniformly on the same set.

Almost uniform convergence implies almost everywhere convergence and convergence in measure.

==See also==
*Uniform convergence in probability
*Modes of convergence (annotated index)
*Dini&#x27;s theorem
*Arzelà–Ascoli theorem

==Notes==
==References==
* Konrad Knopp, Theory and Application of Infinite Series; Blackie and Son, London, 1954, reprinted by Dover Publications, .
* G. H. Hardy, Sir George Stokes and the concept of uniform convergence; Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 19, pp. 148–156 (1918)
* Bourbaki; Elements of Mathematics: General Topology. Chapters 5–10 (paperback); 
* Walter Rudin, Principles of Mathematical Analysis, 3rd ed., McGraw–Hill, 1976.
* Gerald Folland, Real Analysis: Modern Techniques and Their Applications, Second Edition, John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 1999, .
* William Wade, An Introduction to Analysis, 3rd ed., Pearson, 2005

==External links==

* Graphic examples of uniform convergence of Fourier series from the University of Colorado</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="7" end="19" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="29" end="37" title="mathematical analysis" label="analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411887" start="39" end="58" title="Uniform convergence" label="uniform convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889154" start="64" end="83" title="Modes of convergence" label="mode of convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778098" start="111" end="132" title="pointwise convergence" label="pointwise convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="136" end="144" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="148" end="157" title="Function (mathematics)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411887" start="168" end="187" title="Uniform convergence" label="converges uniformly"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="1892" end="1908" title="Karl Weierstrass" label="Karl Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="1987" end="1997" title="continuous function" label="continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q697181" start="1999" end="2020" title="Riemann integral" label="Riemann integrability"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="2055" end="2072" title="differentiability" label="differentiability"/>
<link wikidata="Q33540" start="2097" end="2102" title="limit of a function" label="limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8814" start="2223" end="2244" title="Augustin-Louis Cauchy" label="Augustin-Louis Cauchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124115" start="2340" end="2357" title="Niels Henrik Abel" label="Niels Henrik Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="2416" end="2430" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q77316" start="3049" end="3068" title="Christoph Gudermann" label="Christoph Gudermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q938102" start="3090" end="3108" title="elliptic functions" label="elliptic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="3499" end="3515" title="Karl Weierstrass" label="Karl Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q464" start="3776" end="3801" title="Philipp Ludwig von Seidel" label="Philipp Ludwig von Seidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q155907" start="3806" end="3827" title="George Gabriel Stokes" label="George Gabriel Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184337" start="3829" end="3840" title="G. H. Hardy" label="G. H. Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="4167" end="4183" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Bernhard Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q61038" start="4276" end="4290" title="Hermann Hankel" label="Hermann Hankel"/>
<link wikidata="Q77503" start="4292" end="4312" title="Paul du Bois-Reymond" label="Paul du Bois-Reymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q707148" start="4314" end="4325" title="Ulisse Dini" label="Ulisse Dini"/>
<link wikidata="Q525674" start="4327" end="4340" title="Cesare Arzelà" label="Cesare Arzelà"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189500" start="4412" end="4433" title="Real-valued function" label="real-valued functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="4503" end="4516" title="Metric space" label="metric spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="4538" end="4552" title="Uniform space" label="uniform spaces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4558" end="4563" title="Uniform convergence#Generalizations" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="4591" end="4594" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778098" start="5299" end="5320" title="pointwise convergence" label="pointwise convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="5405" end="5426" title="complete metric space" label="complete metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q217847" start="5432" end="5448" title="Cauchy sequence" label="Cauchy criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q934367" start="5977" end="5991" title="function space" label="function space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202673" start="6029" end="6043" title="Uniform norm" label="uniform metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="6067" end="6075" title="supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="6248" end="6260" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778098" start="7091" end="7112" title="pointwise convergence" label="pointwise convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="7865" end="7877" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191147" start="7978" end="7981" title="net (mathematics)" label="net"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="8052" end="8065" title="uniform space" label="uniform space"/>
<link wikidata="Q652446" start="8213" end="8222" title="entourage (topology)" label="entourage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958543" start="8565" end="8574" title="hyperreal number" label="hyperreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103821" start="8797" end="8812" title="microcontinuity" label="microcontinuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="9493" end="9510" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267362" start="9552" end="9559" title="bounded function" label="bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="9560" end="9564" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="9568" end="9575" title="complex number" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202673" start="9621" end="9633" title="uniform norm" label="uniform norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q847204" start="9733" end="9744" title="Limit of a sequence" label="convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202673" start="9752" end="9764" title="uniform norm" label="uniform norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="10511" end="10527" title="Floor and ceiling functions" label="ceiling function"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="12109" end="12129" title="exponential function" label="exponential function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072412" start="12214" end="12232" title="Weierstrass M-test" label="Weierstrass M-test"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="12727" end="12740" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q165638" start="13081" end="13091" title="ratio test" label="ratio test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780715" start="13462" end="13482" title="compactly convergent" label="compactly convergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="13490" end="13511" title="locally compact space" label="locally compact space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885144" start="13717" end="13733" title="Uniformly Cauchy sequence" label="uniformly Cauchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="13757" end="13764" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q194404" start="13840" end="13859" title="monotonic" label="monotone increasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q595466" start="14073" end="14092" title="Dini&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Dini&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q249092" start="14191" end="14205" title="equicontinuity" label="equicontinuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="14316" end="14334" title="topological space" label="topological spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="14374" end="14384" title="continuous function (topology)" label="continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="14458" end="14470" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="14885" end="14904" title="triangle inequality" label="triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="15278" end="15292" title="Fourier series" label="Fourier series"/>
<link wikidata="Q741865" start="15786" end="15806" title="uniformly continuous" label="uniformly continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q583034" start="15854" end="15869" title="locally compact" label="locally compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="16091" end="16105" title="derivative" label="differentiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="16433" end="16441" title="analytic function" label="analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q94491" start="16457" end="16477" title="Weierstrass function" label="Weierstrass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q697181" start="17593" end="17609" title="Riemann integral" label="Riemann integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="17745" end="17752" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q853831" start="18588" end="18605" title="Lebesgue integration" label="Lebesgue integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140119" start="18643" end="18664" title="Morera&amp;#x27;s Theorem" label="Morera&amp;#x27;s Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="18701" end="18709" title="Analytic function" label="analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q94491" start="19003" end="19023" title="Weierstrass function" label="Weierstrass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058212" start="19738" end="19751" title="measure space" label="measure space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139334" start="20379" end="20396" title="almost everywhere" label="almost everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191709" start="20442" end="20463" title="Egorov&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Egorov&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20550" end="20567" title="Pointwise convergence#Almost everywhere convergence" label="almost everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778098" start="20653" end="20682" title="almost everywhere convergence" label="almost everywhere convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q768656" start="20687" end="20709" title="convergence in measure" label="convergence in measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885099" start="20726" end="20760" title="Uniform convergence in probability" label="Uniform convergence in probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889156" start="20762" end="20800" title="Modes of convergence (annotated index)" label="Modes of convergence (annotated index)"/>
<link wikidata="Q595466" start="20802" end="20821" title="Dini&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Dini&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477053" start="20823" end="20844" title="Arzelà–Ascoli theorem" label="Arzelà–Ascoli theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q72982" start="20873" end="20885" title="Konrad Knopp" label="Konrad Knopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q184337" start="20998" end="21009" title="G. H. Hardy" label="G. H. Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786838" start="21069" end="21119" title="Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society" label="Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q190529" start="21146" end="21154" title="Nicolas Bourbaki" label="Bourbaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q470503" start="21229" end="21241" title="Walter Rudin" label="Walter Rudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549145" start="21310" end="21324" title="Gerald Folland" label="Gerald Folland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50662" wikidata="Q2467893" url="?curid=50662" title="Norman Bates">
<text>Norman Bates is a fictional character created by American author Robert Bloch as the main protagonist in his 1959 horror novel &quot;Psycho&quot;. He has an alter, Mother, who takes the form of his abusive mother, and later victim, Norma, who in his daily life runs the Bates Motel.

He was portrayed by Anthony Perkins in the 1960 version of &quot;Psycho&quot; directed by Alfred Hitchcock and in the &quot;Psycho&quot; franchise. He was also portrayed by Vince Vaughn in the 1998 version of &quot;Psycho&quot;, and by Freddie Highmore in the television series &quot;Bates Motel&quot; (2013–2017).

Unlike the franchise produced by Universal Studios, Norman is not the principal antagonist in Bloch&#x27;s subsequent novels and is succeeded by copycat killers who assume Norman&#x27;s identity after his death in &quot;Psycho II&quot; (1982), although he does return and in the licensed continuation novel &quot;Psycho: Sanitarium&quot; (2016) by Chet Williamson. There is a wide-ranging assumption that the character was directly inspired by the Wisconsin murderer Ed Gein. With &quot;Psycho&quot; being optioned for film adaptation as a direct result of media attention on Gein, Bloch later revealed he was inspired more by the circumstances surrounding Gein&#x27;s case—the idea that &quot;the man next door may be a monster unsuspected even in the gossip-ridden microcosm of small-town life.&quot; Years later, when the full details of Gein&#x27;s crimes were revealed, he was struck by &quot;how closely the imaginary character I&#x27;d created resembled the real Ed Gein both in overt act and apparent motivation.&quot;

==Character overview==
Both the 1959 novel and its 1960 film adaptation explain that Norman suffered severe emotional abuse as a child at the hands of his mother, Norma, who preached to him that sexual intercourse was sinful and that all women (except herself) were whores. The novel also suggests that their relationship may have been incestuous.

After Norman&#x27;s father died, Norman and his mother lived alone together &quot;as if there was no one else in the world&quot; until Norman was a teenager, when his mother met Joe Considine (Chet Rudolph in &quot;Psycho IV: The Beginning&quot;) and planned to marry. Considine eventually convinced Norma to open a motel. Driven over the edge with jealousy, Norman murdered both of them with strychnine. After committing the murders, Norman forged his mother&#x27;s suicide note to make it look like she had killed Considine and then herself. After a brief hospitalization for shock, he developed a split personality, assuming his mother&#x27;s personality to repress his awareness of her death and thus escape the guilt of murdering her. He inherited his mother&#x27;s house—where he kept her corpse in the fruit cellar—and the motel in the fictional small town of Fairvale, California.
Norman&#x27;s &quot;Mother&quot; personality is as cruel and possessive as the real Norma had been in life, frequently berating him and forbidding him to have a life outside of her. As &quot;Mother&quot;, he dresses in Norma&#x27;s clothes and talks to himself in her voice, and he also speaks to her corpse as if it is alive. &quot;Mother&quot; also kills women whom Norman feels attracted to, and anyone else who threatens the illusion of her existence. Norman passes out when &quot;Mother&quot; takes control; after &quot;Mother&quot; commits a murder, Norman awakens and destroys the evidence, convinced that &quot;she&quot; alone is responsible for the crime.

Bloch sums up Norman&#x27;s multiple personalities in his stylistic form of puns: &quot;Norman&quot;, a child needing his mother; &quot;Norma&quot;, a controlling, mean-spirited parent figure; and &quot;Normal&quot;, a functional adult who goes through the motions of day-to-day life.

==&quot;Psycho&quot; (novel and film)==

In Bloch&#x27;s 1959 novel and the 1960 Hitchcock film, Marion Crane (Janet Leigh), a young woman on the run after stealing money from her employer, checks into the motel one night. Norman is smitten with her, and shyly asks her to have dinner with him in the house. &quot;Mother&quot; flies into a rage and threatens to kill Marion if Norman lets her in the house. Norman defies her and eats dinner with Marion anyway, but lashes out at her when she suggests that he institutionalize his mother. When Marion goes to her room to shower, Norman spies on her through a peephole he drilled in the wall. &quot;Mother&quot; takes control and stabs Marion to death (he beheads her in the novel). When Norman awakes to discover what he believes his mother has done, he sinks Marion&#x27;s car—with her corpse and the money in the trunk—into a nearby swamp. As &quot;Mother&quot;, he also murders Milton Arbogast (Martin Balsam), a private detective hired by Marion&#x27;s employer, days later.

Norman is finally caught when Marion&#x27;s sister Lila (Vera Miles) and boyfriend, Sam Loomis (John Gavin), arrive at the motel looking for her. When Norman figures out what they want, he knocks Sam out and goes running after Lila, who has reached the house and found Mrs. Bates&#x27; corpse. He attacks her as &quot;Mother&quot;, but Sam, after coming to, overpowers him, and Norman is finally arrested for murdering Marion and two other missing women. Norman is declared insane and sent to an institution, where &quot;Mother&quot; takes complete, and permanent, control of his mind: he becomes his mother.

==Novel sequels==
===&quot;Psycho II&quot;===

In Bloch&#x27;s 1982 sequel to his first novel, &quot;Psycho II&quot;, Norman escapes from the psychiatric hospital by killing one of two visiting nuns and donning her habit. He steals their van and kills then rapes the corpse of the second nun. Norman plans to find and kill both Sam Loomis and his wife Lila (Lila Crane sister of Mary or Marion Crane) who he believes are responsible for his incarceration but first he needs to fake his death. 
He notices a hitchhiker and decides to kill him and fake his own death. Unbeknown to Norman the hitchhiker is planning to attack this nun and steal her van. Norman tries to attack his passenger but is overpowered. This in turn causes a fiery accident where the hitchhiker escapes, but Norman dies. Meanwhile, Dr. Adam Claiborne, who discovered Norman&#x27;s corpse, assumes his personality and goes on a killing spree.

===&quot;Psycho House&quot;===

In Bloch&#x27;s 1991 sequel to his second novel, &quot;Psycho House&quot;, Norman appears only as a novelty animatronic on display in the Bates Motel, which has been converted into a tourist attraction.

===&quot;Danganronpa Kirigiri&quot;===

In the second volume of Takekuni Kitayama&#x27;s 2013 &quot;&quot; light novel series, a prequel to the 2010 video game &quot;&quot;, the events of &quot;Psycho&quot; and &quot;Psycho House&quot; are depicted as having taken place in the past of the world of &quot;Danganronpa&quot;. Twenty years after Norman&#x27;s death, the reinvented Bates Motel operates as a tourist attraction, now known as the Norman Hotel. It eventually closes, however, following a series of mysterious suicides and murders taking place in its vicinity, said to be committed by Norman&#x27;s ghost.

By the time of the present day narrative of the novel, the hotel is used by the Victims Catharsis Committee (VCC) for their Duel Noir program, intended for victims of crimes to get revenge against the criminals who wronged them. In the novel, Kyoko Kirigiri and her assistant Yui Samidare find themselves participants of the Duel Noir, with an LCD screen of Norman&#x27;s image (an evolution of his animatronic form, initially mistaken for a &quot;talking painting&quot;) uttering lines recorded in the original Norman&#x27;s voice to speak on the behalf the VCC. After explaining the game&#x27;s rules, Norman leads a maid to her death via a burning gun-trap situated under his painting, before announcing that he has to leave to go find his mother. He then &quot;leaves&quot; the painting, and the rest of the Duel Noir is hosted by Norman&#x27;s &quot;family&quot;.

===&quot;Psycho: Sanitarium&quot;===
In Chet Williamson&#x27;s 2016 prequel to the second novel, &quot;&quot;, Dr. Felix Reed tries to bring Norman out of a catatonic state. &quot;Sanitarium&quot; introduces Robert Newman, Norman&#x27;s twin brother who was taken away at birth after the attending doctor pronounced him brain damaged. As Robert and Norman get to know each other, Norman senses a darkness in Robert, even deeper than that which has lurked in Norman himself. Disappearances begin occurring in the asylum, with the victims being those that were a threat towards Norman and wanted to bring him harm. It is revealed that Robert Newman is a new split personality of Norman&#x27;s, which was created by Reed through hypnosis in order to get Norman to kill the asylum&#x27;s most violent patients. With the help of his &quot;Mother&quot; personality (that Norman has been trying to suppress throughout most of the novel), the Robert persona is destroyed and Mother stabs Reed to death. The incident traumatizes Norman and puts him back into a catatonic state.

==Film sequels==
===&quot;Psycho II&quot;===
In 1983&#x27;s &quot;Psycho II&quot;, the first sequel to the original film, Norman is released from the institution twenty-two years after his arrest, seemingly cured. Sam Loomis has passed away at this point. Norman meets Mary Samuels (Meg Tilly)—later revealed to be Mary Loomis, Lila and Sam Loomis&#x27;s daughter and Marion Crane&#x27;s niece—and falls in love with her. However, a series of mysterious murders occurs, as well as strange appearances and messages from his mother, and Norman slowly loses his grip on sanity. The mysterious appearances and messages turn out to be a plot by Lila to drive him insane again in order to get him recommitted. The actual murders turn out to be the work of Norman&#x27;s coworker, Emma Spool (Claudia Bryar). Before Norman discovers this, however, Mary Loomis is shot dead by the police during a confrontation with Norman, and Mrs. Spool murders Lila. When Spool tells Norman that she is his real mother, he kills her and embalms her corpse while assuming the &quot;Mother&quot; personality once again.

===&quot;Psycho III&quot;===
In 1986&#x27;s &quot;Psycho III&quot;, set a month later, Norman continues to struggle, unsuccessfully, against &quot;Mother&quot;&#x27;s dominion. He also finds another love interest named Maureen Coyle (Diana Scarwid), who eventually dies at &quot;Mother&quot;&#x27;s hand. In the film, Mrs. Spool&#x27;s corpse is first discovered by sleazy musician Duane Duke (Jeff Fahey), whom Norman kills when Duke tries to use the discovery to blackmail Norman. Tracy Venable (Roberta Maxwell), a reporter interested in Norman&#x27;s case, finds out that Spool was in fact Norman&#x27;s aunt—Norma Bates&#x27; sister—who was in love with Norman&#x27;s father and killed him when he chose Norma over her. She then kidnapped the child Norman, believing him to be her own, but she was arrested and institutionalized, leaving Norman to be raised by Norma.

&quot;Mother&quot; orders Norman to kill Tracy, but in the end he destroys Spool&#x27;s corpse, attempting to break free of her control. He is then arrested and put back in the institution.

===&quot;Psycho IV: The Beginning&quot;===
&quot;Psycho IV: The Beginning&quot; (1990), the final film in the series, retcons the revelations of the second film and third film, supplying that Norman&#x27;s father was stung to death by bees and removing all references to Emma Spool. In this film, Norman has been released from an institution, and is married to one of the hospital&#x27;s psychologists, a woman named Connie (Donna Mitchell). When his wife becomes pregnant, he lures her to his mother&#x27;s house and tries to kill her, wanting to prevent another of his &quot;cursed&quot; line from being born into the world; the film implies that Mrs. Bates (Olivia Hussey) suffered from schizophrenia and borderline personality disorder and passed the illnesses on to her son. However, he relents at the last minute, when Connie professes her love for him. He then burns the house down in an attempt to free himself of his past. During the attempt, he is tormented by hallucinations of &quot;Mother&quot; and several of his victims, becoming injured in a fall. He almost dies in the flames before willing himself to get out, apparently defeating his illness at long last; he is finally free of his mother&#x27;s voice, which demands to be let out. This was Anthony Perkins&#x27; final performance as Norman Bates; Henry Thomas portrayed Norman as a teenager.

==Television==
===&quot;Bates Motel&quot; (film)===

In the 1987 television spin-off movie and series pilot &quot;Bates Motel&quot;, Norman is never released from the institution after his first incarceration. He befriends Alex West (Bud Cort), a fellow inmate who had murdered his stepfather, and wills ownership of the titular motel to him before dying of old age.

===&quot;Bates Motel&quot; (TV series)===

The television series &quot;Bates Motel&quot;, a reboot to the 1960 film &quot;Psycho&quot;, set in the present day, depicts the young Norman Bates&#x27; life with his mother, Norma (Vera Farmiga). In this continuity, Norman suffers from hallucinations and blackouts, and begins manifesting his &quot;Mother&quot; personality while Norma is alive. He kills his abusive father, Sam (David Cubitt), while in a dissociative state, and Norma moves them from Arizona, where he was born and raised, to White Pine Bay, Oregon, to protect him. The series also introduces his maternal half-brother, Dylan Massett (Max Thieriot) and gives him a love interest in Emma Decody (Olivia Cooke), a classmate with cystic fibrosis.

As &quot;Mother&quot;, Norman murders Blaire Watson (Keegan Connor Tracy), one of his teachers who seduces him; Bradley Martin (Nicola Peltz), a girl he has feelings for; and Audrey Ellis Decody (Karina Logue), Emma&#x27;s estranged mother. Fearing for his sanity, Norma briefly has him committed to a mental institution. While there, Norman recovers a memory of witnessing his father rape Norma in a drunken rage after she tried to leave him; it is implied that this trauma fractured his psyche.

When Norman&#x27;s sanity begins to deteriorate, Norma marries the town sheriff, Alex Romero (Nestor Carbonell), so she can use his insurance coverage to pay for Norman&#x27;s treatment. While the marriage is at first merely a financial arrangement, they eventually fall in love. After Norman is released from the institution and finds out that Norma is married, he grows insanely jealous and tries to kill both Norma and himself by flooding the house with carbon monoxide while his mother sleeps. Romero arrives at the house in time to revive Norman, but finds that Norma is already dead. Romero figures out what happened and swears revenge, but is arrested for perjury before he can do anything. Meanwhile, Norman cannot bear losing his mother, so he digs up her corpse and assumes her personality to preserve the illusion of her being alive.

Two years later, Norman is running the motel and living alone in the house with Norma&#x27;s corpse, which he keeps frozen and preserved in the cellar. He and his &quot;Mother&quot; personality live together as if there is no one else in the world, and she takes care of his problems - such as killing and disposing of a hitman sent by Romero and helping him get rid of his uncle, Norma&#x27;s brother Caleb (Kenny Johnson), after he discovers the truth. Norman falls for Madeline Loomis (Isabelle McNally), a lonely woman who bears an uncanny resemblance to Norma, and whose husband Sam (Austin Nichols) is cheating on her. &quot;Mother&quot; becomes jealous and starts behaving erratically, at one point taking possession of Norman&#x27;s mind and making him have sex with a man at a gay bar while dressed in Norma&#x27;s clothes. Norman finally begins to suspect that &quot;Mother&quot; is not real, and she confirms that he created her in his mind to deal with things that he could not, such as his abusive father.

When Sam&#x27;s mistress Marion Crane (Rihanna) checks into the motel, Norman has dinner with her and tells her that Sam is married. Marion comes back to the motel after confirming Sam&#x27;s infidelity, and seeks comfort from Norman. He fears that &quot;Mother&quot; will kill her, however, and tells her to leave and never come back. When Sam comes to the motel to look for Marion, Norman stabs him to death in the shower.

Dylan comes to see Norman after learning of Norma&#x27;s death, and they get into a fight that ends with Norman assaulting his half-brother at &quot;Mother&quot;&#x27;s instigation. Terrified of what he might do, Norman calls 911 and confesses to murdering Sam. While he is in jail, Sheriff Jane Greene (Brooke Smith) finds the bodies of Norman&#x27;s other victims, and charges him with their murders, as well. While Norman is awaiting trial, Romero—who had earlier escaped from prison—breaks into his cell and takes him hostage. They drive to the woods where Norman hid Norma&#x27;s corpse after the police began searching his house. There, Norman gets the better of Romero and shoots him dead, but not before his former stepfather tells him he will never escape from murdering his own mother. When Norman finally admits to himself that he killed Norma, &quot;Mother&quot; appears to him and tells him she is leaving, as there is no longer anything she can protect him from.

Now completely alone, Norman loses all contact with reality. He calls Dylan and invites him over for a &quot;family dinner&quot;, complete with Norma&#x27;s corpse seated at the head of the table. When Dylan tells him that Norma is dead, Norman flies into a rage and attacks him with a knife, forcing Dylan to shoot him in self-defense. As he dies, Norman sees a vision of his mother embracing him.

==Characterization==
The character Norman Bates in &quot;Psycho&quot; was loosely based on two people. First was the real-life murderer Ed Gein, about whom Bloch later wrote a fictionalized account, &quot;The Shambles of Ed Gein&quot;, in 1962. (The story can be found in &quot;Crimes and Punishments: The Lost Bloch, Volume 3&quot;). Second, it has been indicated by several people, including Noel Carter (wife of Lin Carter) and Chris Steinbrunner, as well as allegedly by Bloch himself, that Norman Bates was partly based on Calvin Beck, publisher of &quot;Castle of Frankenstein&quot;.

The characterization of Norman Bates in the novel and the movie differ in some key areas. In the novel, Norman is in his mid-to-late 40s, short, overweight and homely. In the movie, he is in his mid-20s, tall, slender, and handsome. Reportedly, when working on the film, Hitchcock decided that he wanted audiences to be able to sympathize with Norman and genuinely like the character, so he made him more of a &quot;boy next door&quot;. In the novel, Norman becomes &quot;Mother&quot; after getting drunk and passing out; in the movie, he remains sober before switching personalities. 

In the novel, Norman is well-read in occult and esoteric authors such as P.D. Ouspensky and Aleister Crowley. He is aware that &quot;Mother&quot; disapproves of these authors as being against religion.

==Portrayals==
Norman Bates was portrayed by Anthony Perkins in Hitchcock&#x27;s seminal 1960 film adaptation of Bloch&#x27;s novel and its three sequels. Perkins hosted an episode of &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; in 1976 in which he performed numerous sketches portraying Norman, including the instructional video &quot;The Norman Bates School of Motel Management&quot;. He also portrayed Norman, albeit more lightheartedly, in a 1990 commercial for Oatmeal Crisp cereal. Vince Vaughn portrayed Norman in Gus Van Sant&#x27;s 1998 version of &quot;Psycho&quot;, while Kurt Paul, Perkins&#x27; &quot;Mother&quot; stunt double in &quot;Psycho II&quot; and &quot;Psycho III&quot;, took on the role in the made-for-TV film spin-off &quot;Bates Motel&quot;. Perkins&#x27; son Oz portrayed a younger version of Norman in &quot;Psycho II&quot;. Henry Thomas played a younger version of the character in &quot;Psycho IV: The Beginning&quot;. Freddie Highmore portrayed Norman in the TV series &quot;Bates Motel&quot;, with Vera Farmiga portraying both Norman&#x27;s mother Norma and his murderous split personality &quot;Mother&quot;. For his performance, Highmore was nominated twice for a Critic&#x27;s Choice Award, a Saturn Award, and won a People&#x27;s Choice Award in 2017.

==Comic books==
Norman appears in the 1992 three-issue comic book adaptation of the 1960 film &quot;Psycho&quot; released by Innovation Publishing. Despite being a colorized adaptation of the Hitchcock film, the version of Norman present in the comics resembles the one from Bloch&#x27;s original novel: a middle-aged, overweight, balding man. Comic artist Felipe Echevarria has explained that this was due to Perkins&#x27; refusal to allow his likeness to be replicated for the books, wanting to disassociate himself with Norman Bates.

==Appearances==
===Novels===
* &quot;Psycho&quot; (1959), by Robert Bloch
* &quot;Psycho II&quot; (1982), by Robert Bloch
* &quot;Psycho House&quot; (1990, as an animatronic), by Robert Bloch
* &quot;Suspects&quot; (1985), by David Thomson
* &quot;&quot; (2013, as an animatronic, painting), by Takekuni Kitayama
* &quot;Psycho: Sanitarium&quot; (2016), by Chet Williamson

===Films===
* &quot;Psycho&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Psycho II&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Psycho III&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Bates Motel&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Psycho IV: The Beginning&quot; (1990)
* &quot;Psycho&quot; (1998)

===Television===
* &quot;Bates Motel&quot; (2013–2017)

===Comics===
* &quot;Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s Psycho&quot; (1992)

===Music===
* &quot;Norman Bates&quot;, by John L. Walters, a single and album track by Landscape (band) (1981)
* &quot;Bates Motel&quot;, a single by The Hitmen (1981)
*&quot;A Shower with Norman Bates&quot;, a single and album track by French band Etienne et Moi for their album &quot;Norman Bates&quot; (2006)
* &quot;The Shower Scene,&quot; an album track by Ice Nine Kills for their album The Silver Scream 2: Welcome to Horrorwood (2021)

==Reception==
Norman Bates is ranked as the second-greatest villain on the American Film Institute&#x27;s list of the top 100 film heroes and villains, behind Hannibal Lecter and ahead of Darth Vader. His line &quot;A boy&#x27;s best friend is his mother&quot; also ranks as number 56 on the institute&#x27;s list of the 100 greatest movie quotes. In 2008, Norman Bates was selected by &quot;Empire&quot; as one of &quot;The 100 Greatest Movie Characters&quot;. In 2009, &quot;Total Film&quot; issued it&#x27;s &quot;The 150 Greatest Performances of All Time&quot; list, ranking Perkins&#x27; performance in &quot;Psycho&quot; at 27th place. Bates also ranked number 4 on &quot;Premiere&quot; magazine&#x27;s list of &quot;The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time&quot;.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Norman Bates on IMDb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2467893" start="0" end="12" title="Norman Bates" label="Norman Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="65" end="77" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="90" end="101" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275361" start="133" end="139" title="Psycho (novel)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657" start="154" end="162" title="dissociative identity disorder" label="an alter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878439" start="232" end="237" title="Norma Bates (Psycho)" label="Norma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193146" start="304" end="319" title="Anthony Perkins" label="Anthony Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="323" end="361" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="the 1960 version of &amp;quot;Psycho&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="374" end="390" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565909" start="402" end="430" title="Psycho (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Psycho&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q107730" start="457" end="469" title="Vince Vaughn" label="Vince Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q979196" start="473" end="511" title="Psycho (1998 film)" label="the 1998 version of &amp;quot;Psycho&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q296887" start="520" end="536" title="Freddie Highmore" label="Freddie Highmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q323722" start="568" end="579" title="Bates Motel (TV series)" label="Bates Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="633" end="650" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q109931" start="745" end="759" title="copycat killer" label="copycat killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356476" start="820" end="829" title="Psycho II (novel)" label="Psycho II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094139" start="948" end="963" title="Chet Williamson" label="Chet Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="1048" end="1057" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q309643" start="1067" end="1074" title="Ed Gein" label="Ed Gein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257444" start="1119" end="1134" title="film adaptation" label="film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="1679" end="1699" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="1960 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339137" start="1736" end="1751" title="emotional abuse" label="emotional abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878439" start="1791" end="1796" title="Norma Bates (Psycho)" label="Norma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="1823" end="1841" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="1964" end="1970" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="2343" end="2349" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q194406" start="2370" end="2380" title="strychnine" label="strychnine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657" start="2577" end="2594" title="dissociative identity disorder" label="split personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="3608" end="3611" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765157" start="3915" end="3927" title="Marion Crane" label="Marion Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q205314" start="3929" end="3940" title="Janet Leigh" label="Janet Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q312107" start="4765" end="4778" title="Martin Balsam" label="Martin Balsam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547460" start="4898" end="4902" title="Lila Crane" label="Lila"/>
<link wikidata="Q237864" start="4904" end="4914" title="Vera Miles" label="Vera Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q145627" start="4943" end="4953" title="John Gavin" label="John Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q505619" start="5321" end="5327" title="insanity" label="insane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356476" start="5558" end="5567" title="Psycho II (novel)" label="Psycho II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925018" start="6458" end="6470" title="Psycho House" label="Psycho House"/>
<link wikidata="Q494002" start="6511" end="6522" title="animatronic" label="animatronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747381" start="6714" end="6725" title="light novel" label="light novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="6736" end="6743" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917310" start="6912" end="6923" title="Danganronpa" label="Danganronpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q65663126" start="7467" end="7481" title="Kyoko Kirigiri" label="Kyoko Kirigiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096316" start="7490" end="7499" title="Personal assistant" label="assistant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7500" end="7512" title="List of Danganronpa characters#Yui Samidare" label="Yui Samidare"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="7568" end="7571" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094139" start="8134" end="8149" title="Chet Williamson" label="Chet Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q501571" start="8251" end="8260" title="catatonia" label="catatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475321" start="9230" end="9239" title="Psycho II (film)" label="Psycho II"/>
<link wikidata="Q236705" start="9447" end="9456" title="Meg Tilly" label="Meg Tilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915214" start="9731" end="9737" title="sanity" label="sanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372962" start="9938" end="9948" title="Emma Spool" label="Emma Spool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097356" start="9950" end="9963" title="Claudia Bryar" label="Claudia Bryar"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="10179" end="10186" title="embalming" label="embalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635514" start="10311" end="10321" title="Psycho III" label="Psycho III"/>
<link wikidata="Q242805" start="10495" end="10508" title="Diana Scarwid" label="Diana Scarwid"/>
<link wikidata="Q314606" start="10655" end="10665" title="Jeff Fahey" label="Jeff Fahey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34284" start="10726" end="10735" title="blackmail" label="blackmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159369" start="10759" end="10774" title="Roberta Maxwell" label="Roberta Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11375" end="11399" title="Psycho IV: The Beginning" label="Psycho IV: The Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q517361" start="11444" end="11451" title="retroactive continuity" label="retcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933783" start="11751" end="11765" title="Donna Mitchell" label="Donna Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="11790" end="11798" title="pregnancy" label="pregnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q234293" start="11987" end="12000" title="Olivia Hussey" label="Olivia Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="12016" end="12029" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="12034" end="12065" title="borderline personality disorder" label="borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q130741" start="12297" end="12310" title="hallucination" label="hallucination"/>
<link wikidata="Q506198" start="12643" end="12655" title="Henry Thomas" label="Henry Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q777700" start="12803" end="12814" title="Bates Motel (film)" label="Bates Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39982" start="12923" end="12931" title="Bud Cort" label="Bud Cort"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="12987" end="12992" title="will (law)" label="wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q323722" start="13128" end="13139" title="Bates Motel (TV series)" label="Bates Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q264840" start="13283" end="13295" title="Vera Farmiga" label="Vera Farmiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q366821" start="13482" end="13494" title="David Cubitt" label="David Cubitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663" start="13508" end="13526" title="Dissociation (psychology)" label="dissociative state"/>
<link wikidata="Q703723" start="13705" end="13717" title="Max Thieriot" label="Max Thieriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15069963" start="13765" end="13777" title="Olivia Cooke" label="Olivia Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q178194" start="13797" end="13812" title="cystic fibrosis" label="cystic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q285501" start="13868" end="13887" title="Keegan Connor Tracy" label="Keegan Connor Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q236347" start="13943" end="13955" title="Nicola Peltz" label="Nicola Peltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302973" start="14157" end="14165" title="recovered memory therapy" label="recovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198705" start="14200" end="14204" title="spousal rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q225933" start="14407" end="14423" title="Nestor Carbonell" label="Nestor Carbonell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="14770" end="14785" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="14976" end="14983" title="perjury" label="perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371295" start="15568" end="15581" title="Kenny Johnson" label="Kenny Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q441283" start="15748" end="15762" title="Austin Nichols" label="Austin Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043639" start="15945" end="15952" title="gay bar" label="gay bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765157" start="16204" end="16216" title="Marion Crane" label="Marion Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="16218" end="16225" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q235725" start="16909" end="16921" title="Brooke Smith (actress)" label="Brooke Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q309643" start="18119" end="18126" title="Ed Gein" label="Ed Gein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248054" start="18398" end="18408" title="Lin Carter" label="Lin Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108159" start="18414" end="18432" title="Chris Steinbrunner" label="Chris Steinbrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050387" start="18543" end="18565" title="Castle of Frankenstein" label="Castle of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="19198" end="19204" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q434266" start="19234" end="19248" title="P.D. Ouspensky" label="P.D. Ouspensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="19253" end="19269" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193146" start="19409" end="19424" title="Anthony Perkins" label="Anthony Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="19453" end="19473" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="1960 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275361" start="19477" end="19495" title="Psycho (novel)" label="Bloch&amp;#x27;s novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="19554" end="19573" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074506" start="19817" end="19830" title="Oatmeal Crisp" label="Oatmeal Crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q107730" start="19839" end="19851" title="Vince Vaughn" label="Vince Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25186" start="19872" end="19884" title="Gus Van Sant" label="Gus Van Sant"/>
<link wikidata="Q979196" start="19892" end="19926" title="Psycho (1998 film)" label="1998 version of &amp;quot;Psycho&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q277920" start="19934" end="19943" title="Kurt Paul" label="Kurt Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475321" start="20000" end="20009" title="Psycho II (film)" label="Psycho II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635514" start="20026" end="20036" title="Psycho III" label="Psycho III"/>
<link wikidata="Q777700" start="20068" end="20093" title="Bates Motel (film)" label="made-for-TV film spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379066" start="20137" end="20139" title="Oz Perkins" label="Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q506198" start="20204" end="20216" title="Henry Thomas" label="Henry Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20268" end="20292" title="Psycho IV: The Beginning" label="Psycho IV: The Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q296887" start="20300" end="20316" title="Freddie Highmore" label="Freddie Highmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q323722" start="20357" end="20368" title="Bates Motel (TV series)" label="Bates Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q264840" start="20381" end="20393" title="Vera Farmiga" label="Vera Farmiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7585305" start="20549" end="20575" title="Critic&amp;#x27;s Choice Award" label="Critic&amp;#x27;s Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q105447" start="20579" end="20591" title="Saturn Award" label="Saturn Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q27868160" start="20603" end="20629" title="43rd People&amp;#x27;s Choice Awards" label="People&amp;#x27;s Choice Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="20695" end="20705" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036181" start="20765" end="20786" title="Innovation Publishing" label="Innovation Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634411" start="20804" end="20813" title="Film colorization" label="colorized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275361" start="21215" end="21221" title="Psycho (novel)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="21239" end="21251" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356476" start="21260" end="21269" title="Psycho II (novel)" label="Psycho II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925018" start="21308" end="21320" title="Psycho House" label="Psycho House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176847" start="21404" end="21417" title="David Thomson (film critic)" label="David Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21499" end="21517" title="#Psycho: Sanitarium" label="Psycho: Sanitarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094139" start="21535" end="21550" title="Chet Williamson" label="Chet Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q163038" start="21572" end="21578" title="Psycho (1960 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475321" start="21600" end="21609" title="Psycho II (film)" label="Psycho II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635514" start="21631" end="21641" title="Psycho III" label="Psycho III"/>
<link wikidata="Q777700" start="21663" end="21674" title="Bates Motel (film)" label="Bates Motel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21696" end="21720" title="Psycho IV: The Beginning" label="Psycho IV: The Beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q979196" start="21742" end="21748" title="Psycho (1998 film)" label="Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q323722" start="21788" end="21799" title="Bates Motel (TV series)" label="Bates Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243730" start="21928" end="21943" title="John L. Walters" label="John L. Walters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21958" end="21963" title="From the Tea-rooms of Mars ..." label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485058" start="21973" end="21989" title="Landscape (band)" label="Landscape (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985325" start="22248" end="22262" title="Ice Nine Kills" label="Ice Nine Kills"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22279" end="22321" title="The Silver Scream 2: Welcome to Horrorwood" label="The Silver Scream 2: Welcome to Horrorwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="22405" end="22428" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610957" start="22436" end="22480" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains" label="list of the top 100 film heroes and villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q211013" start="22489" end="22504" title="Hannibal Lecter" label="Hannibal Lecter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206942" start="22518" end="22529" title="Darth Vader" label="Darth Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q400051" start="22639" end="22676" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes" label="list of the 100 greatest movie quotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="22722" end="22728" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="22807" end="22817" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q130706" start="23002" end="23031" title="Premiere Magazine" label="&amp;quot;Premiere&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="23169" end="23173" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
</links>
</doc>
