<doc id="46763" wikidata="Q254106" url="?curid=46763" title="Crimean War">
<text>The Crimean War was fought between the Russian Empire and an alliance of the Ottoman Empire, France, the United Kingdom, and Sardinia-Piedmont from October 1853 to February 1856. Geopolitical causes of the war included the decline of the Ottoman Empire (the &quot;Eastern Question&quot;), the expansion of Russia in the preceding Russo-Turkish Wars, and the British and French preference to preserve the Ottoman Empire to maintain the balance of power in the Concert of Europe.

The flashpoint was a dispute between France and Russia over the rights of Catholic and Orthodox minorities in Palestine. After the Sublime Porte refused Russian tsar Nicholas I&#x27;s demand that the Empire&#x27;s Orthodox subjects be placed under his protection, Russian troops occupied the Danubian Principalities in July 1853. The Ottomans declared war on Russia in October and halted the Russian advance at Silistria. Fearing the growth of Russian influence and compelled by public outrage over the annihilation of the Ottoman squadron at Sinop, Britain and France joined the war on the Ottoman side in March 1854.

In September 1854, after extended preparations, allied forces landed on the Crimean Peninsula in an attempt to capture Russia&#x27;s main naval base in the Black Sea, Sevastopol, and scored an early victory at the Battle of the Alma. The Russians counterattacked in late October in what became the Battle of Balaclava and were repulsed, and a second counterattack at Inkerman ended in a stalemate. The front settled into the eleven-month-long Siege of Sevastopol, involving brutal conditions for troops on both sides. Smaller military actions took place in the Caucasus (1853–1855), the White Sea (July–August 1854) and the North Pacific (1854–1855). The Italian Kingdom of Sardinia entered on the side of the allies in 1855.

Isolated and facing a bleak prospect of invasion by the West if the war continued, Russia sued for peace in March 1856. France and Britain welcomed the development, owing to the conflict&#x27;s domestic unpopularity. The Treaty of Paris, signed on 30 March 1856, ended the war. It forbade Russia to base warships in the Black Sea. The Ottoman vassal states of Wallachia and Moldavia became largely independent. Christians in the Ottoman Empire gained a degree of official equality, and the Orthodox Church regained control of the Christian churches in dispute.

The Crimean War was one of the first conflicts in which military forces used modern technologies such as explosive naval shells, railways and telegraphs. It was also one of the first to be documented extensively in written reports and in photographs. The war quickly became a symbol of logistical, medical and tactical failures and of mismanagement. The reaction in Britain led to a demand for the professionalisation of medicine, most famously achieved by Florence Nightingale, who gained worldwide attention for pioneering modern nursing while she treated the wounded. The Crimean War also marked a turning point for the Russian Empire. It weakened the Imperial Russian Army, drained the treasury and undermined its influence in Europe. The humiliating defeat forced Russia&#x27;s educated elites to identify the country&#x27;s fundamental problems, and became a catalyst for reforms of Russia&#x27;s social institutions, including the abolition of serfdom and overhauls in the justice system, local self-government, education and military service.

==Eastern question==
As the Ottoman Empire steadily weakened during the 19th century, the Russian Empire stood poised to take advantage by expanding southward. In the 1850s, the British and the French Empires were allied with the Ottoman Empire and were determined to prevent that from happening. The historian A. J. P. Taylor argued that the war had resulted not from aggression, but from the interacting fears of the major players:
===Weakening of the Ottoman Empire: 1820–1840s===
In the early 1800s, the Ottoman Empire suffered a number of existential challenges. The Serbian Revolution in 1804 resulted in the autonomy of the first Balkan Christian nation under the empire. The Greek War of Independence, which began in early 1821, provided further evidence of the empire&#x27;s internal and military weakness, and the commission of atrocities by Ottoman military forces (see Chios massacre) further undermined the empire. The disbandment of the centuries-old Janissary corps by Sultan Mahmud II on 15 June 1826 (Auspicious Incident) helped the empire in the longer term but deprived it of its existing standing army in the short term. In 1827, the Anglo-Franco-Russian fleet destroyed almost all of the Ottoman naval forces at the Battle of Navarino. In 1830, Greece became independent after ten years of war and the Russo-Turkish War (1828–29). The Treaty of Adrianople (1829) granted Russian and Western European commercial ships free passage through the Black Sea straits. Also, Serbia received autonomy, and the Danubian Principalities (Moldavia and Wallachia) became territories under Russian protection.

France took the opportunity to occupy Algeria, which had been under Ottoman rule, in 1830. In 1831, Muhammad Ali of Egypt, the most powerful vassal of the Ottoman Empire, declared independence. Ottoman forces were defeated in a number of battles, which forced Mahmud II to seek Russian military aid. A Russian army of 10,000 landed on the shores of the Bosphorus in 1833 and helped prevent the Egyptians from capturing Constantinople.

&quot;The reasons for the Tsar&#x27;s disquietude are not obscure. Not Turkey alone was threatened by the advance of Ibrahim. The rights secured to Russia by a succession of treaties were also directly jeopardized. The substitution of a virile Albanian dynasty at Constantinople in place of the effete Osmanlis was the last thing desired by the Power which wished, naturally enough, to command the gate into the Mediterranean&quot;. Russia was satisfied with the weak government in Constantinople (Istanbul).

As a result, the Treaty of Hünkâr İskelesi was signed and greatly benefited Russia. It provided for a military alliance between the Russian and the Ottoman Empires if one of them was attacked, and a secret additional clause allowed the Ottomans to opt out of sending troops but to close the Straits to foreign warships if Russia were under threat. Egypt remained nominally under Ottoman sovereignty but was &quot;de facto&quot; independent.

In 1838 in a situation similar to that of 1831, Muhammad Ali of Egypt was not happy about his lack of control and power in Syria, and he resumed military action. The Ottomans lost to the Egyptians at the Battle of Nezib on 24 June 1839 but were saved by Britain, Austria, Prussia and Russia, who signed a convention in London on 15 July 1840 that granted Muhammad Ali and his descendants the right to inherit power in Egypt in exchange for the removal of Egyptian forces from Syria and Lebanon. Moreover, Muhammad Ali had to admit a formal dependence on the Ottoman sultan. After Muhammad Ali refused to obey the requirements of the convention, the allied Anglo-Austrian fleet blockaded the Nile Delta, bombarded Beirut and captured Acre. Muhammad Ali then accepted the convention&#x27;s conditions.

On 13 July 1841, after the expiry of the Treaty of Hünkâr İskelesi, the London Straits Convention was signed under pressure from the European countries. The new treaty deprived Russia of its right to block warships from passing into the Black Sea in case of war. Thus, the way to the Black Sea was open for British and French warships during a possible Russo-Ottoman conflict.

Russian historians tend to view that history as evidence that Russia lacked aggressive plans. The Russian historian V. N. Vinogradov writes: &quot;The signing of the documents was the result of deliberate decisions: instead of bilateral (none of the great powers recognized this Treaty of Unkiar Skelessi), the new Treaty of London was obligatory for all, it closed the Bosphorus and Dardanelles. In the absence of expansion plans, this was a sound decision&quot;.

In 1838, Britain lost interest in crushing the Ottoman Empire. On the contrary, after the conclusion of the trade treaty of 1838 (see Treaty of Balta Liman), Britain received unlimited access to the markets of the Ottoman Empire. &quot;Britain imposed on the Porte a Tariff Convention which in effect transformed the Ottoman Empire into a virtual free-trade zone. 
Therefore its trade interests pushed it to protect the integrity of the Ottoman Empire. In the long term, the Ottoman Empire lost the opportunity to modernize and industrialize, but in the short term, it gained the opportunity to receive the support of European powers (primarily Britain) in opposing the desire of the conquered peoples for self-determination and Russia, which sought to crush its influence in the Balkans and Asia.

Publicly, European politicians made broad promises to the Ottomans. Lord Palmerston, the British Foreign Secretary, said in 1839: &quot;All that we hear about the decay of the Turkish Empire, and its being a dead body or a sapless trunk, and so forth, is pure and unadulterated nonsense. Given 10 years of peace under European protection, coupled with internal reform, there seemed to him no reason why it should not become again a respectable Power&quot;.

Orlando Figes has claimed that &quot;The motives of the British in promoting liberal reforms were not just to secure the independence of the Ottoman Empire against Russia. They were also to promote the influence of Britain in Turkey&quot;, also: &quot;to promote British free-trade interests (which may have sounded splendid but was arguably damaging to the Ottoman Empire)&quot;.

&quot;British exports to the Ottoman Empire, including Egypt and the Danubian principalities, increased nearly threefold from 1840 to 1851 (...) Thus it was very important, from the financial point of view, for Britain to prevent the Ottoman Empire from falling into other hands.&quot;

&quot;From this moment (1838) the export of British manufactured goods to Turkey rose steeply. There was an elevenfold increase by 1850&quot;.

Assistance from Western European powers or Russia had twice saved the Ottoman Empire from destruction, but the Ottomans also lost their independence in foreign policy. Britain and France desired more than any other states to preserve the integrity of the Ottoman Empire because they did not want to see Russia gaining access to the Mediterranean Sea. Austria had the same fears.

===Russian expansionism===

Russia, as a member of the Holy Alliance, had operated as the &quot;police of Europe&quot; to maintain the balance of power that had been established in the Congress of Vienna in 1815. Russia had assisted Austria&#x27;s efforts in suppressing the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, and expected a free hand in settling its problems with the Ottoman Empire, the &quot;sick man of Europe&quot;. However, Britain could not tolerate Russian dominance of Ottoman affairs, which would challenge its domination of the eastern Mediterranean.

Starting with Peter the Great in the early 1700s, after centuries of Ottoman northward expansion and Crimean-Nogai raids, Russia began a southwards expansion across the sparsely-populated &quot;Wild Fields&quot; toward the warm water ports of the Black Sea, which does not freeze over, unlike the handful of ports controlled by Russia in the north. The goal was to promote year-round trade and a year-round navy. Pursuit of that goal brought the emerging Russian state into conflict with the Ukrainian Cossacks and then the Tatars of the Crimean Khanate and Circassians.

&quot;The plan to develop Russia as a southern power had begun in earnest in 1776, when Catherine placed Potemkin in charge of New Russia (Novorossiia), the sparsely populated territories newly conquered from the Ottomans on the Black Sea&#x27;s northern coastline, and ordered him to colonize the area&quot;. 
When Russia conquered those groups and gained possession of their territories, the Ottoman Empire lost its buffer zone against Russian expansion, and both empires came into direct conflict. The conflict with the Ottoman Empire also presented a religious issue of importance, as Russia saw itself as the protector of history of the Eastern Orthodox Church under the Ottoman Orthodox Christians, who were legally treated as second-class citizens. The Ottoman Reform Edict of 1856, promulgated after the war, largely reversed much of the second-class status, most notably the tax that only non-Muslims paid.

Britain&#x27;s immediate fear was Russia&#x27;s expansion at the expense of the Ottoman Empire. The British desired to preserve Ottoman integrity and were concerned that Russia might make advances toward British India or move toward Scandinavia or Western Europe. A distraction (in the form of the Ottoman Empire) on the Russian southwest flank would mitigate that threat. The Royal Navy also wanted to forestall the threat of a powerful Imperial Russian Navy. Taylor stated the British perspective:

Because of &quot;British commercial and strategic interests in the Middle East and India&quot;, the British joined the French, &quot;cement[ing] an alliance with Britain and... reassert[ing] its military power&quot;. Among those who supported the British strategy were Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. In his articles for the &quot;New-York Tribune&quot; around 1853, Marx saw the Crimean War as a conflict between the democratic ideals of the west that started with the &quot;great movement of 1789&quot; against &quot;Russia and Absolutism&quot;. He described the Ottoman Empire as a buffer against a pattern of expansionism by the Tsar. Marx and Engels also accused Lord Palmerston of playing along with the interests of Russia and being unserious in preparing for the conflict. Marx believed Palmerston to be bribed by Russia, and shared this belief with David Urquhart. Urquhart, for his part, was a British politician who was a major advocate for the Ottoman Empire.

Mikhail Pogodin, a professor of history at Moscow University, gave Nicholas I a summary of Russia&#x27;s policy towards the Slavs in the war. Nicholas&#x27; answer was filled with grievances against the West. Nicholas shared Pogodin&#x27;s sense that Russia&#x27;s role as the protector of Orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire was not understood and that Russia was unfairly treated by the West. Nicholas especially approved of the following passage:

Russia was militarily weak, technologically backward and administratively incompetent. Despite its grand ambitions toward the south, it had not built its railway network in that direction, and its communications were poor. Its bureaucracy was riddled with graft, corruption and inefficiency and was unprepared for war. Its navy was weak and technologically backward. Its army, although very large, suffered from colonels who pocketed their men&#x27;s pay, from poor morale, and from a technological deficit relative to Britain and France. By the war&#x27;s end, the profound weaknesses of the Russian armed forces had become readily apparent, and the Russian leadership was determined to reform it.

However, no matter how great the problems of Russia were, Russia believed those of the Ottomans were greater. &quot;In a one-to-one fight Nikolai (Tsar) had no doubt of beating the Ottoman armies and navy&quot;. Russian foreign policy failed to understand the importance of Britain&#x27;s trade interests and did not understand the changes in the situation after the conclusion of the Anglo-Ottoman Treaty in 1838 (see Treaty of Balta Liman). Russia attempted to &quot;honestly&quot; negotiate with the United Kingdom on the partition of the Ottoman Empire and made concessions in order to eliminate all objections from the United Kingdom.

&quot;The Tsar Nicholas had always, as we have seen, been anxious to maintain a cordial understanding with England in regard to the Eastern Question, and early in the spring of 1853 he had a series of interviews with Sir George Hamilton Seymour, then British ambassador at St. Petersburg.&quot; Emperor Nicholas I assured that he did not intend to seize Constantinople and territories in the Balkans, he himself offered Britain to take over Egypt and Crete. Concessions at the conclusion of the London Straits Convention were made earlier in 1841. &quot;By signing the convention, the Russians had given up their privileged position in the Ottoman Empire and their control of the Straits, all in the hope of improving relations with Britain and isolating France&quot;. But Britain after 1838 was interested in preserving the integrity of the Ottoman Empire and rejected all Russian proposals. &quot;The fall of the Ottoman Empire was not, however, a requirement of British policy in the East. A weak Ottoman state best suited British interests&quot;.

===Immediate causes of war===
French Emperor Napoleon III&#x27;s ambition to restore France&#x27;s grandeur initiated the immediate chain of events that led to France and Britain declaring war on Russia on 27 and 28 March 1854, respectively. He pursued Catholic support by asserting France&#x27;s &quot;sovereign authority&quot; over the Christian population of Palestine, to the detriment of Russia (the sponsor of Eastern Orthodoxy). To achieve that, he in May 1851 appointed Charles, marquis de La Valette, a zealous leading member of the Catholic clericalists, as his ambassador to the Sublime Porte of the Ottoman Empire.

Russia disputed that attempted change in authority. Referring to two previous treaties (one from 1757 and the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca from 1774), the Ottomans reversed their earlier decision, renounced the French treaty and declared that Russia was the protector of the Orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire.

Napoleon III responded with a show of force by sending the ship of the line &quot;Charlemagne&quot; to the Black Sea and thereby violated the London Straits Convention. The gunboat diplomacy show of force, together with money, induced Ottoman Sultan Abdülmecid I to accept a new treaty confirming France and the Catholic Church&#x27;s supreme authority over Christian holy places, including the Church of the Nativity, which had been held by the Greek Orthodox Church.

Tsar Nicholas I then deployed his 4th and 5th Army Corps along the River Danube in Wallachia, as a direct threat to the Ottoman lands south of the river. He had Foreign Minister Count Karl Nesselrode undertake talks with the Ottomans. Nesselrode confided to Seymour:

The agreement referred to by the French was in 1740. At present most historians (except for the new Russian Orthodox nationalists) accept that the question of the holy places was no more than a pretext for the Crimean War. As conflict emerged over the issue of the holy places, Nicholas I and Nesselrode began a diplomatic offensive, which they hoped would prevent either British or French interference in any conflict between Russia and the Ottomans and prevent both from forming an anti-Russian alliance.

Nicholas began courting Britain by means of conversations with Seymour in January and February 1853. Nicholas insisted that he no longer wished to expand the Russian Empire but that he had an obligation to the Christian communities in the Ottoman Empire.

He next dispatched a highly-abrasive diplomat, Prince Menshikov, on a special mission to the Ottoman Sublime Porte in February 1853. By previous treaties, the sultan had committed &quot;to protect the (Eastern Orthodox) Christian religion and its churches&quot;. Menshikov demanded a Russian protectorate over all 12 million Orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire with control of the Orthodox Church&#x27;s hierarchy. A compromise was reached regarding Orthodox access to the Holy Land, but the Sultan, strongly supported by the British ambassador, Stratford Canning, 1st Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe, rejected the most sweeping demands.

Russian historian Vinogradov V.N. point out that Menshikov&#x27;s demands did not go beyond the limits of previous treaties. &quot;The agreement was reached on the administration of church rites of both clergy in respected temples and, secondly, that the tsar rejected the idea of expanding his right of patronage and, in fact, insisted on confirming the terms of the Kucuk-Kaynardzhiy treaty of 1774, which allowed giving advice to the Sultan, but did not oblige them to accept&quot;.

&quot;By the early 1850s Stratford Canning had become far more than an ambassador or adviser to the Porte. The &#x27;Great Elchi&#x27;, or Great Ambassador, as he was known in Constantinople, had a direct influence on the policies of the Turkish government. (...) His presence was a source of deep resentment among the Sultan&#x27;s ministers, who lived in terror of a personal visit from the dictatorial ambassador&quot;.

Nicholas fumed at &quot;the infernal dictatorship of this Redcliffe&quot; whose name and political ascendancy at the Porte personified for him the whole Eastern Question, The British and the French sent in naval task forces to support the Ottomans, as Russia had prepared to seize the Danubian Principalities.

All the calculations of the Russian emperor turned out to be erroneous. Britain refused his proposals, it was not possible to prevent the Anglo-French rapprochement, Austria opposed his policy, the Ottoman Empire showed intransigence. On the contrary, a favourable situation was developing for Britain. Britain had great naval power and a powerful economy, but did not have a strong land army. The alliance with France, which had a strong land army, made it possible to strike at Russia. &quot;With the help of French infantry, it was possible to overturn Russia&#x27;s positions with one blow&quot;

===First hostilities===

In February 1853, the British government of Prime Minister Lord Aberdeen reappointed Lord Stratford as British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire. Having resigned the ambassadorship in January, he had been replaced by Colonel Rose as &quot;chargé d&#x27;affaires&quot;. Lord Stratford then turned around, sailed back to Constantinople, arriving there on 5 April 1853 and convinced the Sultan there to reject the Russian treaty proposal as compromising Ottoman independence. The Leader of the Opposition in the British House of Commons, Benjamin Disraeli, blamed Aberdeen and Stratford&#x27;s actions for making war inevitable, which started the process that would force the Aberdeen government to resign in January 1855 over the war.

Shortly after the Tsar had learned of the failure of Menshikov&#x27;s diplomacy toward the end of June 1853, he sent armies under the commands of Field Marshal Ivan Paskevich and General Mikhail Gorchakov across the River Prut into the Ottoman-controlled Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia. Fewer than half of the 80,000 Russian soldiers who crossed the Prut in 1853 survived. By far, nearly all of the deaths would result from sickness, rather than action, since the Russian Army still suffered from medical services that ranged from bad to none.

Russia had obtained recognition from the Ottoman Empire of the Tsar&#x27;s role as special guardian of the Orthodox Christians in Moldavia and Wallachia. Russia now used the Sultan&#x27;s failure to resolve the issue of the protection of the Christian sites in the Holy Land as a pretext for Russian occupation of those Danubian provinces. Nicholas believed that the European powers, especially Austria, would not object strongly to the annexation of a few neighbouring Ottoman provinces, especially since Russia had assisted Austria&#x27;s efforts in suppressing the Hungarian Revolution in 1849.

The United Kingdom, hoping to maintain the Ottoman Empire as a bulwark against the expansion of Russian power in Asia, sent a fleet to the Dardanelles, where it joined a fleet sent by France.

====Battle of Sinop====
The European powers continued to pursue diplomatic avenues. The representatives of the four Great Powers (the United Kingdom, France, Austria and Prussia) met in Vienna, where they drafted a note, which they hoped would be acceptable to both the Russians and the Ottomans. The peace terms arrived at by the four powers at the Vienna Conference (1853) were delivered to the Russians by Austrian Foreign Minister Count Karl von Buol on 5 December 1853. The note met with the approval of Nicholas I, but Abdülmecid I rejected the proposal since he felt that the document&#x27;s poor phrasing left it open to many different interpretations. The United Kingdom, France and Austria united in proposing amendments to mollify the Sultan, but the court of St. Petersburg ignored their suggestions. The United Kingdom and France then set aside the idea of continuing negotiations, but Austria and Prussia did not believe that the rejection of the proposed amendments justified the abandonment of the diplomatic process.

On 23 November, a small Russian naval force discovered the Ottoman fleet harboured in Sinop and began a blockade. Once the Russian blockade was reinforced, a squadron of 6 Russian ships of the line supported by 5 smaller warships, assaulted the harbour on 30 November 1853. During Battle of Sinop, the Russian squadron destroyed a patrol squadron of 11 Ottoman warships—mostly frigates—while they were anchored in port under defence of the onshore artillery garrison. The Ottoman fleet suffered a crushing defeat. The Russian victory in the naval battle in Sinope was called &quot;the massacre of Sinope&quot;. Although Russia and the Ottoman Empire were already at war, and there was no evidence of Russian atrocities, the phrase was used as propaganda in the West. The press in both United Kingdom and France used Sinop as the &quot;casus belli&quot; (&quot;cause of war&quot;) to shape the public opinion in favour of war against Russia. By 28 March 1854, after Russia ignored an Anglo-French ultimatum to withdraw from the Danubian Principalities, the United Kingdom and France had both declared war.

===Dardanelles===
Britain was concerned about Russian activity and Sir John Burgoyne, a senior advisor to Lord Aberdeen, urged for the Dardanelles to be occupied and works of sufficient strength to be built to block any Russian move to capture Constantinople and gain access to the Mediterranean. The Corps of Royal Engineers sent men to the Dardanelles, and Burgoyne went to Paris and met with the British ambassador and the French emperor. Lord Cowley wrote on 8 February to Burgoyne, &quot;Your visit to Paris has produced a visible change in the Emperor&#x27;s views, and he is making every preparation for a land expedition in case the last attempt at negotiation should break down&quot;.

Burgoyne and his team of engineers inspected and surveyed the Dardanelles area in February. They were fired on by Russian riflemen when they went to Varna. A team of sappers arrived in March, and major building works commenced on a seven-mile line of defence, which was designed to block the Gallipoli Peninsula. French sappers worked on half of the line, which was finished in May.

===Peace attempts===

Nicholas felt that because of Russian assistance in suppressing the Hungarian revolution of 1848, Austria would side with him or at the very least remain neutral. Austria, however, felt threatened by the Russian troops in the Balkans. On 27 February 1854, the United Kingdom and France demanded the withdrawal of Russian forces from the principalities. Austria supported them and, without declaring war on Russia, refused to guarantee its neutrality. Russia&#x27;s rejection of the ultimatum proved to be the justification used by Britain and France to enter the war.

Russia soon withdrew its troops from the Danubian Principalities, which were then occupied by Austria for the duration of the war. That removed the original grounds for war, but the British and the French continued with hostilities. Determined to address the Eastern Question by putting an end to the Russian threat to the Ottomans, the allies in August 1854 proposed the &quot;Four Points&quot; for ending the conflict in addition to the Russian withdrawal:
* Russia was to give up its protectorate over the Danubian Principalities.
* The Danube was to be opened up to foreign commerce.
* The Straits Convention of 1841, which allowed only Ottoman and Russian warships in the Black Sea, was to be revised.
* Russia was to abandon any claim granting it the right to interfere in Ottoman affairs on behalf of Orthodox Christians.

Those points, particularly the third, would require clarification through negotiations, which Russia refused. The allies, including Austria, therefore agreed that Britain and France should take further military action to prevent further Russian aggression against the Ottomans. Britain and France agreed on the invasion of Crimea as the first step.

==Battles==
===Danube campaign===

The Danube campaign opened when the Russians occupied the Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia in July 1853, which brought their forces to the north bank of the River Danube. In response, the Ottoman Empire also moved its forces up to the river, establishing strongholds at Vidin in the west and Silistra in the east, near the mouth of the Danube. The Ottoman move up the River Danube was also of concern to the Austrians, who moved forces into Transylvania in response. However, the Austrians had begun to fear the Russians more than the Ottomans. Indeed, like the British, the Austrians were now coming to see that an intact Ottoman Empire was necessary as a bulwark against the Russians. Accordingly, Austria resisted Russian diplomatic attempts to join the war but remained neutral during the Crimean War.

After the Ottoman ultimatum in September 1853, forces under Ottoman General Omar Pasha crossed the Danube at Vidin and captured Calafat in October 1853. Simultaneously, in the east, the Ottomans crossed the Danube at Silistra and attacked the Russians at Oltenița. The resulting Battle of Oltenița was the first engagement since the declaration of war. The Russians counterattacked but were beaten back. On 31 December 1853, the Ottoman forces at Calafat moved against the Russian force at Chetatea or Cetate, a small village nine miles north of Calafat, and engaged it on 6 January 1854. The battle began when the Russians made a move to recapture Calafat. Most of the heavy fighting took place in and around Chetatea until the Russians were driven out of the village. Despite the setback at Chetatea, Russian forces on 28 January 1854 laid siege to Calafat. The siege would continue until May 1854 when it was lifted by the Russians. The Ottomans would also later beat the Russians in battle at Caracal.

In early 1854, the Russians again advanced by crossing the River Danube into the Turkish province of Dobruja. By April 1854, the Russians had reached the lines of Trajan&#x27;s Wall, where they were finally halted. In the centre, the Russian forces crossed the Danube and laid siege to Silistra from 14 April with 60,000 troops. The defenders had 15,000 troops and supplies for three months. The siege was lifted on 23 June 1854. The British and the French could not then take the field for lack of equipment.

In the west, the Russians were dissuaded from attacking Vidin by the presence of the Austrian forces, which had swollen to 280,000 men. On 28 May 1854, a protocol of the Vienna Conference was signed by Austria and Russia. One of the aims of the Russian advance had been to encourage the Orthodox Christian Serbs and Bulgarians who were living under Ottoman rule to rebel. When the Russian troops crossed the River Pruth into Moldavia, the Orthodox Christians showed no interest in rising up against the Ottomans. Adding to Nicholas I&#x27;s worries was the concern that Austria would enter the war against the Russians and attack his armies on the western flank. Indeed, after attempting to mediate a peaceful settlement between Russia and the Ottomans, the Austrians entered the war on the side of the Ottomans with an attack against the Russians in the Danubian Principalities which threatened to cut off the Russian supply lines. Accordingly, the Russians were forced to raise the siege of Silistra on 23 June 1854 and to begin abandoning the principalities. The lifting of the siege reduced the threat of a Russian advance into Bulgaria.

In June 1854, the Allied expeditionary force landed at Varna, a city on the Black Sea&#x27;s western coast, but made little advance from its base there. Karl Marx was noted to have quipped that &quot;there they are, the French doing nothing and the British helping them as fast as possible&quot;. In July 1854, the Ottomans, under Omar Pasha, crossed the Danube into Wallachia and on 7 July 1854 engaged the Russians in the city of Giurgiu and conquered it. The capture of Giurgiu by the Ottomans immediately threatened Bucharest in Wallachia with capture by the same Ottoman army. On 1854, Nicholas I, responding to an Austrian ultimatum, ordered the withdrawal of Russian troops from the principalities. Also, in late July 1854, following up on the Russian retreat, the French staged an expedition against the Russian forces still in Dobruja, but it was a failure.

By then, the Russian withdrawal was complete, except for the fortress towns of northern Dobruja, and Russia&#x27;s place in the principalities was taken by the Austrians as a neutral peacekeeping force. There was little further action on that front after late 1854, and in September, the allied force boarded ships at Varna to invade Crimea.

===Black Sea theatre===

The naval operations of the Crimean War commenced with the dispatch in mid-1853 of the French and the British fleets to the Black Sea region, to support the Ottomans and to dissuade the Russians from encroachment. By June 1853, both fleets had been stationed at Besikas Bay, outside the Dardanelles. With the Russian occupation of the Danube Principalities in July 1853, they moved to the Bosphorus, and on 3 January 1854, they entered the Black Sea.

Meanwhile, the Russian Black Sea Fleet operated against Ottoman coastal traffic between Constantinople and the Caucasus ports, and the Ottoman fleet sought to protect the supply line. The clash came on 30 November 1853, when a Russian fleet attacked an Ottoman force in the harbour at Sinop and destroyed it at the Battle of Sinop. The battle outraged British public opinion, which called for war. There was little additional naval action until March 1854, when after the declaration of war, the British frigate was fired on outside Odessa Harbour. In response an Anglo-French fleet bombarded the port and caused much damage to the town. To show support for the Ottomans after the Battle of Sinop, on 22 December 1853, the Anglo-French squadron entered the Black Sea and the steamship HMS &quot;Retribution&quot; approached the Port of Sevastopol. Its commander received an ultimatum not to allow any ships in the Black Sea.

In June, the fleets transported the Allied expeditionary forces to Varna to support the Ottoman operations on the Danube. In September they again transported the armies, this time to Crimea. The Russian fleet then declined to engage the allies but preferred to maintain a &quot;fleet in being&quot;, a strategy that failed when Sevastopol, the main port and the base of most of the Black Sea fleet, came under siege. The Russians were reduced to scuttling their warships as blockships after they had stripped them of their guns and men to reinforce batteries on shore. During the siege, the Russians lost four 110- or 120-gun, three-decker ships of the line, twelve 84-gun two-deckers and four 60-gun frigates in the Black Sea, as well as a large number of smaller vessels. During the rest of the campaign, the allied fleets remained in control of the Black Sea and ensured that the various fronts were kept supplied.

In May 1855, the allies successfully invaded Kerch and operated against Taganrog in the Sea of Azov. In September, they moved against Russian installations in the Dnieper estuary by attacking Kinburn in the first use of ironclad ships in naval warfare.

===Crimean campaign===

The Russians evacuated Wallachia and Moldavia in late July 1854. Therefore, the immediate cause of war had now been withdrawn, and the war might have then ended. However, war fever among the public in both Britain and France had been whipped up by the press in both countries to the degree that politicians found it untenable to propose immediately ending the war. The coalition government of George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen, fell on 30 January 1855 on a no-confidence vote, as Parliament voted to appoint a committee to investigate the mismanagement of the war.

French and British officers and engineers were sent on 20 July on &quot;Fury&quot;, a wooden &quot;Bulldog&quot;-class paddle sloop, to survey the harbour of Sevastopol and the coast near it. They managed to get close to the harbour mouth to inspect the formidable batteries. Returning, they reported that they believed that 15,000–20,000 troops were encamped. Ships were prepared to transport horses, and siege equipment was both manufactured and imported.

The Crimean campaign opened in September 1854. In seven columns, 360 ships sailed, each steamer towing two sailing ships. Anchoring on 13 September in the bay of Yevpatoria, the town surrendered, and 500 marines landed to occupy it. The town and the bay would provide a fallback position in case of disaster. The ships then sailed east to make the landing of the allied expeditionary force on the sandy beaches of Kalamita Bay, on the south-west coast of Crimea. The landing surprised the Russians, as they had expected a landing at Katcha. The last-minute change proved that Russia had known the original campaign plan. There was no sign of the enemy and so all of the invading troops landed on 14 September 1854. It took another four days to land all of the stores, equipment, horses and artillery.

The landing took place north of Sevastopol and so the Russians had arrayed their army in expectation of a direct attack. The allies advanced and on the morning of 20 September came up to the River Alma and engaged the Russian Army. The Russian position was strong, but after three hours, the allied frontal attack had driven the Russians out of their dug-in positions with losses of 6,000 men. The Battle of the Alma resulted in 3,300 Allied losses. Failing to pursue the retreating forces was one of many strategic errors made during the war, and the Russians themselves noted that if the allies had pressed south that day, they would have easily captured Sevastopol.

Believing the northern approaches to the city too well defended, especially because of the presence of a large star fort and the city being on the south side of Sevastopol Bay, Sir John Burgoyne, the engineer advisor, recommended for the allies attack to Sevastopol from the south. The joint commanders, Raglan and Saint-Arnaud, agreed. On 25 September, the whole army began to march southeast and encircled the city from the south after it had established port facilities at Balaclava for the British and at Kamiesch () for the French. The Russians retreated into the city.

The Allied armies moved without problems to the south, and the heavy artillery was brought ashore with batteries and connecting trenches built. By 10 October, some batteries were ready, and by 17 October, when the bombardment commenced—126 guns were firing, 53 of them French. The fleet meanwhile engaged the shore batteries. The British bombardment worked better than that of the French, who had smaller-calibre guns. The fleet suffered high casualties during the day. The British wanted to attack that afternoon, but the French wanted to defer the attack.

A postponement was agreed, but on the next day, the French were still not ready. By 19 October the Russians had transferred some heavy guns to the southern defences and had outgunned the allies.

Reinforcements for the Russians gave them the courage to send out probing attacks. The Allied lines, beginning to suffer from cholera as early as September, were stretched. The French, on the west, had less to do than the British on the east, with their siege lines and the large nine-mile open wing back to their supply base on the south coast.

===Battle of Balaclava===
A large Russian assault on the allied supply base to the southeast at Balaclava was rebuffed on 25 October 1854. The Battle of Balaclava is remembered in Britain for the actions of two British units. At the start of the battle, a large body of Russian cavalry charged the 93rd Highlanders, who were posted north of the village of Kadikoi. Commanding them was Sir Colin Campbell. Rather than &quot;form square&quot;, the traditional method of repelling cavalry, Campbell took the risky decision to have his Highlanders form a single line two men deep. Campbell had seen the effectiveness of the new Minié rifles with which his troops were armed at the Battle of Alma, a month earlier, and he was confident that his men could beat back the Russians. His tactics succeeded. From up on the ridge to the west, &quot;Times&quot; correspondent William Howard Russell saw the Highlanders as a &quot;thin red streak topped with steel&quot;, a phrase which soon became the &quot;Thin Red Line&quot;.

Soon afterward, a Russian cavalry movement was countered by the Heavy Brigade, which charged and fought hand to hand until the Russians retreated. That caused a more widespread Russian retreat, including a number of their artillery units. After the local commanders had failed to take advantage of the retreat, Lord Raglan sent out orders to move up and to prevent the withdrawal of naval guns from the recently captured redoubts on the heights. Raglan could see those guns because of his position on the hill. In the valley, that view was obstructed, and the wrong guns were in sight to the left. The local commanders ignored the demands, which led to the British aide-de-camp, Captain Louis Nolan, personally delivering the quickly-written and confusing order to attack the artillery. When Lord Lucan questioned to which guns the order referred, the aide-de-camp pointed to the first Russian battery that he could see and allegedly said &quot;There is your enemy, there are your guns&quot;, because of his obstructed view, which were wrong. Lucan then passed the order to the Earl of Cardigan, which resulted in the Charge of the Light Brigade.

In that charge, Cardigan formed up his unit and charged the length of the Valley of the Balaclava, under fire from Russian batteries in the hills. The charge of the Light Brigade caused 278 casualties of the 700-man unit. The Light Brigade was memorialised in the famous poem by Alfred, Lord Tennyson, &quot;The Charge of the Light Brigade&quot;. Although traditionally, the charge of the Light Brigade was looked upon as a glorious but wasted sacrifice of good men and horses, recent historians believe that the charge of the Light Brigade succeeded in at least some of its objectives. The aim of any cavalry charge is to scatter the enemy&#x27;s lines and frighten the enemy off the battlefield. The Charge of the Light Brigade so unnerved the Russian cavalry, which had been routed by the Charge of the Heavy Brigade, that the Russians were set to full-scale flight.

The shortage of men led to the failure of the British and the French to follow up on the Battle of Balaclava, which led directly to the much bloodier Battle of Inkerman. On 5 November 1854, the Russians attempted to raise the siege at Sevastopol with an attack against the allies, which resulted in another allied victory.

===Winter of 1854–1855===

Winter weather and a deteriorating supply of troops and materiel on both sides led to a halt in ground operations. Sevastopol remained invested by the allies, whose armies were hemmed in by the Imperial Russian Army in the interior. On 14 November, the &quot;Balaklava Storm&quot;, a major weather event, sank 30 allied transport ships, including , which was carrying a cargo of winter clothing.

The storm and the heavy traffic caused the road from the coast to the troops to disintegrate into a quagmire, which required engineers to devote most of their time to its repair, including by quarrying stone. A tramway was ordered and arrived in January with a civilian engineering crew, but it took until March before it had become sufficiently advanced to be of any appreciable value. An electrical telegraph was also ordered, but the frozen ground delayed its installation until March, when communications from the base port of Balaklava to the British HQ was established. The pipe-and-cable-laying plough failed because of the hard frozen soil, but nevertheless of cable were laid.

The troops suffered greatly from cold and sickness, and the shortage of fuel led them to start dismantling their defensive gabions and fascines. In February 1855, the Russians attacked the allied base at Eupatoria, where an Ottoman army had built up and was threatening Russian supply routes. The Russians were defeated at the Battle of Eupatoria, leading to a change in their command.

The strain of directing the war had taken its toll on the health of Tsar Nicholas. Full of remorse for the disasters that he had caused, he caught pneumonia and died on 2 March.

===Siege of Sevastopol===

The allies had had time to consider the problem, and the French were brought around to agree that the key to the defence was the Malakoff. Emphasis of the siege at Sevastopol shifted to the British left against the fortifications on Malakoff Hill. In March, there was fighting by the French over a new fort being built by the Russians at Mamelon, on a hill in front of the Malakoff. Several weeks of fighting resulted in little change in the front line, and the Mamelon remained in Russian hands.

In April 1855, the allies staged a second all-out bombardment, which led to an artillery duel with the Russian guns, but no ground assault followed.

On 24 May 1855, 60 ships, containing 7,000 French, 5,000 Turkish and 3,000 British troops, set off for a raid on the city of Kerch, east of Sevastopol, in an attempt to open another front in Crimea and to cut off Russian supplies. When the allies landed the force at Kerch, the plan was to outflank the Russian Army. The landings were successful, but the force made little progress thereafter.

Many more artillery pieces had arrived and had been dug into batteries. The first general assault of Sevastopol took place on 18 June 1855. There is a legend that the assault was scheduled for that date in favour of in the 40th anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo, but the legend is not confirmed by historians. However, the appearance of such a legend is undoubtedly symptomatic since the war in France was understood as a certain revanche for the defeat of 1812.

In June, a third bombardment was followed after two days by a successful attack on the Mamelon, but a follow-up assault on the Malakoff failed with heavy losses. Meanwhile, the garrison commander, Admiral Pavel Nakhimov, fell on 30 June 1855, and Raglan died on 28 June. Losses in those battles were so great that by agreement of military opponents short-term truces for removal of corpses were signed (these truces were described in the work of Leo Tolstoy &quot;Sevastopol Sketches&quot;). The assault was beaten back with heavy casualties and in an undoubted victory for Russia. It is worth mentioning that the Russian Siege of Sevastopol (panorama) depicts the moment of the assault of Sevastopol on 18 June 1855.

In August, the Russians again made an attack towards the base at Balaclava, which was defended by the French, newly arrived Sardinian and Ottoman troops. The resulting Battle of the Chernaya was a defeat for the Russians, who suffered heavy casualties.

For months, each side had been building forward rifle pits and defensive positions, which resulted in many skirmishes. Artillery fire aimed to gain superiority over the enemy guns. The final assault was made on , when another French bombardment (the sixth) was followed by an assault by the French Army on and resulted in the French capture of the Malakoff fort. The Russians failed to retake it and their defences collapsed. Meanwhile, the British assaulted the Great Redan, a Russian defensive battlement just south of the city of Sevastopol, a position that had been attacked repeatedly for months. Whether the British captured the Redan remains in dispute: Russian historians recognise only the loss of the Malakhov Kurgan, a key point of defence, claiming that all other positions were retained. What is agreed is that the Russians abandoned the positions, blew up their powder magazines and retreated to the north. The city finally fell on 9 September 1855, after a 337-day-long siege.

Both sides were now exhausted, and no further military operations were launched in Crimea before the onset of winter. The main objective of the siege was the destruction of the Russian fleet and docks and took place over the winter. On 28 February, multiple mines blew up the five docks, the canal, and three locks.

===Azov campaign===

In early 1855, the allied Anglo-French commanders decided to send an Anglo-French naval squadron into the Azov Sea to undermine Russian communications and supplies to besieged Sevastopol. On 12 May 1855, Anglo-French warships entered the Kerch Strait and destroyed the coast battery of the Kamishevaya Bay. Once through the Kerch Strait, British and French warships struck at every vestige of Russian power along the coast of the Sea of Azov. Except for Rostov and Azov, no town, depot, building or fortification was immune from attack, and Russian naval power ceased to exist almost overnight. This Allied campaign led to a significant reduction in supplies flowing to the besieged Russian troops at Sevastopol.

On 21 May 1855, the gunboats and armed steamers attacked the seaport of Taganrog, the most important hub near Rostov on Don. The vast amounts of food, especially bread, wheat, barley and rye, that were amassed in the city after the outbreak of war were prevented from being exported.

The Governor of Taganrog, Yegor Tolstoy, and Lieutenant-General Ivan Krasnov refused an allied ultimatum by responding, &quot;Russians never surrender their cities&quot;. The Anglo-French squadron bombarded Taganrog for 6 hours and landed 300 troops near the Old Stairway in the centre of Taganrog, but they were thrown back by Don Cossacks and a volunteer corps.

In July 1855, the allied squadron tried to go past Taganrog to Rostov-on-Don by entering the River Don through the Mius River. On 12 July 1855 HMS &quot;Jasper&quot; grounded near Taganrog thanks to a fisherman who moved buoys into shallow water. The Cossacks captured the gunboat with all of its guns and blew it up. The third siege attempt was made 19–31 August 1855, but the city was already fortified, and the squadron could not approach close enough for landing operations. The allied fleet left the Gulf of Taganrog on 2 September 1855, with minor military operations along the Azov Sea coast continuing until late 1855.

===Caucasus theatre===
As in the previous wars, the Caucasus front was secondary to what happened in the west. Perhaps because of better communications, western events sometimes influenced the east. The main events were the second capture of Kars and a landing on the Georgian coast. Several commanders on both sides were either incompetent or unlucky, and few fought aggressively.

1853: There were four main events. 1. In the north, the Ottomans captured the border fort of Saint Nicholas in a surprise night attack (27/28 October). They then pushed about 20,000 troops across the Choloki river border. Being outnumbered, the Russians abandoned Poti and Redoubt Kali and drew back to Marani. Both sides remained immobile for the next seven months. 2. In the centre the Ottomans moved north from Ardahan to within cannon-shot of Akhaltsike and awaited reinforcements (13 November), but the Russians routed them. The claimed losses were 4,000 Turks and 400 Russians. 3. In the south about 30,000 Turks slowly moved east to the main Russian concentration at Gyumri or Alexandropol (November). They crossed the border and set up artillery south of town. Prince Vakhtang Orbeliani tried to drive them off and found himself trapped. The Ottomans failed to press their advantage; the remaining Russians rescued Orbeliani and the Ottomans retired west. Orbeliani lost about 1,000 men from 5,000. The Russians now decided to advance. The Ottomans took up a strong position on the Kars road and attacked-only to be defeated in the Battle of Başgedikler, losing 6,000 men, half their artillery and all of their supply train. The Russians lost 1,300, including Prince Orbeliani. This was Prince Ellico Orbeliani, whose wife was later kidnapped by Imam Shamil at Tsinandali. 4. At sea the Turks sent a fleet east, which was destroyed by Admiral Nakhimov at Sinope.

1854: The British and French declared war on 28 March. Early in the year on 3 January, the Anglo-French fleet appeared in the Black Sea, and the Russians abandoned the Black Sea Defensive Line from Anapa south. Nikolay Muravyov, who replaced Vorontsov, fearing an Anglo-French landing in conjunction with Shamil, 3rd Imam of Dagestan and the Persians, recommended withdrawal north of the Caucasus. For that purpose, he was replaced by Aleksandr Baryatinsky. When the allies chose a land attack on Sevastopol, any plan for a landing in the east was abandoned.

In the north, Georgiy Evseevich Eristov pushed southwest, fought two battles, forced the Ottomans back to Batumi, retired behind the Cholok river and suspended action for the rest of the year (June). In the far south, Wrangel pushed west, fought a battle and occupied Bayazit. In the centre. the main forces stood at Kars and Gyumri. Both slowly approached along the Kars-Gyumri road and faced each other, neither side choosing to fight (June–July). On 4 August, Russian scouts saw a movement which they thought was the start of a withdrawal, the Russians advanced and the Ottomans attacked first. They were defeated and lost 8,000 men to the Russian 3,000. Also, 10,000 irregulars deserted to their villages. Both sides withdrew to their former positions. About then, the Persians made a semi-secret agreement to remain neutral in exchange for the cancellation of the indemnity from the previous war.

1855: Siege of Kars: Up to May 1855, Ottomans forces in the east were reduced from 120,000 to 75,000, mostly by disease. The local Armenian population kept Muravyov well-informed about the Ottomans at Kars and he judged they had about five months of supplies. He therefore decided to control the surrounding area with cavalry and starve them out. He started in May and by June was south and west of the town. A relieving force fell back and there was a possibility of taking Erzurum, but Muravyov chose not to. In late September he learned of the fall of Sevastopol and a Turkish landing at Batum. This led him to reverse policy and try a direct attack. It failed, the Russians losing 8,000 men and the Turks 1,500 (29 September). The blockade continued and Kars surrendered on 28 November.

1855: Georgian coast: Omar Pasha, the Turkish commander at Crimea had long wanted to land in Georgia, but the western powers vetoed it. When they relented in August most of the campaigning season was lost. In 8 September Turks landed at Batum, but the main concentration was at Sukhum Kale. This required a 100-mile march south through a country with poor roads. In essence, it was a military demonstration in order to frighten the Russian command and force it to lift the siege of the fortress of Kars. &quot;All luck depended on whether Muravyov (the Russian commander) would be scared or not&quot;. But the Russian command did not see a serious threat, the Siege of Kars was continued. The Russians planned to hold the line of the Ingur river which separates Abkhazia from Georgia proper. Omar crossed the Ingur on 7 November and then wasted a great deal of time, the Russians doing little. By 2 December he had reached the Tskhenistsqali, the rainy season had started, his camps were submerged in mud and there was no bread. Learning of the fall of Kars he withdrew to the Ingur. The Russians did nothing and he evacuated to Batum in February of the following year.

===Baltic theatre===

The Baltic was a forgotten theatre of the Crimean War. Popularisation of events elsewhere overshadowed the significance of this theatre, which was close to Saint Petersburg, the Russian capital. In April 1854, an Anglo-French fleet entered the Baltic to attack the Russian naval base of Kronstadt and the Russian fleet that was stationed there. In August 1854, the combined British and French fleet returned to Kronstadt for another attempt. The outnumbered Russian Baltic Fleet confined its movements to the areas around its fortifications. At the same time, the British and French commanders Sir Charles Napier and Alexandre Ferdinand Parseval-Deschenes although they led the largest fleet assembled since the Napoleonic Wars, considered the Sveaborg fortress too well-defended to engage. Thus, shelling of the Russian batteries was limited to two attempts in 1854 and 1855, and initially, the attacking fleets limited their actions to blockading Russian trade in the Gulf of Finland. Naval attacks on other ports, such as the ones in the island of Hogland in the Gulf of Finland, proved more successful. Additionally, allies conducted raids on less fortified sections of the Finnish coast. These battles are known in Finland as the Åland War.

Russia depended on imports—both for its domestic economy and for the supply of its military forces: the blockade forced Russia to rely on more expensive overland shipments from Prussia. The blockade seriously undermined the Russian export economy and helped shorten the war.

The burning of tar warehouses and ships led to international criticism, and in London the MP Thomas Milner Gibson demanded in the House of Commons that the First Lord of the Admiralty explain &quot;a system which carried on a great war by plundering and destroying the property of defenceless villagers&quot;.
In fact, the operations in the Baltic sea were in the nature of binding forces. It was very important to divert Russian forces from the south or, more precisely, not to allow Nicholas to transfer to Crimea a huge army guarding the Baltic coast and the capital. This goal Anglo-French forces achieved. The Russian Army in Crimea was forced to act without superiority in forces.

In August 1854 a Franco-British naval force captured and destroyed the Russian Bomarsund fortress on Åland Islands. In the August 1855, the Western Allied Baltic Fleet tried to destroy heavily defended Russian dockyards at Sveaborg outside Helsinki. More than 1,000 enemy guns tested the strength of the fortress for two days. Despite the shelling, the sailors of the 120-gun ship &quot;Rossiya&quot;, led by Captain Viktor Poplonsky, defended the entrance to the harbour. The Allies fired over 20,000 shells but failed to defeat the Russian batteries. The British then built a massive new fleet of more than 350 gunboats and mortar vessels, which was known as the Great Armament, but the war ended before the attack was launched.

Part of the Russian resistance was credited to the deployment of newly invented naval mines. Perhaps the most influential contributor to the development of naval mining was a Swede resident in Russia, the inventor and civil engineer Immanuel Nobel (the father of Alfred Nobel). Immanuel Nobel helped the Russian war effort by applying his knowledge of industrial explosives, such as nitroglycerin and gunpowder. An account given in 1860 by United States Army Major Richard Delafield dates modern naval mining to the Crimean War: &quot;Torpedo mines, if I may use this name given by Fulton to &#x27;self-acting mines underwater&#x27;, were among the novelties attempted by the Russians in their defences about Cronstadt and Sevastopol.&quot;

For the campaign of 1856, Britain and France planned an attack on the main base of the Russian Navy in the Baltic sea—Kronstadt. The attack was to be carried out using armoured floating batteries. The use of the latter proved to be highly effective in the attack on Kinburn on the Black Sea in 1855. Undoubtedly, this threat contributed on the part of Russia the decision on the conclusion of peace on unfavourable terms.

===White Sea theatre===
In late 1854, a squadron of three British warships led by HMS &quot;Miranda&quot; left the Baltic for the White Sea, where they shelled Kola (which was destroyed) and the Solovki.

===Pacific theatre===

Minor naval skirmishes also occurred in the Far East, where at Petropavlovsk on the Kamchatka Peninsula a British and French Allied squadron including under Rear Admiral David Price and a French force under Counter-Admiral Auguste Febvrier Despointes besieged a smaller Russian force under Rear Admiral Yevfimiy Putyatin. In September 1854, an Allied landing force was beaten back with heavy casualties, and the Allies withdrew. The victory at Petropavlovsk was for Russia in the words of the future Minister of War Dmitry Milyutin &quot;a ray of light among the dark clouds&quot;. The Russians escaped under the cover of snow in early 1855 after Allied reinforcements arrived in the region.

The Anglo-French forces in the Far East also made several small landings on Sakhalin and Urup, one of the Kuril Islands.

===Piedmontese involvement===

Camillo di Cavour, under orders of Victor Emmanuel II of Piedmont-Sardinia, sent an expeditionary corps of 15,000 soldiers, commanded by General Alfonso La Marmora, to side with French and British forces during the war. This was an attempt at gaining the favour of the French, especially when the issue of uniting Italy would become an important matter. The deployment of Italian troops to Crimea, and the gallantry shown by them in the Battle of the Chernaya (16 August 1855) and in the Siege of Sevastopol, allowed the Kingdom of Sardinia to be among the participants at the peace conference at the end of the war, where it could address the issue of the &quot;Risorgimento&quot; to other European powers.

===Greece===

Greece played a peripheral role in the war. When Russia attacked the Ottoman Empire in 1853, King Otto of Greece saw an opportunity to expand north and south into Ottoman areas that had large Greek Christian majorities. Greece did not coordinate its plans with Russia, did not declare war, and received no outside military or financial support. Greece, an Orthodox nation, had considerable support in Russia, but the Russian government decided it was too dangerous to help Greece expand its holdings. When the Russians invaded the Principalities, the Ottoman forces were tied down so Greece invaded Thessaly and Epirus. To block further Greek moves, the British and French occupied the main Greek port at Piraeus from April 1854 to February 1857, and effectively neutralized the Greek Army. The Greeks, gambling on a Russian victory, incited the large-scale Epirus Revolt of 1854 as well as uprisings in Ottoman Crete. The insurrections were failures that were easily crushed by the Ottomans&#x27; allied Egyptian Army. Greece was not invited to the peace conference and made no gains out of the war. The frustrated Greek leadership blamed the King for failing to take advantage of the situation; his popularity plunged and he was forced to abdicate in 1862.

In addition, a 1,000-strong Greek Volunteer Legion was formed in the Danubian Principalities in 1854 and later fought at Sevastopol.

===Kiev Cossack revolt===
A peasant revolt that began in the Vasylkiv county of Kiev Governorate (province) in February 1855 spread across the whole Kiev and Chernigov governorates, with peasants refusing to participate in corvée labour and other orders of the local authorities and, in some cases, attacking priests who were accused of hiding a decree about the liberation of the peasants.

==End of the war==
===British position===
Dissatisfaction with the conduct of the war was growing with the public in Britain and other countries and was worsened by reports of fiascos, especially the devastating losses of the Charge of the Light Brigade at the Battle of Balaclava. On Sunday, 21 January 1855, a &quot;snowball riot&quot; occurred in Trafalgar Square near St Martin-in-the-Fields in which 1,500 people gathered to protest against the war by pelting cabs and pedestrians with snowballs. When the police intervened, the snowballs were directed at the constables. The riot was finally put down by troops and police acting with truncheons. In Parliament, the Conservatives demanded an accounting of all soldiers, cavalry and sailors sent to Crimea and accurate figures as to the number of casualties sustained by all British armed forces in Crimea, especially concerning the Battle of Balaclava. When Parliament passed a bill to investigate by the vote of 305 to 148, Aberdeen said he had lost a vote of no confidence and resigned as prime minister on 30 January 1855. The veteran former Foreign Secretary Lord Palmerston became prime minister. Palmerston took a hard line and wanted to expand the war, foment unrest inside the Russian Empire and reduce the Russian threat to Europe permanently. Sweden–Norway and Prussia were willing to join Britain and France, and Russia was isolated.

===Peace negotiations===
France, which had sent far more soldiers to the war and suffered far more casualties than Britain had, wanted the war to end, as did Austria.

Negotiations began in Paris in February 1856 and were surprisingly easy. France, under the leadership of Napoleon III, had no special interests in the Black Sea and so did not support the harsh British and Austrian proposals.

Peace negotiations at the Congress of Paris resulted in the signing of the Treaty of Paris on 30 March 1856. In compliance with Article III, Russia restored to the Ottoman Empire the city and the citadel of Kars and &quot;all other parts of the Ottoman territory of which the Russian troop were in possession&quot;. Russia returned the Southern Bessarabia to Moldavia. By Article IV, Britain, France, Sardinia and Ottoman Empire restored to Russia &quot;the towns and ports of Sevastopol, Balaklava, Kamish, Eupatoria, Kerch, Jenikale, Kinburn as well as all other territories occupied by the allied troops&quot;. In conformity with Articles XI and XIII, the Tsar and the Sultan agreed not to establish any naval or military arsenal on the Black Sea coast. The Black Sea clauses weakened Russia, which no longer posed a naval threat to the Ottomans. The Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia were nominally returned to the Ottoman Empire, and the Austrian Empire was forced to abandon its annexation and to end its occupation of them, but they in practice became independent. The Treaty of Paris admitted the Ottoman Empire to the Concert of Europe, and the great powers pledged to respect its independence and territorial integrity.

===Aftermath in Russia===
Some members of the Russian intelligentsia saw defeat as a pressure to modernise their society. Grand Duke Constantine, a son of the Tsar, remarked:
==Long-term effects==

Orlando Figes points to the long-term damage Russia suffered:
&quot;The demilitarization of the Black Sea was a major blow to Russia, which was no longer able to protect its vulnerable southern coastal frontier against the British or any other fleet... The destruction of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, Sevastopol and other naval docks was a humiliation. No compulsory disarmament had ever been imposed on a great power previously... The Allies did not really think that they were dealing with a European power in Russia. They regarded Russia as a semi-Asiatic state... In Russia itself, the Crimean defeat discredited the armed services and highlighted the need to modernize the country&#x27;s defences, not just in the strictly military sense, but also through the building of railways, industrialization, sound finances and so on... The image many Russians had built up of their country—the biggest, richest and most powerful in the world—had suddenly been shattered. Russia&#x27;s backwardness had been exposed... The Crimean disaster had exposed the shortcomings of every institution in Russia—not just the corruption and incompetence of the military command, the technological backwardness of the army and navy, or the inadequate roads and lack of railways that accounted for the chronic problems of supply, but the poor condition and illiteracy of the serfs who made up the armed forces, the inability of the serf economy to sustain a state of war against industrial powers, and the failures of autocracy itself.&quot;
Surprisingly, after the war, the Russian-French rapprochement came, which corresponded to the plans of both sides. France persuaded the Russians to support their claims to return to the territories before the Congress of Vienna, in exchange for ceasing to act as a guarantor of the Paris peace. Alexander II stated in response to his minister&#x27;s remark: &quot;It would undoubtedly be more useful for our interests to have him among our allies if we could rely on him.&quot;

The Treaty of Paris stood until 1871, when Prussia defeated France in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71. While Prussia and several other German states united to form a powerful German Empire in January 1871, the French deposed Emperor Napoleon III and proclaimed the French Third Republic (September 1870). During his reign, Napoleon, eager for the support of the United Kingdom, had opposed Russia over the Eastern Question. Russian interference in the Ottoman Empire did not in any significant manner threaten the interests of France (Kissinger uses Napoleon&#x27;s pandering to journalists and public opinion on this subject—at the expense of the true interests of France—as an example of strategic frivolity), and France abandoned its opposition to Russia after the establishment of the republic. Encouraged by the new attitude of French diplomacy after the surrenders of the besieged French Army at Sedan and later Metz and supported by the German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck, Russia in October 1870 renounced the Black Sea clauses of the treaty agreed to in 1856. As the United Kingdom with Austria-Hungary could not enforce the clauses, Russia once again established a fleet in the Black Sea.

After being defeated in the Crimean War, Russia feared that Russian Alaska would be easily captured in any future war with the British; therefore, Alexander II opted to sell the territory to the United States.

A Greek tortoise named Timothy was found on a Portuguese ship by Captain John Guy Courtenay-Everard on in 1854. Serving as a mascot throughout the war, when she died in 2004 this made her the last living veteran of the Crimean war.

Historian Norman Rich argues that the war was not an accident, but was sought out by the determination of the British and French not to allow Russia an honourable retreat. Both insisted on a military victory to enhance their prestige in European affairs when a non-violent peaceful political solution was available. The war then wrecked the Concert of Europe, which had long kept the peace.

Turkish historian Candan Badem wrote, &quot;Victory in this war did not bring any significant material gain, not even a war indemnity. On the other hand, the Ottoman treasury was nearly bankrupted due to war expenses&quot;. Badem adds that the Ottomans achieved no significant territorial gains, lost the right to a navy in the Black Sea, and failed to gain status as a great power. Further, the war gave impetus to the union of the Danubian principalities and ultimately to their independence.

The treaty punished the defeated Russia, but in the long run, Austria lost the most from the war despite having barely taken part in it. Having abandoned its alliance with Russia, Austria remained diplomatically isolated following the war, which contributed to its disastrous defeats in the 1859 Franco-Austrian War that resulted in the cession of Lombardy to the Kingdom of Sardinia and later in the loss of the Habsburg rule of Tuscany and Modena, which meant the end of Austrian influence in peninsular Italy. Furthermore, Russia did not do anything to assist its former ally, Austria, in the 1866 Austro-Prussian War, when Austria lost Venetia and, more importantly, its influence in most German-speaking lands. The status of Austria as a great power, with the unifications of Germany and Italy, now became very precarious. It had to compromise with Hungary; the two countries shared the Danubian Empire. With France now hostile to Germany and gravitating towards Russia, and with Russia competing with the newly renamed Austro-Hungarian Empire for an increased role in the Balkans at the expense of the Ottoman Empire, the foundations were in place for building the diplomatic alliances that would shape the First World War.

The Treaty&#x27;s guarantees to preserve Ottoman territories were broken 21 years later when Russia, exploiting nationalist unrest in the Balkans and seeking to regain lost prestige, once again declared war on the Ottoman Empire on 24 April 1877. In this later Russo-Turkish War the states of Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro gained international recognition of their independence and Bulgaria achieved its autonomy from direct Ottoman rule. Russia took over Southern Bessarabia, lost in 1856. The regions of Batum and Kars, as well as those inhabited by Adjarians (Muslim Georgians) and Armenians, were also annexed to Russia in the Caucasus. At the same time, &quot;protectors&quot; of the Ottoman Empire Britain received Cyprus as a colonial possession, while Austria-Hungary occupied and annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1908. Finally, Ottoman rule in the Balkans ended after the First Balkan War of 1912, when the combined forces of the Balkan states defeated it.

The Crimean War marked the re-ascendancy of France to the position of pre-eminent power on the Continent, the continued decline of the Ottoman Empire and a period of crisis for Imperial Russia. As Fuller notes, &quot;Russia had been beaten on the Crimean Peninsula, and the military feared that it would inevitably be beaten again unless steps were taken to surmount its military weakness.&quot; To compensate for its defeat in the Crimean War, the Russian Empire then embarked in more intensive expansion in Asia, partially to restore national pride and partially to distract Britain on the world stage, intensifying the Great Game.

The war also marked the demise of the first phase of the Concert of Europe, the balance-of-power system that had dominated Europe since the Congress of Vienna in 1815 and had included France, Russia, Prussia, Austria and the United Kingdom. From 1854 to 1871, the Concert of Europe concept was weakened, leading to the crises that were the unifications of Germany and of Italy, before a resurgence of great power conferences.

In 1870, Prussia persuaded Russia to remain neutral in the Franco-Prussian war. Bismarck, having declared it impossible to keep 100 million Russians in a humiliated position without sovereign rights to their Black Sea coastline, supported Russia against the Treaty of Paris, and in return, Prussia achieved freedom of action against France in 1870–71 and inflicted a crushing defeat on it.

An envoy from India who visited the war front after arriving to Constantinople from a failed mission in England, Azimullah Khan observed exhaustion and fatigue in the British soldiers and set to exploit a perceived weak state of the British Empire upon his return which consequently planted the seeds for the Indian War of Independence.

=== Historical analysis ===
According to historian Shepard Clough, the war
The view of &quot;diplomatic drift&quot; as the cause of the war was first popularised by A. W. Kinglake, who portrayed the British as victims of newspaper sensationalism and duplicitous French and Ottoman diplomacy.

More recently, historians Andrew Lambert and Winfried Baumgart have argued that Britain was following a geopolitical strategy in aiming to destroy the fledgling Russian Navy, which might challenge the Royal Navy for control of the seas, and that the war was also a joint European response to a century of Russian expansion not just southwards but also into Western Europe.

===Casualties===
The war undoubtedly became one of the bloodiest in the history of Europe at that time, but data on casualties vary greatly. The European states, Russia, France and Britain suffered the bloodiest losses. Sources agree on the definition of the losses of the last two, these are 95,615 dead on the part of France, 22,182 on the part of Britain and 2,166 dead Italians, Turkish losses range from 45,400 dead to 400,000. Data on losses among Russians also vary greatly. The minimum death toll is 73,125 dead, rising to 522,000. There are also data on 450,015 dead and killed. Historian Yevgeny Tarle described the war as a &quot;bloody massacre&quot;.

==Documentation==

Documentation of the war was provided by William Howard Russell, who wrote for &quot;The Times&quot; newspaper, and by Roger Fenton&#x27;s photographs. News from war correspondents reached all of the nations involved in the war and kept the public citizenry of those nations better informed of the day-to-day events of the war than had been the case in any earlier war. The British public was very well informed on the day-to-day realities of the war. After the French extended the telegraph to the coast of the Black Sea in late 1854, news reached London in two days. When the British laid an underwater cable to Crimea in April 1855, news reached London in a few hours. The daily news reports energised public opinion, which brought down the Aberdeen government and carried Lord Palmerston into office as prime minister.

Leo Tolstoy wrote a few short sketches on the Siege of Sevastopol, collected in &quot;Sevastopol Sketches&quot;. The stories detail the lives of the Russian soldiers and citizens in Sevastopol during the siege. Because of this work, Tolstoy has been called the world&#x27;s first war correspondent.

==Criticisms and reform==
Historian R. B. McCallum points out the war was enthusiastically supported by the British populace as it was happening, but the mood changed very dramatically afterwards. Pacifists and critics were unpopular but:
As the memory of the &quot;Charge of the Light Brigade&quot; demonstrates, the war became an iconic symbol of logistical, medical and tactical failures and mismanagement. Public opinion in Britain was outraged at the logistical and command failures of the war; the newspapers demanded drastic reforms, and parliamentary investigations demonstrated the multiple failures of the army. The reform campaign was not well organised, and the traditional aristocratic leadership of the army pulled itself together, and blocked all serious reforms. No one was punished. The outbreak of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 shifted attention to the heroic defence of British interest by the army, and further talk of reform went nowhere. The demand for professionalisation was achieved by Florence Nightingale, who gained worldwide attention for pioneering and publicising modern nursing while treating the wounded. Another nurse, a Jamaican named Mary Seacole, also made an impact providing care for wounded and dying soldiers. &quot;The Times&quot; war correspondent William Howard Russell spoke highly of Seacole&#x27;s skill as a healer, writing &quot;A more tender or skilful hand about a wound or a broken limb could not be found among our best surgeons.&quot;

Outstanding achievements in battlefield surgery were done during the war of 1853–56. &quot;Nikolai Pirogov, who pioneered the system of field surgery that other nations came to only in the First World War&quot;.

The Crimean War also saw the first tactical use of railways and other modern inventions, such as the electric telegraph, with the first &quot;live&quot; war reporting by Russell. Some credit Russell with prompting the resignation of the sitting British government through his reporting of the lacklustre condition of British forces deployed in Crimea. Additionally, the telegraph reduced the independence of British overseas possessions from their commanders in London due to such rapid communications. Newspaper readership informed public opinion in the United Kingdom and France as never before.

The Crimean War was a contributing factor in the Russian abolition of serfdom in 1861: Tsar Alexander II (Nicholas I&#x27;s son and successor) saw the military defeat of the Russian serf-army by free troops from Britain and France as proof of the need for emancipation. The Crimean War also led to the realisation by the Russian government of its technological inferiority, in military practices as well as weapons. Alexander also initiated the Great Reforms, which were aimed at strengthening and modernising the Russian state in the light of weaknesses revealed by the war.

==Chronology of major battles of the war==

* Battle of Sinop, 30 November 1853
* Siege of Silistra, 5 April – 25 June 1854
* First Battle of Bomarsund, 21 June 1854
* Second Battle of Bomarsund, 15 August 1854
* Siege of Petropavlovsk, 30–31 August 1854, on the Pacific coast
* Battle of the Alma, 20 September 1854
* Siege of Sevastopol, 25 September 1854 to 8 September 1855
* Battle of Balaclava, 25 October 1854 (&quot;see also&quot; Charge of the Light Brigade and the Thin Red Line)
* Battle of Inkerman, 5 November 1854
* Battle of Eupatoria, 17 February 1855
* Battle of the Chernaya (aka &quot;Battle of Traktir Bridge&quot;), 16 August 1855
* Battle of Kinburn (1855), 17 October 1855
* Sea of Azov naval campaign, May to November 1855
* Siege of Kars, June to 28 November 1855

==See also==

* Crimean War Research Society
* Foreign policy of the Russian Empire
* Egyptian intervention in the Crimean War
* Grand Crimean Central Railway
* International relations (1814–1919)
* List of Crimean War Victoria Cross recipients
* List of British recipients of the Légion d&#x27;Honneur for the Crimean War
* Order of Nakhimov
* &quot;Peace Concluded&quot; (painting)

* Nikolskaya sopka

==Notes and references==
===Notes===
===References===
===Sources===
* 
* * 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Ramm, Agatha, and B. H. Sumner. &quot;The Crimean War.&quot; in J. P. T. Bury, ed., &quot;The New Cambridge Modern History: Vol. 10: The Zenith of European Power, 1830–1870&quot; (1960) pp. 468–492, short survey online
* Rath, Andrew C. &quot;The Crimean War in Imperial Context, 1854–1856&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 2015).
* Rich, Norman &quot;Why the Crimean War: A Cautionary Tale&quot; (1985) McGraw-Hill 
* Ridley, Jasper. &quot;Lord Palmerston&quot; (1970) pp. 425–454 online
* Schroeder, Paul W. &quot;Austria, Great Britain, and the Crimean War: The Destruction of the European Concert&quot; (Cornell Up, 1972) online 
* 
* Temperley, Harold W. V. &quot;England and the Near East: The Crimea&quot; (1936) online
* Trager, Robert F. &quot;Long-term consequences of aggressive diplomacy: European relations after Austrian Crimean War threats.&quot; &quot;Security Studies&quot; 21.2 (2012): 232–265. Online 
* Wetzel, David &quot;The Crimean War: A Diplomatic History&quot; (1985) Columbia University Press 


===Historiography and memory===
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
===Contemporary sources===
* Vol. 1 – Vol. 2 – Vol. 3 – Vol. 4 – Vol. 5 – Vol. 6 – Vol. 7 – Vol. 8 – Vol. 9
* 
* 
* Volume I: History of individual Corps Volume II: History of disease, wounds and injuries

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="4" end="15" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="39" end="53" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="77" end="91" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="93" end="99" title="Second French Empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="105" end="119" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="125" end="142" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Sardinia-Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393556" start="223" end="252" title="decline of the Ottoman Empire" label="decline of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q735165" start="264" end="280" title="Eastern Question" label="Eastern Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q743046" start="330" end="348" title="History of the Russo-Turkish wars" label="Russo-Turkish Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413483" start="435" end="451" title="European balance of power" label="balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="459" end="476" title="Concert of Europe" label="Concert of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="553" end="561" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="566" end="574" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="589" end="598" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="610" end="623" title="Sublime Porte" label="Sublime Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="645" end="655" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q627527" start="771" end="794" title="Danubian Principalities" label="Danubian Principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q815207" start="890" end="899" title="Siege of Silistria (1854)" label="Silistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q427958" start="1022" end="1027" title="Battle of Sinop" label="Sinop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="1175" end="1192" title="Crimea" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="1266" end="1276" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q913604" start="1313" end="1331" title="Battle of the Alma" label="Battle of the Alma"/>
<link wikidata="Q464512" start="1397" end="1416" title="Battle of Balaclava" label="Battle of Balaclava"/>
<link wikidata="Q770536" start="1466" end="1474" title="Battle of Inkerman" label="Inkerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q815216" start="1542" end="1561" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1854–1855)" label="Siege of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="1660" end="1668" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44133" start="1686" end="1695" title="White Sea" label="White Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="1723" end="1736" title="North Pacific" label="North Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q25638012" start="1916" end="1930" title="suing for peace" label="sued for peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q319260" start="2047" end="2062" title="Treaty of Paris (1856)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371288" start="2169" end="2181" title="vassal state" label="vassal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="2186" end="2195" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="2200" end="2208" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="2509" end="2515" title="shell (projectile)" label="shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="2517" end="2525" title="railways" label="railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="2530" end="2540" title="telegraphy" label="telegraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q605789" start="2626" end="2637" title="war photography" label="photographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="2845" end="2865" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="2920" end="2927" title="nursing" label="nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="3043" end="3064" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393846" start="3266" end="3310" title="Government reforms of Alexander II of Russia" label="reforms of Russia&amp;#x27;s social institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192212" start="3326" end="3346" title="emancipation reform of 1861" label="abolition of serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393556" start="3483" end="3500" title="decline and modernization of the Ottoman Empire" label="steadily weakened"/>
<link wikidata="Q706931" start="3751" end="3766" title="A. J. P. Taylor" label="A. J. P. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092429" start="4012" end="4030" title="Serbian Revolution" label="Serbian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="4077" end="4083" title="Balkan" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="4123" end="4148" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144988" start="4321" end="4335" title="Chios massacre" label="Chios massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="4405" end="4414" title="Janissaries" label="Janissary"/>
<link wikidata="Q174791" start="4431" end="4440" title="Mahmud II" label="Mahmud II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665576" start="4458" end="4477" title="Auspicious Incident" label="Auspicious Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q238440" start="4677" end="4695" title="Battle of Navarino" label="Battle of Navarino"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="4706" end="4712" title="Kingdom of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q287942" start="4763" end="4790" title="Russo-Turkish War (1828–29)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1828–29)"/>
<link wikidata="Q137847" start="4796" end="4823" title="Treaty of Adrianople (1829)" label="Treaty of Adrianople (1829)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="4903" end="4920" title="Dardanelles" label="Black Sea straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q684030" start="4928" end="4934" title="Principality of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="4987" end="4995" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171393" start="5000" end="5009" title="Wallachia" label="Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629782" start="5088" end="5102" title="French conquest of Algeria" label="occupy Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182781" start="5157" end="5178" title="Muhammad Ali of Egypt" label="Muhammad Ali of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="5198" end="5204" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584439" start="5271" end="5302" title="Egyptian–Ottoman War (1831–1833)" label="defeated in a number of battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="5410" end="5419" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="5476" end="5490" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q311789" start="5610" end="5617" title="Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt" label="Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q193383" start="5795" end="5803" title="Ottoman dynasty" label="Osmanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051748" start="6020" end="6045" title="Treaty of Hünkâr İskelesi" label="Treaty of Hünkâr İskelesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q491507" start="6351" end="6356" title="Egypt Eyalet" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076765" start="6568" end="6573" title="Ottoman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600326" start="6582" end="6605" title="Egyptian–Ottoman War (1839–41)" label="resumed military action"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640981" start="6649" end="6664" title="Battle of Nezib" label="Battle of Nezib"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="6708" end="6715" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="6717" end="6724" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700848" start="6750" end="6770" title="Convention of London (1840)" label="convention in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="6931" end="6938" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179528" start="7136" end="7146" title="Nile Delta" label="Nile Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="7158" end="7164" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q27627693" start="7169" end="7182" title="Battle of Acre (1840)" label="captured Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q700363" start="7318" end="7343" title="London Straits Convention" label="London Straits Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657887" start="8224" end="8245" title="Treaty of Balta Liman" label="Treaty of Balta Liman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="8870" end="8877" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="8962" end="8972" title="Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston" label="Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="8986" end="9003" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q513285" start="9347" end="9360" title="Orlando Figes" label="Orlando Figes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="10492" end="10509" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q154640" start="10595" end="10608" title="Holy Alliance" label="Holy Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125082" start="10675" end="10691" title="balance of power (international relations)" label="balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="10725" end="10743" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="10815" end="10843" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472463" start="10930" end="10948" title="sick man of Europe" label="sick man of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="11112" end="11127" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q698985" start="11175" end="11194" title="Ottoman wars in Europe" label="northward expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242966" start="11199" end="11218" title="Crimean–Nogai raids into East Slavic lands" label="Crimean-Nogai raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q829104" start="11235" end="11255" title="Russo-Turkish War (1686–1700)" label="southwards expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q672600" start="11292" end="11303" title="Wild Fields" label="Wild Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076173" start="11590" end="11608" title="Ukrainian Cossacks" label="Ukrainian Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q117458" start="11622" end="11628" title="Crimean Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="11636" end="11651" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimean Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="11656" end="11667" title="Circassians" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="11758" end="11767" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q243201" start="11775" end="11783" title="Grigory Potemkin" label="Potemkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169828" start="12346" end="12373" title="Christianity in the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q273603" start="12384" end="12424" title="Dhimmi" label="legally treated as second-class citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199195" start="12430" end="12458" title="Ottoman Reform Edict of 1856" label="Ottoman Reform Edict of 1856"/>
<link wikidata="Q461786" start="12554" end="12584" title="jizya" label="tax that only non-Muslims paid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="12791" end="12804" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="12820" end="12831" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="12835" end="12849" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12964" end="12974" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q583941" start="13025" end="13046" title="Imperial Russian Navy" label="Imperial Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="13357" end="13366" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="13371" end="13387" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q983247" start="13419" end="13435" title="New-York Tribune" label="New-York Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q334374" start="13946" end="13960" title="David Urquhart" label="David Urquhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093709" start="14061" end="14076" title="Mikhail Pogodin" label="Mikhail Pogodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="14104" end="14121" title="Moscow State University" label="Moscow University"/>
<link wikidata="Q169828" start="14351" end="14392" title="Christianity in the Ottoman Empire" label="Orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657887" start="15637" end="15658" title="Treaty of Balta Liman" label="Treaty of Balta Liman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432393" start="16080" end="16103" title="George Hamilton Seymour" label="George Hamilton Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q29972737" start="16110" end="16128" title="British Ambassador to Russia" label="British ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="16956" end="16968" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17164" end="17172" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="17273" end="17282" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="17327" end="17344" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960615" start="17389" end="17419" title="Charles, marquis de La Valette" label="Charles, marquis de La Valette"/>
<link wikidata="Q18871" start="17501" end="17514" title="Sublime Porte" label="Sublime Porte"/>
<link wikidata="Q123227" start="17649" end="17673" title="Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca" label="Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="17810" end="17829" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="17913" end="17929" title="ship of the line" label="ship of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502406" start="17936" end="17947" title="French ship Charlemagne (1851)" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q700151" start="18027" end="18044" title="gunboat diplomacy" label="gunboat diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174772" start="18104" end="18116" title="Abdülmecid I" label="Abdülmecid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q194504" start="18249" end="18271" title="Church of the Nativity" label="Church of the Nativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q632602" start="18300" end="18321" title="Greek Orthodox Church of Jerusalem" label="Greek Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="18329" end="18339" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="18397" end="18403" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q314196" start="18508" end="18523" title="Karl Nesselrode" label="Karl Nesselrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q374393" start="19403" end="19419" title="Alexander Sergeyevich Menshikov" label="Prince Menshikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q943984" start="19908" end="19962" title="Stratford Canning, 1st Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe" label="Stratford Canning, 1st Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q627527" start="21197" end="21220" title="Danubian Principalities" label="Danubian Principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q24631" start="21908" end="21921" title="George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen" label="Lord Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q335777" start="22065" end="22077" title="Hugh Rose, 1st Baron Strathnairn" label="Colonel Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q217713" start="22087" end="22109" title="chargé d&amp;#x27;affaires" label="chargé d&amp;#x27;affaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="22325" end="22349" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="22365" end="22381" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="22383" end="22400" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667025" start="22521" end="22540" title="Aberdeen ministry" label="Aberdeen government"/>
<link wikidata="Q126656" start="22742" end="22756" title="Ivan Paskevich" label="Ivan Paskevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q661233" start="22769" end="22786" title="Mikhail Dmitrievich Gorchakov" label="Mikhail Gorchakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="22804" end="22808" title="Prut" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="23858" end="23862" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="24108" end="24115" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="24124" end="24130" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q79001" start="24373" end="24392" title="Count Karl Ferdinand von Buol" label="Count Karl von Buol"/>
<link wikidata="Q427958" start="25254" end="25269" title="Battle of Sinop" label="Battle of Sinop"/>
<link wikidata="Q45635" start="25808" end="25819" title="casus belli" label="casus belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504395" start="26150" end="26163" title="John Fox Burgoyne" label="John Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="26380" end="26404" title="Corps of Royal Engineers" label="Corps of Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q320817" start="26521" end="26532" title="Henry Wellesley, 1st Earl Cowley" label="Lord Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="26923" end="26928" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324245" start="26940" end="26946" title="sapper" label="sapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="27066" end="27085" title="Gallipoli Peninsula" label="Gallipoli Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="27248" end="27276" title="Hungarian revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q700363" start="28343" end="28369" title="London Straits Convention" label="Straits Convention of 1841"/>
<link wikidata="Q178531" start="29251" end="29256" title="Vidin" label="Vidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182428" start="29273" end="29281" title="Silistra" label="Silistra"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="29422" end="29434" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q560045" start="29864" end="29874" title="Omar Pasha" label="Omar Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q652856" start="29916" end="29923" title="Calafat" label="Calafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q737188" start="30043" end="30051" title="Oltenița" label="Oltenița"/>
<link wikidata="Q601152" start="30067" end="30085" title="Battle of Oltenița" label="Battle of Oltenița"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724630" start="30290" end="30296" title="Cetate, Dolj" label="Cetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351343" start="30458" end="30506" title="Battle of Cetate" label="heavy fighting took place in and around Chetatea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986204" start="30630" end="30646" title="Siege of Calafat" label="siege to Calafat"/>
<link wikidata="Q609044" start="30775" end="30792" title="Caracal, Romania" label="battle at Caracal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="30896" end="30903" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309639" start="30958" end="30976" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q815207" start="31072" end="31089" title="Siege of Silistria (1854)" label="siege to Silistra"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="31612" end="31617" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="31622" end="31632" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q202351" start="32881" end="32888" title="Giurgiu" label="Giurgiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="32969" end="32978" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="33651" end="33657" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4080909" start="33947" end="33958" title="Beşik Bay, Çanakkale" label="Besikas Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="34160" end="34175" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q599416" start="34422" end="34427" title="Sinop, Turkey" label="Sinop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="34670" end="34676" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093048" start="34720" end="34738" title="Bombardment of Odessa" label="bombarded the port"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411928" start="34965" end="34983" title="Port of Sevastopol" label="Port of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387833" start="35341" end="35355" title="fleet in being" label="fleet in being"/>
<link wikidata="Q535705" start="35537" end="35546" title="blockship" label="blockship"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="35764" end="35771" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q157065" start="36027" end="36032" title="Kerch" label="Kerch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590545" start="36037" end="36062" title="Siege of Taganrog" label="operated against Taganrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q35000" start="36070" end="36081" title="Sea of Azov" label="Sea of Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="36145" end="36152" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986186" start="36164" end="36181" title="Battle of Kinburn (1855)" label="attacking Kinburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410980" start="36202" end="36210" title="ironclad" label="ironclad"/>
<link wikidata="Q111944911" start="36909" end="36913" title="HMS Fury (1845)" label="Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q33345" start="37458" end="37468" title="Yevpatoria" label="Yevpatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026815" start="37710" end="37722" title="Kalamita Bay" label="Kalamita Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626746" start="37829" end="37835" title="Kacha, Sevastopol" label="Katcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q864843" start="38295" end="38299" title="Alma (Crimea)" label="Alma"/>
<link wikidata="Q913604" start="38496" end="38514" title="Battle of the Alma" label="Battle of the Alma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12797" start="38879" end="38888" title="star fort" label="star fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q999039" start="38929" end="38943" title="Sevastopol Bay" label="Sevastopol Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q335138" start="39072" end="39078" title="FitzRoy Somerset, 1st Baron Raglan" label="Raglan"/>
<link wikidata="Q115687" start="39083" end="39095" title="Jacques Leroy de Saint-Arnaud" label="Saint-Arnaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q748363" start="39244" end="39253" title="Balaklava" label="Balaclava"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211999" start="39277" end="39285" title="Kamiesch" label="Kamiesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q464512" start="40589" end="40608" title="Battle of Balaclava" label="Battle of Balaclava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818707" start="40744" end="40760" title="93rd Highlanders" label="93rd Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6345513" start="40802" end="40809" title="Kadikoi" label="Kadikoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q336049" start="40835" end="40849" title="Colin Campbell, 1st Baron Clyde" label="Colin Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q639509" start="40869" end="40880" title="infantry square" label="form square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427149" start="41070" end="41081" title="Minié rifle" label="Minié rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="41283" end="41288" title="The Times" label="Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q741053" start="41309" end="41331" title="William Howard Russell" label="William Howard Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634456" start="41441" end="41454" title="The Thin Red Line (Battle of Balaclava)" label="Thin Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q464512" start="41527" end="41540" title="Charge of the Heavy Brigade" label="Heavy Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="42128" end="42140" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871643" start="42150" end="42161" title="Louis Nolan" label="Louis Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q335779" start="42255" end="42265" title="George Bingham, 3rd Earl of Lucan" label="Lord Lucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q335449" start="42541" end="42557" title="James Brudenell, 7th Earl of Cardigan" label="Earl of Cardigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q757870" start="42581" end="42608" title="Charge of the Light Brigade" label="Charge of the Light Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="42890" end="42911" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred, Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867023" start="42919" end="42950" title="The Charge of the Light Brigade (poem)" label="The Charge of the Light Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q770536" start="43632" end="43650" title="Battle of Inkerman" label="Battle of Inkerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="43889" end="43897" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="44027" end="44048" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063686" start="44092" end="44107" title="Great Storm of 1854" label="Balaklava Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202261" start="44441" end="44448" title="plateway" label="tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="44620" end="44640" title="electrical telegraph" label="electrical telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2516863" start="44810" end="44838" title="pipe-and-cable-laying plough" label="pipe-and-cable-laying plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q88512" start="45040" end="45046" title="gabion" label="gabion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397327" start="45052" end="45059" title="fascine" label="fascine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573604" start="45244" end="45263" title="Battle of Eupatoria" label="Battle of Eupatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844168" start="45848" end="45855" title="Mamelon (fort)" label="Mamelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="46800" end="46818" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="47004" end="47018" title="French invasion of Russia" label="defeat of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q586204" start="47133" end="47156" title="Battle of Malakoff" label="assault on the Malakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q345365" start="47226" end="47240" title="Pavel Nakhimov" label="Pavel Nakhimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="47467" end="47478" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q647268" start="47485" end="47504" title="Sevastopol Sketches" label="Sevastopol Sketches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232436" start="47643" end="47673" title="Siege of Sevastopol (panorama)" label="Siege of Sevastopol (panorama)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694075" start="47864" end="47873" title="Sardinian expeditionary corps in the Crimean War" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342758" start="47908" end="47930" title="Battle of the Chernaya" label="Battle of the Chernaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="48285" end="48296" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840019" start="48457" end="48468" title="Battle of the Great Redan" label="Great Redan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35000" start="49431" end="49439" title="Azov Sea" label="Azov Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="49501" end="49511" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q187890" start="49563" end="49575" title="Kerch Strait" label="Kerch Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q193342" start="49779" end="49785" title="Rostov, Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q102762" start="49790" end="49794" title="Azov" label="Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="50059" end="50066" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170513" start="50111" end="50119" title="Taganrog" label="Taganrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q908" start="50149" end="50162" title="Rostov on Don" label="Rostov on Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112720" start="50328" end="50348" title="Governor of Taganrog" label="Governor of Taganrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468309" start="50350" end="50363" title="Yegor Tolstoy" label="Yegor Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4238338" start="50388" end="50400" title="Ivan Krasnov" label="Ivan Krasnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211133" start="50583" end="50595" title="Depaldo stone stairs" label="Old Stairway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057292" start="50652" end="50664" title="Don Cossacks" label="Don Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q908" start="50752" end="50765" title="Rostov-on-Don" label="Rostov-on-Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="50782" end="50791" title="Don River (Russia)" label="River Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165587" start="50804" end="50814" title="Mius River" label="Mius River"/>
<link wikidata="Q30026" start="50910" end="50914" title="buoy" label="buoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="50940" end="50948" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q143460" start="51194" end="51210" title="Gulf of Taganrog" label="Gulf of Taganrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632640" start="51237" end="51262" title="HMS Grinder (1855)" label="minor military operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q743046" start="51350" end="51363" title="Russo-Turkish Wars" label="previous wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q815157" start="51541" end="51563" title="Siege of Kars" label="second capture of Kars"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="51585" end="51593" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915146" start="51900" end="51907" title="Choloki" label="Choloki"/>
<link wikidata="Q185345" start="51964" end="51968" title="Poti" label="Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649036" start="51973" end="51985" title="Redoubt Kali" label="Redoubt Kali"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754817" start="52003" end="52009" title="Marani, Georgia" label="Marani"/>
<link wikidata="Q202188" start="52114" end="52121" title="Ardahan" label="Ardahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212546" start="52147" end="52157" title="Akhaltsike" label="Akhaltsike"/>
<link wikidata="Q199500" start="52374" end="52380" title="Gyumri" label="Gyumri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335705" start="52476" end="52494" title="Vakhtang Orbeliani" label="Vakhtang Orbeliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q127063" start="52790" end="52794" title="Kars" label="Kars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19631987" start="52840" end="52861" title="Battle of Başgedikler" label="Battle of Başgedikler"/>
<link wikidata="Q244742" start="53054" end="53065" title="Imam Shamil" label="Imam Shamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q118953" start="53069" end="53079" title="Tsinandali" label="Tsinandali"/>
<link wikidata="Q715262" start="53383" end="53399" title="Nikolay Muravyov-Karsky" label="Nikolay Muravyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q466151" start="53414" end="53423" title="Mikhail Semyonovich Vorontsov" label="Vorontsov"/>
<link wikidata="Q244742" start="53477" end="53505" title="Shamil, 3rd Imam of Dagestan" label="Shamil, 3rd Imam of Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="53514" end="53520" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q607195" start="53607" end="53628" title="Aleksandr Baryatinsky" label="Aleksandr Baryatinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532469" start="53746" end="53771" title="Georgiy Evseevich Eristov" label="Georgiy Evseevich Eristov"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="53838" end="53844" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q849535" start="54000" end="54007" title="Doğubayazıt" label="Bayazit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596320" start="54330" end="54348" title="Battle of Kurekdere" label="They were defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="54505" end="54513" title="Qajar Iran" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="54766" end="54773" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122803" start="55110" end="55117" title="Erzurum" label="Erzurum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40811" start="55705" end="55716" title="Sukhumi" label="Sukhum Kale"/>
<link wikidata="Q504388" start="56161" end="56166" title="Enguri" label="Ingur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040044" start="56354" end="56368" title="Tskhenistsqali" label="Tskhenistsqali"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="56624" end="56630" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="56907" end="56916" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q805787" start="56925" end="56938" title="Baltic Fleet" label="Russian fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212700" start="57218" end="57232" title="Charles Napier (naval officer)" label="Charles Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223082" start="57237" end="57275" title="Alexandre Ferdinand Parseval-Deschenes" label="Alexandre Ferdinand Parseval-Deschenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="57332" end="57347" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292442" start="57364" end="57372" title="Suomenlinna" label="Sveaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="57590" end="57605" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049578" start="57671" end="57678" title="Gogland" label="Hogland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="57798" end="57805" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="57840" end="57847" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885643" start="57855" end="57864" title="Åland War" label="Åland War"/>
<link wikidata="Q332712" start="58236" end="58256" title="Thomas Milner Gibson" label="Thomas Milner Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="58299" end="58326" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091915" start="58902" end="58928" title="Battle of Bomarsund" label="Russian Bomarsund fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="58932" end="58945" title="Åland" label="Åland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872467" start="58999" end="59062" title="Battle of Suomenlinna" label="tried to destroy heavily defended Russian dockyards at Sveaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="59071" end="59079" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053132" start="59218" end="59225" title="Russian ship of the line Rossiya" label="Rossiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839986" start="59496" end="59510" title="Great Armament" label="Great Armament"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="59643" end="59653" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q726590" start="59796" end="59810" title="Immanuel Nobel" label="Immanuel Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810" start="59826" end="59838" title="Alfred Nobel" label="Alfred Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="59946" end="59959" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="59964" end="59973" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="60003" end="60021" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4157035" start="60028" end="60045" title="Richard Delafield" label="Richard Delafield"/>
<link wikidata="Q165363" start="60098" end="60105" title="Torpedo" label="Torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192496" start="60145" end="60151" title="Robert Fulton" label="Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633403" start="60810" end="60833" title="HMS Miranda (1851)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Miranda&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q44133" start="60858" end="60867" title="White Sea" label="White Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q154704" start="60888" end="60892" title="Kola (town)" label="Kola"/>
<link wikidata="Q205711" start="60923" end="60930" title="Solovetsky Islands" label="Solovki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951" start="61019" end="61032" title="Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky" label="Petropavlovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="61040" end="61059" title="Kamchatka Peninsula" label="Kamchatka Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376401" start="61126" end="61137" title="David Price (Royal Navy officer)" label="David Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871189" start="61179" end="61206" title="Auguste Febvrier Despointes" label="Auguste Febvrier Despointes"/>
<link wikidata="Q815197" start="61207" end="61215" title="Siege of Petropavlovsk" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165355" start="61226" end="61239" title="Pacific Fleet (Russia)" label="Russian force"/>
<link wikidata="Q957601" start="61259" end="61276" title="Yevfimiy Putyatin" label="Yevfimiy Putyatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473208" start="61456" end="61471" title="Ministry of War of the Russian Empire" label="Minister of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232419" start="61472" end="61487" title="Dmitry Milyutin" label="Dmitry Milyutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="61680" end="61688" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="61725" end="61733" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q847281" start="61738" end="61742" title="Urup" label="Urup"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="61755" end="61768" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q166092" start="61802" end="61819" title="Camillo di Cavour" label="Camillo di Cavour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61837" end="61855" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="61859" end="61876" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720-1861)" label="Piedmont-Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q471272" start="61947" end="61965" title="Alfonso La Marmora" label="Alfonso La Marmora"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="62465" end="62477" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q77067" start="62623" end="62637" title="Otto of Greece" label="Otto of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="63124" end="63132" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="63137" end="63143" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="63230" end="63237" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546449" start="63304" end="63314" title="Hellenic army" label="Greek Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383233" start="63383" end="63404" title="Epirus Revolt of 1854" label="Epirus Revolt of 1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599571" start="63429" end="63442" title="Ottoman Crete" label="Ottoman Crete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63530" end="63543" title="Egyptian Army#Under the Muhammad Ali Dynasty" label="Egyptian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148758" start="63813" end="63835" title="Greek Volunteer Legion" label="Greek Volunteer Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q997421" start="63980" end="63988" title="Vasylkiv" label="Vasylkiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437277" start="63999" end="64015" title="Kiev Governorate" label="Kiev Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257953" start="64077" end="64099" title="Chernigov Governorate" label="Chernigov governorates"/>
<link wikidata="Q466259" start="64142" end="64155" title="corvée labour" label="corvée labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="64661" end="64677" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335201" start="64683" end="64706" title="St Martin-in-the-Fields" label="St Martin-in-the-Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="64741" end="64764" title="anti-war movement" label="protest against the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="64966" end="64976" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q193656" start="65429" end="65444" title="Lord Palmerston" label="Lord Palmerston"/>
<link wikidata="Q62589" start="65619" end="65632" title="Union between Sweden and Norway" label="Sweden–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110818" start="66133" end="66150" title="Congress of Paris (1856)" label="Congress of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q319260" start="66182" end="66197" title="Treaty of Paris (1856)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025796" start="66443" end="66462" title="Southern Bessarabia" label="Southern Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q772781" start="66633" end="66641" title="Yeni-Kale" label="Jenikale"/>
<link wikidata="Q446724" start="67467" end="67489" title="Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolayevich of Russia" label="Grand Duke Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q513285" start="67543" end="67556" title="Orlando Figes" label="Orlando Figes"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="69276" end="69294" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="69362" end="69374" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="69620" end="69639" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="69724" end="69737" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="69814" end="69835" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="70084" end="70093" title="Kissinger" label="Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q56314107" start="70239" end="70258" title="strategic frivolity" label="strategic frivolity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156681" start="70451" end="70456" title="Battle of Sedan" label="Sedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q688847" start="70467" end="70471" title="Siege of Metz (1870)" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="70511" end="70528" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="70645" end="70660" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="70809" end="70823" title="Russian Alaska" label="Russian Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q309029" start="70918" end="70936" title="Alaska Purchase" label="sell the territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="70944" end="70957" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q504549" start="70962" end="70976" title="Greek tortoise" label="Greek tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410817" start="70983" end="70990" title="Timothy (tortoise)" label="Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="71085" end="71091" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q193891" start="71164" end="71171" title="veteran" label="veteran"/>
<link wikidata="Q958291" start="72005" end="72041" title="United Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia" label="union of the Danubian principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q540978" start="72377" end="72396" title="Franco-Austrian War" label="Franco-Austrian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="72429" end="72437" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="72445" end="72464" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="72511" end="72518" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q252580" start="72523" end="72529" title="Duchy of Modena and Reggio" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="72682" end="72701" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q209857" start="72721" end="72728" title="Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia" label="Venetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="72862" end="72869" title="German unification" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="72874" end="72879" title="Italian unification" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="72919" end="72929" title="Ausgleich" label="compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="72935" end="72942" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="73106" end="73129" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="73294" end="73309" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="73573" end="73590" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="73605" end="73612" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q779011" start="73626" end="73636" title="Principality of Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q815731" start="73696" end="73704" title="Principality of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q26291" start="73866" end="73875" title="Adjarians" label="Adjarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973" start="73884" end="73893" title="Georgians" label="Georgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="73899" end="73908" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="74035" end="74041" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q609233" start="74090" end="74098" title="Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q167246" start="74103" end="74110" title="Bosnian Crisis" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="74111" end="74133" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q177918" start="74196" end="74212" title="First Balkan War" label="First Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q216702" start="74904" end="74914" title="Great Game" label="Great Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q702073" start="74974" end="74991" title="Concert of Europe" label="Concert of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="75257" end="75280" title="Unification of Germany" label="unifications of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="75288" end="75293" title="Unification of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="75749" end="75754" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="75799" end="75813" title="Istanbul" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="75839" end="75846" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832617" start="75848" end="75862" title="Azimullah Khan" label="Azimullah Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="76044" end="76070" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q28128061" start="76124" end="76138" title="Shepard B. Clough" label="Shepard Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q334080" start="76238" end="76252" title="A. W. Kinglake" label="A. W. Kinglake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757681" start="76392" end="76406" title="Andrew Lambert" label="Andrew Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584166" start="76411" end="76428" title="Winfried Baumgart" label="Winfried Baumgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="76902" end="76908" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="76910" end="76916" title="Second French Empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="76921" end="76928" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398528" start="77338" end="77351" title="Yevgeny Tarle" label="Yevgeny Tarle"/>
<link wikidata="Q345666" start="77543" end="77555" title="Roger Fenton" label="Roger Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="77973" end="77979" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="78248" end="78259" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q647268" start="78334" end="78353" title="Sevastopol Sketches" label="Sevastopol Sketches"/>
<link wikidata="Q164236" start="78528" end="78545" title="war correspondent" label="war correspondent"/>
<link wikidata="Q261820" start="78584" end="78598" title="R. B. McCallum" label="R. B. McCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q129864" start="79368" end="79392" title="Indian Rebellion of 1857" label="Indian Rebellion of 1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="79558" end="79578" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q963703" start="79717" end="79729" title="Mary Seacole" label="Mary Seacole"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="79804" end="79813" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q741053" start="79838" end="79860" title="William Howard Russell" label="William Howard Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q315266" start="80128" end="80143" title="Nikolai Pirogov" label="Nikolai Pirogov"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="80658" end="80686" title="British Empire" label="British overseas possessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192212" start="80906" end="80926" title="Emancipation reform of 1861" label="abolition of serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="80941" end="80953" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393846" start="81294" end="81307" title="Government reforms of Alexander II of Russia" label="Great Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q427958" start="81472" end="81487" title="Battle of Sinop" label="Battle of Sinop"/>
<link wikidata="Q815207" start="81508" end="81525" title="Siege of Silistria (1854)" label="Siege of Silistra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091915" start="81558" end="81577" title="Battle of Bomarsund" label="Battle of Bomarsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091915" start="81601" end="81620" title="Battle of Bomarsund" label="Battle of Bomarsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q815197" start="81639" end="81661" title="Siege of Petropavlovsk" label="Siege of Petropavlovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q913604" start="81705" end="81723" title="Battle of the Alma" label="Battle of the Alma"/>
<link wikidata="Q815216" start="81745" end="81764" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1854–1855)" label="Siege of Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q464512" start="81806" end="81825" title="Battle of Balaclava" label="Battle of Balaclava"/>
<link wikidata="Q757870" start="81865" end="81892" title="Charge of the Light Brigade" label="Charge of the Light Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634456" start="81897" end="81914" title="The Thin Red Line (Battle of Balaclava)" label="the Thin Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q770536" start="81918" end="81936" title="Battle of Inkerman" label="Battle of Inkerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573604" start="81956" end="81975" title="Battle of Eupatoria" label="Battle of Eupatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342758" start="81996" end="82018" title="Battle of the Chernaya" label="Battle of the Chernaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986186" start="82080" end="82104" title="Battle of Kinburn (1855)" label="Battle of Kinburn (1855)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440078" start="82124" end="82150" title="Sea of Azov naval campaign (1855)" label="Sea of Azov naval campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q815157" start="82175" end="82188" title="Siege of Kars" label="Siege of Kars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185455" start="82232" end="82260" title="Crimean War Research Society" label="Crimean War Research Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628298" start="82263" end="82299" title="Foreign policy of the Russian Empire" label="Foreign policy of the Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q125288727" start="82302" end="82342" title="Egyptian intervention in the Crimean War" label="Egyptian intervention in the Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4076311" start="82345" end="82374" title="Grand Crimean Central Railway" label="Grand Crimean Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002695" start="82377" end="82412" title="International relations (1814–1919)" label="International relations (1814–1919)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568056" start="82415" end="82460" title="List of Crimean War Victoria Cross recipients" label="List of Crimean War Victoria Cross recipients"/>
<link wikidata="Q6565031" start="82463" end="82538" title="List of British recipients of the Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur for the Crimean War" label="List of British recipients of the Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur for the Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326089" start="82541" end="82558" title="Order of Nakhimov" label="Order of Nakhimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q266435" start="82567" end="82582" title="Peace Concluded" label="Peace Concluded"/>
<link wikidata="Q4320841" start="82603" end="82619" title="Nikolskaya sopka" label="Nikolskaya sopka"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46764" wikidata="Q25329" url="?curid=46764" title="Artiodactyl">
<text>Artiodactyls are placental mammals belonging to the order Artiodactyla ( , ). Typically, they are ungulates which bear weight equally on two (an even number) of their five toes (the third and fourth, often in the form of a hoof). The other three toes are either present, absent, vestigial, or pointing posteriorly. By contrast, most perissodactyls bear weight on an odd number of the five toes. Another difference between the two orders is that many artiodactyls (except for Suina) digest plant cellulose in one or more stomach chambers rather than in their intestine (as perissodactyls do). Molecular biology, along with new fossil discoveries, has found that cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and porpoises) fall within this taxonomic branch, being most closely related to hippopotamuses. Some modern taxonomists thus apply the name Cetartiodactyla () to this group, while others opt to include cetaceans within the existing name of Artiodactyla. Some researchers use &quot;even-toed ungulates&quot; to exclude cetaceans and only include terrestrial artiodactyls, making the term paraphyletic in nature.

The roughly 270 land-based even-toed ungulate species include pigs, peccaries, hippopotamuses, antelopes, deer, giraffes, camels, llamas, alpacas, sheep, goats and cattle. Many are herbivores, but suids are omnivorous, and cetaceans are entirely carnivorous. Artiodactyls are also known by many extinct groups such as anoplotheres, cainotheriids, merycoidodonts, entelodonts, anthracotheres, basilosaurids, and palaeomerycids. Many artiodactyls are of great dietary, economic, and cultural importance to humans.

==Evolutionary history==

The oldest fossils of even-toed ungulates date back to the early Eocene (about 53 million years ago). Since these findings almost simultaneously appeared in Europe, Asia, and North America, it is very difficult to accurately determine the origin of artiodactyls. The fossils are classified as belonging to the family Diacodexeidae; their best-known and best-preserved member is &quot;Diacodexis&quot;. These were small animals, some as small as a hare, with a slim build, lanky legs, and a long tail. Their hind legs were much longer than their front legs. The early to middle Eocene saw the emergence of the ancestors of most of today&#x27;s mammals.

Two formerly widespread, but now extinct, families of even-toed ungulates were Entelodontidae and Anthracotheriidae. Entelodonts existed from the middle Eocene to the early Miocene in Eurasia and North America. They had a stocky body with short legs and a massive head, which was characterized by two humps on the lower jaw bone. Anthracotheres had a large, porcine (pig-like) build, with short legs and an elongated muzzle. This group appeared in the middle Eocene up until the Pliocene, and spread throughout Eurasia, Africa, and North America. Anthracotheres are thought to be the ancestors of hippos, and, likewise, probably led a similar aquatic lifestyle. Hippopotamuses appeared in the late Miocene and occupied Africa and Asia—they never got to the Americas.

The camels (Tylopoda) were, during large parts of the Cenozoic, limited to North America; early forms like Cainotheriidae occupied Europe. Among the North American camels were groups like the stocky, short-legged Merycoidodontidae. They first appeared in the late Eocene and developed a great diversity of species in North America. Only in the late Miocene or early Pliocene did they migrate from North America into Eurasia. The North American varieties became extinct around 10,000 years ago. 

Suina (including pigs) have been around since the Eocene. In the late Eocene or the Oligocene, two families stayed in Eurasia and Africa; the peccaries, which became extinct in the Old World, exist today only in the Americas. 

South America was settled by even-toed ungulates only in the Pliocene, after the land bridge at the Isthmus of Panama formed some three million years ago. With only the peccaries, lamoids (or llamas), and various species of capreoline deer, South America has comparatively fewer artiodactyl families than other continents, except Australia, which has no native species.

==Taxonomy and phylogeny==
The classification of artiodactyls was hotly debated because ocean-dwelling cetaceans evolved from land-dwelling even-toed ungulates. Some semiaquatic even-toed ungulates (hippopotamuses) are more closely related to ocean-dwelling cetaceans than to other even-toed ungulates.

Phylogenetic classification only recognizes monophyletic taxa; that is, groups that descend from a common ancestor and include all of its descendants. To address this problem, the traditional order Artiodactyla and infraorder Cetacea are sometimes subsumed into the more inclusive Cetartiodactyla taxon. An alternative approach is to include both land-dwelling even-toed ungulates and ocean-dwelling cetaceans in a revised Artiodactyla taxon.

===Classification===

* Order Artiodactyla/Clade Cetartiodactyla
** Family Diacodexeidae
** Family Amphimerycidae
** Family Robiacinidae
** Family Cainotheriidae
**Suborder Tylopoda
*** Family Anoplotheriidae?
*** Family Merycoidodontidae
*** Family Agriochoeridae
*** Family Camelidae: camels, llamas, alpacas, vicuñas, and guanacos (7 extant and 13 extinct species)
*** Family Oromerycidae
*** Family Xiphodontidae?
*** Family Protoceratidae?
** Clade Artiofabula
***Suborder Suina
**** Family Suidae: pigs (19 species)
**** Family Tayassuidae: peccaries (4 species)
**** Family Sanitheriidae
****Family Doliochoeridae
*** Clade Cetruminantia
****Clade Cetancodontamorpha
***** Genus &quot;Andrewsarchus&quot;?
***** Family Entelodontidae
***** Suborder Whippomorpha
****** Family Raoellidae
****** Superfamily Dichobunoidea – paraphyletic to Cetacea and Raoellidae
******* Family Dichobunidae
******* Family Helohyidae
******* Family Choeropotamidae
******* Family Cebochoeridae (Family contains Cebochoerus)
******* Family Mixtotheriidae
****** Infraorder Ancodonta
******* Family Anthracotheriidae – paraphyletic to Hippopotamidae
******* Family Hippopotamidae: hippos (two species)
****** Infraorder Cetacea: whales (about 90 species)
*******Parvorder Archaeoceti
******** Family Pakicetidae
******** Family Ambulocetidae
******** Family Remingtonocetidae
******** Family Basilosauridae
******* Clade Neoceti
******** Parvorder Mysticeti: baleen whales
********* Superfamily Balaenoidea: right whales
********** Family Balaenidae: greater right whales (four species)
********** Family Cetotheriidae: pygmy right whale (one species)
********* Superfamily Balaenopteroidea: large baleen whales
********** Family Balaenopteridae: slender-back rorquals and humpback whale (eight species)
********** Family Eschrichtiidae: gray whale (one species)
******** Parvorder Odontoceti: toothed whales
********* Superfamily Delphinoidea: oceanic dolphins, porpoises, and others
********** Family Delphinidae: oceanic true dolphins (38 species)
********** Family Monodontidae: Arctic whales; narwhal and beluga (two species)
********** Family Phocoenidae: porpoises (six species)
********* Superfamily Physeteroidea: sperm whales
********** Family Kogiidae: lesser sperm whales (two species)
********** Family Physeteridae: sperm whale (one species)
********* Superfamily Platanistoidea: river dolphins
********** Family Iniidae: South American river dolphins (two species)
********** Family Lipotidae: Chinese river dolphin (one species, possibly extinct)
********** Family Platanistidae: South Asian river dolphin (one species)
********** Family Pontoporiidae: La Plata dolphin (one species)
********* Superfamily Ziphioidea
********** Family Ziphiidae: beaked whales (22 species)
**** Total-group Ruminantia
***** Suborder Ruminantia
****** Infraorder Tragulina
******* Family Leptomerycidae
******* Family Hypertragulidae
******* Family Praetragulidae
******* Family Gelocidae
******* Family Bachitheriidae
******* Family Tragulidae: chevrotains (ten species)
******* Family Archaeomerycidae
******* Family Lophiomerycidae
****** Infraorder Pecora
******* Family Palaeomerycidae
******* Family Dromomerycidae
******* Family Antilocapridae: pronghorn (one species)
******* Family Climacoceratidae
******* Family Giraffidae: okapi and four species of giraffe (five species total)
******* Family Hoplitomerycidae
******* Family Cervidae: deer (49 species)
******* Family Moschidae: musk deer (7 species)
******* Family Bovidae: cattle, buffaloes, goats, sheep, antelopes, caprines, and bison (135 species)

===Research history===
In the 1990s, biological systematics used not only morphology and fossils to classify organisms, but also molecular biology. Molecular biology involves sequencing an organism&#x27;s DNA and RNA and comparing the sequence with that of other living beings—the more similar they are, the more closely they are related. Comparison of even-toed ungulate and cetaceans genetic material has shown that the closest living relatives of whales and hippopotamuses is the paraphyletic group Artiodactyla.

Dan Graur and Desmond Higgins were among the first to come to this conclusion, and included a paper published in 1994. However, they did not recognize hippopotamuses and classified the ruminants as the sister group of cetaceans. Subsequent studies established the close relationship between hippopotamuses and cetaceans; these studies were based on casein genes, SINEs, fibrinogen sequences, cytochrome and rRNA sequences, IRBP (and vWF) gene sequences, adrenergic receptors, and apolipoproteins.

In 2001, the fossil limbs of a &quot;Pakicetus&quot; (amphibioid cetacean the size of a wolf) and &quot;Ichthyolestes&quot; (an early whale the size of a fox) were found in Pakistan. They were both archaeocetes (&quot;ancient whales&quot;) from about 48 million years ago (in the Eocene). These findings showed that archaeocetes were more terrestrial than previously thought, and that the special construction of the talus (ankle bone) with a double-rolled joint surface, previously thought to be unique to even-toed ungulates, were also in early cetaceans. The mesonychians, another type of ungulate, did not show this special construction of the talus, and thus was concluded to not have the same ancestors as cetaceans.

The oldest cetaceans date back to the early Eocene (53 million years ago), whereas the oldest known hippopotamus dates back only to the Miocene (15 million years ago). The hippopotamids are descended from the anthracotheres, a family of semiaquatic and terrestrial artiodactyls that appeared in the late Eocene, and are thought to have resembled small- or narrow-headed hippos. Research is therefore focused on anthracotheres (family Anthracotheriidae); one dating from the Eocene to Miocene was declared to be &quot;hippo-like&quot; upon discovery in the 19th century. A study from 2005 showed that the anthracotheres and hippopotamuses had very similar skulls, but differed in the adaptations of their teeth. It was nevertheless believed that cetaceans and anthracothereres descended from a common ancestor, and that hippopotamuses developed from anthracotheres. A study published in 2015 confirmed this, but also revealed that hippopotamuses were derived from older anthracotherians. The newly introduced genus &quot;Epirigenys&quot; from Eastern Africa is thus the sister group of hippos.

====Historical classification of Artiodactyla====
Linnaeus postulated a close relationship between camels and ruminants as early as the mid-1700s. Henri de Blainville recognized the similar anatomy of the limbs of pigs and hippos, and British zoologist Richard Owen coined the term &quot;even-toed ungulates&quot; and the scientific name &quot;Artiodactyla&quot; in 1848.

Internal morphology (mainly the stomach and the molars) were used for classification. Suines (including pigs) and hippopotamuses have molars with well-developed roots and a simple stomach that digests food. Thus, they were grouped together as non-ruminants (porcine). All other even-toed ungulates have molars with a selenodont construction (crescent-shaped cusps) and have the ability to ruminate, which requires regurgitating food and re-chewing it. Differences in stomach construction indicated that rumination evolved independently between tylopods and ruminants; therefore, tylopods were excluded from Ruminantia.

The taxonomy that was widely accepted by the end of the 20th century was:

====Historical classification of Cetacea====
Modern cetaceans are highly adapted sea creatures which, morphologically, have little in common with land mammals; they are similar to other marine mammals, such as seals and sea cows, due to convergent evolution. However, they evolved from originally terrestrial mammals. The most likely ancestors were long thought to be mesonychians—large, carnivorous animals from the early Cenozoic (Paleocene and Eocene), which had hooves instead of claws on their feet. Their molars were adapted to a carnivorous diet, resembling the teeth in modern toothed whales, and, unlike other mammals, had a uniform construction.

The suspected relations can be shown as follows:

===Inner systematics===
Molecular findings and morphological indications suggest that artiodactyls, as traditionally defined, are paraphyletic with respect to cetaceans. Cetaceans are deeply nested within the former; the two groups together form a monophyletic taxon, for which the name Cetartiodactyla is sometimes used. Modern nomenclature divides Artiodactyla (or Cetartiodactyla) in four subordinate taxa: camelids (Tylopoda), pigs and peccaries (Suina), ruminants (Ruminantia), and hippos plus cetaceans (Whippomorpha).

The presumed lineages within Artiodactyla can be represented in the following cladogram:

The four summarized Artiodactyla taxa are divided into ten extant families:
* The camelids (Tylopoda) comprise only one family, Camelidae. It is a species-poor artiodactyl suborder of North American origin that is well adapted to extreme habitats—the dromedary and Bactrian camels in the Old World deserts and the guanacos, llamas, vicuñas, and alpacas in South American high mountain regions.
* The pig-like creatures (Suina) are made up of two families:
** The pigs (Suidae) are limited to the Old World. These include the wild boar and the domesticated form, the domestic pig.
** The peccaries (Tayassuidae) are named after glands on their belly and are indigenous to Central and South America.
* The ruminants (Ruminantia) consist of six families:
** The mouse deer (Tragulidae) are the smallest and most primitive even-toed-ruminants; they inhabit forests of Africa and Asia.
** The giraffe-like creatures (Giraffidae) are composed of two species: the giraffe and the okapi.
** The musk deer (Moschidae) is indigenous to East Asia.
** The antilocaprids (Antilocapridae) of North America comprise only one extant species: the pronghorn.
** The deer (Cervidae) are made up of about 45 species, which are characterized by a pair of antlers (generally only in males). They are spread across Europe, Asia, and the Americas. This group includes, among other species, the red deer, moose, elk (wapiti), and reindeer (caribou).
** The bovids (Bovidae) are the most species-rich. Among them are cattle, sheep, caprines, and antelopes, and more.
* The whippomorphs include hippos and cetaceans:
** The hippos (Hippopotamidae) comprise two groups, the common hippo and the pygmy hippo.
** The cetaceans comprise 72 species and two parvorders: toothed whales (Odontoceti) and baleen whales (Mysticeti)

Although deer, musk deer, and pronghorns have traditionally been summarized as cervids (Cervioidea), molecular studies provide different—and inconsistent—results, so the question of phylogenetic systematics of infraorder Pecora (the horned ruminants) for the time being, cannot be answered.

==Anatomy==
Artiodactyls are generally quadrupeds. Two major body types are known: suinids and hippopotamuses are characterized by a stocky body, short legs, and a large head; camels and ruminants, though, have a more slender build and lanky legs. Size varies considerably; the smallest member, the mouse deer, often reaches a body length of only and a weight of . The largest member, the hippopotamus, can grow up to in length and weigh , and the giraffe can grow to be tall and in body length. All even-toed ungulates display some form of sexual dimorphism: the males are consistently larger and heavier than the females. In the majority of deer species, only the males grow antlers, and the horns of bovines are usually small or not present in females. Male Indian antelopes have a much darker coat than females.

Almost all even-toed ungulates have fur, with the exception being the nearly hairless hippopotamus. Fur varies in length and coloration depending on the habitat. Species in cooler regions can shed their coat. Camouflaged coats come in colors of yellow, gray, brown, or black tones.

===Limbs===
Even-toed ungulates bear their name because they have an even number of toes (two or four)—in some peccaries, the hind legs have a reduction in the number of toes to three. The central axis of the leg is between the third and fourth toe. The first toe is missing in modern artiodactyls, and can only be found in now-extinct genera. The second and fifth toes are adapted differently between species:

When camels have only two toes present, the claws are transformed into nails (while both are made of keratin, claws are curved and pointed while nails are flat and dull). These claws consist of three parts: the plate (top and sides), the sole (bottom), and the bale (rear). In general, the claws of the forelegs are wider and blunter than those of the hind legs, and they are farther apart. Aside from camels, all even-toed ungulates put just the tip of the foremost phalanx on the ground.

In even-toed ungulates, the bones of the stylopodium (upper arm or thigh bone) and zygopodiums (tibia and fibula) are usually elongated. The muscles of the limbs are predominantly localized, which ensures that artiodactyls often have very slender legs. A clavicle is never present, and the scapula is very agile and swings back and forth for added mobility when running. The special construction of the legs causes the legs to be unable to rotate, which allows for greater stability when running at high speeds. In addition, many smaller artiodactyls have a very flexible body, contributing to their speed by increasing their stride length.

===Head===
Many even-toed ungulates have a relatively large head. The skull is elongated and rather narrow; the frontal bone is enlarged near the back and displaces the parietal bone, which forms only part of the side of the cranium (especially in ruminants).

====Horns and antlers====
Four families of even-toed ungulates have cranial appendages. These Pecora (with the exception of the musk deer), have one of four types of cranial appendages: true horns, antlers, ossicones, or pronghorns.

&quot;True horns&quot; have a bone core that is covered in a permanent sheath of keratin, and are found only in the bovids. &quot;Antlers&quot; are bony structures that are shed and replaced each year; they are found in deer (members of the family Cervidae). They grow from a permanent outgrowth of the frontal bone called the pedicle and can be branched, as in the white-tailed deer (&quot;Odocoileus virginianus&quot;), or palmate, as in the moose (&quot;Alces alces&quot;). &quot;Ossicones&quot; are permanent bone structures that fuse to the frontal or parietal bones during an animal&#x27;s life and are found only in the Giraffidae. &quot;Pronghorns&quot;, while similar to horns in that they have keratinous sheaths covering permanent bone cores, are deciduous.

All these cranial appendages can serve for posturing, battling for mating privilege, and for defense. In almost all cases, they are sexually dimorphic, and are often found only on the males. One exception is the species &quot;Rangifer tarandus&quot;, known as reindeer in Europe or caribou in North America, where both sexes can grow antlers yearly, though the females&#x27; antlers are typically smaller and not always present.

====Teeth====


There are two trends in terms of teeth within Artiodactyla. The Suina and hippopotamuses have a relatively large number of teeth (with some pigs having 44); their dentition is more adapted to a squeezing mastication, which is characteristic of omnivores. Camels and ruminants have fewer teeth; there is often a yawning diastema, a designated gap in the teeth where the molars are aligned for crushing plant matter.

The incisors are often reduced in ruminants, and are completely absent in the upper jaw. The canines are enlarged and tusk-like in the Suina, and are used for digging in the ground and for defense. In ruminants, the males&#x27; upper canines are enlarged and used as a weapon in certain species (mouse deer, musk deer, water deer); species with frontal weapons are usually missing the upper canines. The lower canines of ruminants resemble the incisors, so that these animals have eight uniform teeth in the frontal part of the lower jaw.

The molars of porcine have only a few bumps. In contrast, camels and ruminants have bumps that are crescent-shaped cusps (selenodont).

====Senses====
Artiodactyls have a well-developed sense of smell and sense of hearing. Unlike many other mammals, they have a poor sense of sight—moving objects are much easier to see than stationary ones. Similar to many other prey animals, their eyes are on the sides of the head, giving them an almost panoramic view.

===Digestive system===

The ruminants (Ruminantia) ruminate their food—they regurgitate and re-chew it. Ruminants&#x27; mouths often have additional salivary glands, and the oral mucosa is often heavily calloused to avoid injury from hard plant parts and to allow easier transport of roughly chewed food. Their stomachs are divided into three to four sections: the rumen, the reticulum, the omasum, and the abomasum. After the food is ingested, it is mixed with saliva in the rumen and reticulum and separates into layers of solid versus liquid material. The solids lump together to form a bolus (also known as the cud); this is regurgitated by reticular contractions while the glottis is closed. When the bolus enters the mouth, the fluid is squeezed out with the tongue and re-swallowed. The bolus is chewed slowly to completely mix it with saliva and to break it down. Ingested food passes to the &quot;fermentation chamber&quot; (rumen and reticulum), where it is kept in continual motion by rhythmic contractions. Cellulytic microbes (bacteria, protozoa, and fungi) produce cellulase, which is needed to break down the cellulose found in plant material. This form of digestion has two advantages: plants that are indigestible to other species can be digested and used, and the duration of the actual food consumption shortened; the animal spends only a short time out in the open with its head to the ground—rumination can take place later, in a sheltered area.

Tylopoda (camels, llamas, and alpacas) and chevrotains have three-chambered stomachs, while the rest of Ruminantia have four-chambered stomachs. The handicap of a heavy digestive system has increased selective pressure towards limbs that allow the animal to quickly escape predators. Most species within Suina have a simple two-chambered stomach that allows for an omnivorous diet. The babirusa, however, is a herbivore, and has extra maxillary teeth to allow for proper mastication of plant material. Most of the fermentation occurs with the help of cellulolytic microorganisms within the caecum of the large intestine. Peccaries have a complex stomach that contains four compartments. Their fore stomach has fermentation carried out by microbes and has high levels of volatile fatty acid; it has been proposed that their complex fore-stomach is a means to slow digestive passage and increase digestive efficiency. Hippopotamuses have three-chambered stomachs and do not ruminate. They consume around of grass and other plant matter each night. They may cover distances up to to obtain food, which they digest with the help of microbes that produce cellulase. Their closest living relatives, the whales, are obligate carnivores.

Unlike other even-toed ungulates, pigs have a simple sack-shaped stomach. Some artiodactyls, such as white-tailed deer, lack a gall bladder.

===Genitourinary system===

The penises of even-toed ungulates have an S-shape at rest and lie in a pocket under the skin on the belly. The corpora cavernosa are only slightly developed; and an erection mainly causes this curvature to extend, which leads to an extension, but not a thickening, of the penis. Cetaceans have similar penises. In some even-toed ungulates, the penis contains a structure called the &quot;urethral process&quot; or &quot;penile vermiform appendix.&quot;

The testicles are located in the scrotum and thus outside the abdominal cavity. The ovaries of many females descend—as the testicles descend of many male mammals—and are close to the pelvic inlet at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra. The uterus has two horns (uterus bicornis).

===Other===
The number of mammary glands is variable and correlates, as in all mammals, with litter size. Pigs, which have the largest litter size of all even-toed ungulates, have two rows of teats lined from the armpit to the groin area. In most cases, however, even-toed ungulates have only one or two pairs of teats. In some species these form an udder in the groin region.

Secretory glands in the skin are present in virtually all species and can be located in different places, such as in the eyes, behind the horns, the neck, or back, on the feet, or in the anal region.

Artiodactyls have a carotid rete heat exchange that enables them, unlike perissodactyls which lack one, to regulate their brain temperature independently of their bodies. It has been argued that its presence explains the greater success of artiodactyls compared to perissodactyls in being able to adapt to diverse environments from the Arctic Circle to deserts and tropical savannahs.

==Lifestyle==

=== Distribution and habitat ===
Artiodactyls are native to almost all parts of the world, with the exception of Oceania and Antarctica. Humans have introduced different artiodactyls worldwide as hunting animals. Artiodactyls inhabit almost every habitat, from tropical rainforests and steppes to deserts and high mountain regions. The greatest biodiversity prevails in open habitats such as grasslands and open forests.

===Social behavior===
The social behavior of even-toed ungulates varies from species to species. Generally, there is a tendency to merge into larger groups, but some live alone or in pairs. Species living in groups often have a hierarchy, both among males and females. Some species also live in harem groups, with one male, several females, and their common offspring. In other species, the females and juveniles stay together, while males are solitary or live in bachelor groups and seek out females only during mating season.

Many artiodactyls are territorial and mark their territory, for example, with glandular secretions or urine. In addition to year-round sedentary species, there are animals that migrate seasonally.

There are diurnal, crepuscular, and nocturnal artiodactyls. Some species&#x27; pattern of wakefulness varies with season or habitat.

===Reproduction and life expectancy===
Generally, even-toed ungulates tend to have long gestation periods, smaller litter sizes, and more highly developed newborns. As with many other mammals, species in temperate or polar regions have a fixed mating season, while those in tropical areas breed year-round. They carry out polygynous mating behavior, meaning a male mates with several females and suppresses all competition.

The length of the gestation period varies from four to five months for porcine, deer, and musk deer; six to ten months for hippos, deer, and bovines; ten to thirteen months with camels; and fourteen to fifteen months with giraffes. Most deliver one or two babies, but some pigs can deliver up to ten.

The newborns are precocial (born relatively mature) and come with open eyes and are hairy (with the exception of the hairless hippos). Juvenile deer and pigs have striped or spotted coats; the pattern disappears as they grow older. The juveniles of some species spend their first weeks with their mother in a safe location, where others may be running and following the herd within a few hours or days.

Life expectancy is typically twenty to thirty years; as in many mammals, smaller species often have a shorter lifespan than larger species. The artiodactyls with the longest lifespans are the hippos, cows, and camels, which can live 40 to 50 years.

===Predators and parasites===
Artiodactyls have different natural predators depending on their size and habitat. There are several carnivores that prey on them, including large cats (e.g., lions) and bears. Other predators are crocodiles, wolves and dogs, large raptors, and for small species and young animals, large snakes. For cetaceans, possible predators include sharks, polar bears, and other cetaceans; in the latter is the orca, the top predator of the oceans.

Parasites include nematodes, botflies, fleas, lice, or flukes, but they have debilitating effects only when the infestation is severe.

==Interactions with humans==

===Domestication===

Artiodactyls have been hunted by primitive humans for various reasons: for meat or fur, as well as to use their bones and teeth as weapons or tools. Their domestication began around 8000 BCE. To date, humans have domesticated goats, sheep, cattle, camels, llamas, alpacas, and pigs. Initially, livestock was used primarily for food, but they began being used for work activities around 3000 BCE. Clear evidence exists of antelope being used for food 2 million years ago in the Olduvai Gorge, part of the Great Rift Valley. Cro-Magnons relied heavily on reindeer for food, skins, tools, and weapons; with dropping temperatures and increased reindeer numbers at the end of the Pleistocene, they became the prey of choice. Reindeer remains accounted for 94% of bones and teeth found in a cave above the river Céou that was inhabited around 12,500 years ago. In general, most even-toed ungulates can be consumed as a kosher meat, with the principal exception of Suina (pigs, etc.) and hippopotamids, which are even-toed but do not chew the cud, and of Cetacea, which, for the purpose of rabbinic law, are considered to be scaleless fish, and thus not kosher.

Today, artiodactyls are kept primarily for their meat, milk, and wool, fur, or hide for clothing. Domestic cattle, the water buffalo, the yak, and camels are used for work, as rides, or as pack animals.

===Threats===
The endangerment level of each even-toed ungulate is different. Some species are synanthropic (such as the wild boar) and have spread into areas that they are not indigenous to, either having been brought in as farm animals or having run away as people&#x27;s pets. Some artiodactyls also benefit from the fact that their predators (e.g., the Tasmanian tiger) were severely decimated by ranchers, who saw them as competition.

Conversely, many artiodactyls have declined significantly in numbers, and some have even gone extinct, largely due to over-hunting, and, more recently, habitat destruction. Extinct species include several gazelles, the aurochs, the Malagasy hippopotamus, the bluebuck, and Schomburgk&#x27;s deer. Two species, the scimitar-horned oryx and Père David&#x27;s deer, are extinct in the wild. 14 species are considered critically endangered, including the addax, the kouprey, the wild Bactrian camel, Przewalski&#x27;s gazelle, the saiga, and the pygmy hog. 24 species are considered endangered.

== See also ==


==References==
==External links==

* Ungulate Taxonomy: A new perspective from Groves and Grubb (2011)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="0" end="12" title="Artiodactyl" label="Artiodactyls"/>
<link wikidata="Q25833" start="17" end="33" title="placental mammal" label="placental mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="52" end="57" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="58" end="70" title="Artiodactyl" label="Artiodactyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="98" end="106" title="ungulate" label="ungulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q128007" start="223" end="227" title="hoof" label="hoof"/>
<link wikidata="Q627214" start="279" end="288" title="vestigial" label="vestigial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25374" start="333" end="346" title="perissodactyl" label="perissodactyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q335308" start="475" end="480" title="Suina" label="Suina"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="495" end="504" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="520" end="527" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="558" end="567" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="672" end="677" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="680" end="687" title="dolphin" label="dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="694" end="702" title="porpoise" label="porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q213336" start="770" end="784" title="Hippopotamidae" label="hippopotamuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="830" end="845" title="Artiodactyl" label="Cetartiodactyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q25329" start="971" end="990" title="Artiodactyl" label="even-toed ungulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="1077" end="1089" title="paraphyletic" label="paraphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166898" start="1164" end="1167" title="Suidae" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q232866" start="1170" end="1179" title="peccaries" label="peccaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q213336" start="1181" end="1195" title="hippopotamidae" label="hippopotamuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="1197" end="1205" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="1208" end="1212" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q862089" start="1214" end="1221" title="giraffe" label="giraffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="1224" end="1229" title="camel" label="camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42569" start="1232" end="1237" title="llama" label="llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q122181742" start="1240" end="1246" title="alpaca" label="alpaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q22724" start="1249" end="1254" title="Ovis" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q172923" start="1256" end="1260" title="Capra (genus)" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q237993" start="1266" end="1272" title="Bos" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q567678" start="1420" end="1432" title="Anoplotheriidae" label="anoplotheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739355" start="1434" end="1447" title="Cainotheriidae" label="cainotheriids"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981107" start="1449" end="1463" title="Merycoidodontoidea" label="merycoidodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131139" start="1465" end="1476" title="entelodonts" label="entelodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q574319" start="1478" end="1492" title="anthracotheres" label="anthracotheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670162" start="1494" end="1507" title="basilosaurids" label="basilosaurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493096" start="1513" end="1527" title="Palaeomerycidae" label="palaeomerycids"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="1706" end="1712" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1798" end="1804" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="1806" end="1810" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1816" end="1829" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q59780133" start="1958" end="1971" title="Diacodexeidae" label="Diacodexeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q976572" start="2025" end="2035" title="Diacodexis" label="Diacodexis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="2088" end="2092" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q508691" start="2202" end="2207" title="Ypresian" label="early"/>
<link wikidata="Q131139" start="2373" end="2383" title="Entelodont" label="Entelodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q574319" start="2392" end="2409" title="Anthracotheriidae" label="Anthracotheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326689" start="2461" end="2474" title="early Miocene" label="early Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="2478" end="2485" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="2661" end="2664" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q167896" start="2711" end="2717" title="Snout" label="muzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="2773" end="2781" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495247" start="2987" end="2999" title="late Miocene" label="late Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077169" start="3074" end="3082" title="Tylopoda" label="Tylopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="3116" end="3124" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739355" start="3169" end="3183" title="Cainotheriidae" label="Cainotheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981107" start="3275" end="3292" title="Merycoidodontidae" label="Merycoidodontidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3491" end="3515" title="List of mammals of North America#Camelidae" label="North American varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q335308" start="3558" end="3563" title="Suina" label="Suina"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="3575" end="3578" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="3642" end="3651" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q232866" start="3700" end="3709" title="peccaries" label="peccaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="3739" end="3748" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="3774" end="3782" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q278170" start="3804" end="3834" title="Great American Interchange" label="settled by even-toed ungulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q864812" start="3867" end="3878" title="land bridge" label="land bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="3886" end="3903" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q42569" start="3978" end="3983" title="llama" label="llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q118722" start="4010" end="4025" title="Capreolinae" label="capreoline deer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4045" end="4085" title="List of mammals of South America#Order: Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates and cetaceans)" label="comparatively fewer artiodactyl families"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="4260" end="4267" title="cetacea" label="cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715289" start="4323" end="4334" title="semiaquatic" label="semiaquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="4356" end="4368" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="4505" end="4517" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="4687" end="4694" title="Cetacea" label="Cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q59780133" start="4980" end="4993" title="Diacodexeidae" label="Diacodexeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15041821" start="5004" end="5018" title="Amphimerycidae" label="Amphimerycidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5029" end="5041" title="Robiacinidae" label="Robiacinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739355" start="5052" end="5066" title="Cainotheriidae" label="Cainotheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077169" start="5078" end="5086" title="Tylopoda" label="Tylopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q567678" start="5098" end="5113" title="Anoplotheriidae" label="Anoplotheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981107" start="5126" end="5143" title="Merycoidodontidae" label="Merycoidodontidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5155" end="5169" title="Agriochoeridae" label="Agriochoeridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q135022" start="5181" end="5190" title="Camelidae" label="Camelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="5192" end="5197" title="camel" label="camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42569" start="5200" end="5205" title="llama" label="llama"/>
<link wikidata="Q122181742" start="5208" end="5214" title="alpaca" label="alpaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q125422609" start="5217" end="5223" title="vicuña" label="vicuña"/>
<link wikidata="Q172886" start="5230" end="5237" title="guanaco" label="guanaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374997" start="5284" end="5296" title="Oromerycidae" label="Oromerycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699941" start="5308" end="5321" title="Xiphodontidae" label="Xiphodontidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133821" start="5334" end="5348" title="Protoceratidae" label="Protoceratidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428352" start="5359" end="5370" title="Artiofabula" label="Artiofabula"/>
<link wikidata="Q335308" start="5383" end="5388" title="Suina" label="Suina"/>
<link wikidata="Q166898" start="5401" end="5407" title="Suidae" label="Suidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q232866" start="5439" end="5450" title="Tayassuidae" label="Tayassuidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q30893054" start="5486" end="5499" title="Sanitheriidae" label="Sanitheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q114634548" start="5511" end="5525" title="Doliochoeridae" label="Doliochoeridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369337" start="5536" end="5549" title="Cetruminantia" label="Cetruminantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q727029" start="5560" end="5578" title="Cetancodontamorpha" label="Cetancodontamorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q133214" start="5597" end="5610" title="Andrewsarchus" label="Andrewsarchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131139" start="5631" end="5645" title="Entelodontidae" label="Entelodontidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993757" start="5661" end="5673" title="Whippomorpha" label="Whippomorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q135753" start="5688" end="5698" title="Raoellidae" label="Raoellidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5718" end="5731" title="Dichobunoidea" label="Dichobunoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313354" start="5788" end="5800" title="Dichobunidae" label="Dichobunidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294574" start="5816" end="5826" title="Helohyidae" label="Helohyidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245188" start="5842" end="5857" title="Choeropotamidae" label="Choeropotamidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5873" end="5886" title="Cebochoeridae" label="Cebochoeridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055785" start="5904" end="5915" title="Cebochoerus" label="Cebochoerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30894650" start="5932" end="5946" title="Mixtotheriidae" label="Mixtotheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q110265920" start="5965" end="5974" title="Ancodonta" label="Ancodonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q574319" start="5990" end="6007" title="Anthracotheriidae" label="Anthracotheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q213336" start="6056" end="6070" title="Hippopotamidae" label="Hippopotamidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="6111" end="6118" title="Cetacea" label="Cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q568536" start="6163" end="6174" title="Archaeoceti" label="Archaeoceti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190158" start="6191" end="6202" title="Pakicetidae" label="Pakicetidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134967" start="6219" end="6232" title="Ambulocetidae" label="Ambulocetidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q134988" start="6249" end="6266" title="Remingtonocetidae" label="Remingtonocetidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670162" start="6283" end="6297" title="Basilosauridae" label="Basilosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="6312" end="6319" title="Neoceti" label="Neoceti"/>
<link wikidata="Q168366" start="6339" end="6348" title="Mysticeti" label="Mysticeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527843" start="6399" end="6410" title="right whale" label="right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q782603" start="6430" end="6440" title="Balaenidae" label="Balaenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527843" start="6450" end="6461" title="right whale" label="right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q766441" start="6496" end="6509" title="Cetotheriidae" label="Cetotheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q189615" start="6511" end="6528" title="pygmy right whale" label="pygmy right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q168366" start="6589" end="6601" title="baleen whale" label="baleen whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q232829" start="6621" end="6636" title="Balaenopteridae" label="Balaenopteridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q133320" start="6638" end="6659" title="Balaenoptera" label="slender-back rorquals"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="6664" end="6678" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q898360" start="6713" end="6727" title="Eschrichtiidae" label="Eschrichtiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="6729" end="6739" title="gray whale" label="gray whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q144144" start="6773" end="6783" title="Odontoceti" label="Odontoceti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139670" start="6822" end="6834" title="Delphinoidea" label="Delphinoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q215760" start="6836" end="6851" title="oceanic dolphin" label="oceanic dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="6854" end="6862" title="porpoise" label="porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q215760" start="6894" end="6905" title="Delphinidae" label="Delphinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q215760" start="6907" end="6928" title="Oceanic dolphin" label="oceanic true dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q219419" start="6960" end="6972" title="Monodontidae" label="Monodontidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q219419" start="6974" end="6987" title="Monodontidae" label="Arctic whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q159426" start="6989" end="6996" title="narwhal" label="narwhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132072" start="7001" end="7007" title="Beluga whale" label="beluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="7040" end="7051" title="Phocoenidae" label="Phocoenidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10867" start="7053" end="7061" title="porpoise" label="porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q21446362" start="7099" end="7112" title="Physeteroidea" label="Physeteroidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q21446362" start="7114" end="7126" title="Physeteroidea" label="sperm whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965630" start="7145" end="7153" title="Kogiidae" label="Kogiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965630" start="7155" end="7174" title="Kogiidae" label="lesser sperm whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21446362" start="7207" end="7219" title="Physeteridae" label="Physeteridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q81214" start="7221" end="7232" title="sperm whale" label="sperm whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q22312407" start="7269" end="7283" title="Platanistoidea" label="Platanistoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q22312407" start="7285" end="7298" title="river dolphin" label="river dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54873" start="7318" end="7325" title="Iniidae" label="Iniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q54873" start="7327" end="7356" title="Iniidae" label="South American river dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242241" start="7389" end="7398" title="Lipotidae" label="Lipotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q188130" start="7400" end="7421" title="Chinese river dolphin" label="Chinese river dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078080" start="7472" end="7485" title="Platanistidae" label="Platanistidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q950620" start="7487" end="7512" title="South Asian river dolphin" label="South Asian river dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410384" start="7545" end="7558" title="Pontoporiidae" label="Pontoporiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q622597" start="7560" end="7576" title="La Plata dolphin" label="La Plata dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193106" start="7642" end="7651" title="Ziphiidae" label="Ziphiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q193106" start="7653" end="7665" title="beaked whale" label="beaked whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="7723" end="7733" title="Ruminantia" label="Ruminantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832672" start="7752" end="7761" title="Tragulina" label="Tragulina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7777" end="7791" title="Leptomerycidae" label="Leptomerycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958751" start="7807" end="7822" title="Hypertragulidae" label="Hypertragulidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7838" end="7852" title="Praetragulidae" label="Praetragulidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057307" start="7868" end="7877" title="Gelocidae" label="Gelocidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632528" start="7893" end="7907" title="Bachitheriidae" label="Bachitheriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8535351" start="7923" end="7933" title="Tragulidae" label="Tragulidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7976" end="7992" title="Archaeomerycidae" label="Archaeomerycidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8008" end="8023" title="Lophiomerycidae" label="Lophiomerycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q772442" start="8042" end="8048" title="Pecora" label="Pecora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493096" start="8064" end="8079" title="Palaeomerycidae" label="Palaeomerycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q21291084" start="8095" end="8109" title="Dromomerycidae" label="Dromomerycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3581369" start="8125" end="8139" title="Antilocapridae" label="Antilocapridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="8141" end="8150" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q867989" start="8180" end="8196" title="Climacoceratidae" label="Climacoceratidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q186154" start="8212" end="8222" title="Giraffidae" label="Giraffidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q82037" start="8224" end="8229" title="okapi" label="okapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q862089" start="8250" end="8257" title="giraffe" label="giraffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786730" start="8294" end="8310" title="Hoplitomerycidae" label="Hoplitomerycidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="8326" end="8334" title="Cervidae" label="Cervidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="8336" end="8340" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q229084" start="8369" end="8378" title="Moschidae" label="Moschidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866060" start="8380" end="8389" title="musk deer" label="musk deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25497" start="8417" end="8424" title="Bovidae" label="Bovidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q237993" start="8426" end="8432" title="Bos" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371237" start="8434" end="8443" title="Bubalina" label="buffaloes"/>
<link wikidata="Q172923" start="8445" end="8449" title="Capra (genus)" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22724" start="8452" end="8457" title="Ovis" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="8459" end="8467" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q189804" start="8470" end="8477" title="Caprinae" label="caprine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="8484" end="8489" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516404" start="8553" end="8564" title="systematics" label="systematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="8634" end="8651" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="8955" end="8960" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="8966" end="8978" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="9207" end="9215" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193970" start="9371" end="9383" title="Casein" label="casein genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q908273" start="9385" end="9390" title="Short interspersed nuclear element" label="SINEs"/>
<link wikidata="Q381899" start="9392" end="9402" title="fibrinogen" label="fibrinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q408068" start="9414" end="9424" title="cytochrome" label="cytochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="9429" end="9433" title="rRNA" label="rRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18031072" start="9445" end="9449" title="RBP3" label="IRBP"/>
<link wikidata="Q412310" start="9455" end="9458" title="Von Willebrand factor" label="vWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q410568" start="9476" end="9495" title="adrenergic receptor" label="adrenergic receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q416890" start="9502" end="9516" title="apolipoprotein" label="apolipoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q310503" start="9557" end="9566" title="Pakicetus" label="Pakicetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366647" start="9624" end="9637" title="Ichthyolestes" label="Ichthyolestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q568536" start="9718" end="9729" title="archaeocete" label="archaeocete"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100" start="9937" end="9942" title="Talus bone" label="talus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132961" start="10082" end="10092" title="mesonychia" label="mesonychia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="10899" end="10904" title="skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11264" end="11274" title="Epirigenys" label="Epirigenys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="11388" end="11396" title="Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44691" start="11485" end="11504" title="Henri de Blainville" label="Henri de Blainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q151556" start="11591" end="11603" title="Richard Owen" label="Richard Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q335308" start="11797" end="11803" title="Suines" label="Suines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447896" start="12028" end="12038" title="selenodont" label="selenodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="12100" end="12108" title="ruminant" label="ruminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077169" start="12255" end="12262" title="tylopod" label="tylopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="12268" end="12276" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="12318" end="12328" title="Ruminantia" label="Ruminantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="12592" end="12605" title="marine mammal" label="marine mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="12616" end="12621" title="pinniped" label="seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q25431" start="12626" end="12633" title="sea cow" label="sea cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="12643" end="12663" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="12839" end="12848" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="12853" end="12859" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q128007" start="12872" end="12878" title="hooves" label="hooves"/>
<link wikidata="Q217605" start="12890" end="12894" title="claw" label="claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q144144" start="12991" end="13004" title="toothed whale" label="toothed whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="13361" end="13373" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="13717" end="13726" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077169" start="13821" end="13829" title="Tylopoda" label="Tylopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q135022" start="13857" end="13866" title="Camelidae" label="Camelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q71516" start="13980" end="13989" title="dromedary" label="dromedary"/>
<link wikidata="Q132922" start="13994" end="14002" title="Bactrian camel" label="Bactrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q172886" start="14043" end="14050" title="guanaco" label="guanaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q125422609" start="14061" end="14067" title="vicuña" label="vicuña"/>
<link wikidata="Q122181742" start="14074" end="14080" title="alpaca" label="alpaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q335308" start="14149" end="14154" title="Suina" label="Suina"/>
<link wikidata="Q166898" start="14198" end="14204" title="Suidae" label="Suidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="14254" end="14263" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="14295" end="14307" title="domestic pig" label="domestic pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q232866" start="14327" end="14338" title="Tayassuidae" label="Tayassuidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="14444" end="14454" title="Ruminantia" label="Ruminantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8535351" start="14500" end="14510" title="Tragulidae" label="Tragulidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q186154" start="14641" end="14651" title="Giraffidae" label="Giraffidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q82037" start="14702" end="14707" title="okapi" label="okapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q229084" start="14727" end="14736" title="Moschidae" label="Moschidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3581369" start="14788" end="14802" title="Antilocapridae" label="Antilocapridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="14859" end="14868" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="14883" end="14891" title="Cervidae" label="Cervidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q834007" start="14963" end="14969" title="antler" label="antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="15099" end="15107" title="red deer" label="red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="15109" end="15114" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="15116" end="15119" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="15134" end="15142" title="reindeer" label="reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25497" start="15169" end="15176" title="Bovidae" label="Bovidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q237993" start="15220" end="15226" title="Bos" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22724" start="15228" end="15233" title="Ovis" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q189804" start="15235" end="15242" title="Caprinae" label="caprine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25894" start="15249" end="15257" title="antelope" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993757" start="15276" end="15288" title="Whippomorpha" label="whippomorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213336" start="15334" end="15348" title="Hippopotamidae" label="Hippopotamidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="15375" end="15387" title="common hippo" label="common hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22110899" start="15396" end="15407" title="pygmy hippo" label="pygmy hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="15416" end="15423" title="cetacea" label="cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q144144" start="15482" end="15492" title="Odontoceti" label="Odontoceti"/>
<link wikidata="Q168366" start="15513" end="15522" title="Mysticeti" label="Mysticeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q772442" start="15746" end="15752" title="Pecora" label="Pecora"/>
<link wikidata="Q21907045" start="15856" end="15865" title="quadruped" label="quadruped"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="16358" end="16375" title="sexual dimorphism" label="sexual dimorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979192" start="16520" end="16527" title="bovines" label="bovines"/>
<link wikidata="Q183339" start="16578" end="16593" title="Indian antelope" label="Indian antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q154425" start="17001" end="17004" title="toe" label="toe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766112" start="17043" end="17052" title="hind legs" label="hind legs"/>
<link wikidata="Q217605" start="17373" end="17377" title="claw" label="claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q36864" start="17400" end="17405" title="Nail (anatomy)" label="nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="17430" end="17437" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057892" start="17796" end="17803" title="phalanx bone" label="phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q228537" start="17903" end="17913" title="zygopodium" label="zygopodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16343" start="18075" end="18083" title="clavicle" label="clavicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336" start="18110" end="18117" title="scapula" label="scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16295" start="18574" end="18586" title="frontal bone" label="frontal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16298" start="18631" end="18644" title="parietal bone" label="parietal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q772442" start="18817" end="18823" title="Pecora" label="Pecora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866060" start="18851" end="18860" title="musk deer" label="musk deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q834007" start="18921" end="18927" title="antler" label="antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094188" start="18930" end="18938" title="ossicone" label="ossicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="18944" end="18953" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25497" start="19073" end="19079" title="bovids" label="bovids"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="19205" end="19213" title="Cervidae" label="Cervidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="19323" end="19340" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="19401" end="19406" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q186154" start="19584" end="19594" title="Giraffidae" label="Giraffidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="19987" end="19995" title="reindeer" label="reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q827742" start="20377" end="20388" title="mastication" label="mastication"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="20417" end="20425" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174313" start="20492" end="20500" title="diastema" label="diastema"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="20593" end="20600" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182895" start="20667" end="20676" title="upper jaw" label="upper jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q192573" start="20908" end="20918" title="water deer" label="water deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16370" start="21117" end="21126" title="lower jaw" label="lower jaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447896" start="21251" end="21261" title="selenodont" label="selenodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="21615" end="21623" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q134938" start="21736" end="21750" title="salivary gland" label="salivary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776131" start="21761" end="21772" title="oral mucosa" label="oral mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q427652" start="21952" end="21957" title="rumen" label="rumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q767749" start="21963" end="21972" title="reticulum (anatomy)" label="reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q846746" start="21978" end="21984" title="omasum" label="omasum"/>
<link wikidata="Q27004" start="21994" end="22002" title="abomasum" label="abomasum"/>
<link wikidata="Q427652" start="22063" end="22068" title="rumen" label="rumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q767749" start="22073" end="22082" title="reticulum (anatomy)" label="reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580786" start="22177" end="22182" title="bolus (digestion)" label="bolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784209" start="22202" end="22205" title="cud" label="cud"/>
<link wikidata="Q374418" start="22265" end="22272" title="glottis" label="glottis"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="22617" end="22624" title="microbe" label="microbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="22627" end="22635" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="22637" end="22645" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="22651" end="22656" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q410324" start="22666" end="22675" title="cellulase" label="cellulase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077169" start="23055" end="23063" title="Tylopoda" label="Tylopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8535351" start="23098" end="23108" title="chevrotain" label="chevrotain"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="23159" end="23169" title="Ruminantia" label="Ruminantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q335308" start="23359" end="23364" title="Suina" label="Suina"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="23420" end="23430" title="omnivorous" label="omnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q232558" start="23441" end="23449" title="babirusa" label="babirusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="23490" end="23505" title="maxillary teeth" label="maxillary teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q185317" start="23645" end="23651" title="caecum" label="caecum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="23659" end="23674" title="large intestine" label="large intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q232866" start="23676" end="23685" title="Peccaries" label="Peccaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698455" start="23825" end="23844" title="volatile fatty acid" label="volatile fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="24252" end="24257" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="24264" end="24282" title="obligate carnivore" label="obligate carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="24351" end="24358" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="24387" end="24404" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q64386" start="24413" end="24425" title="gall bladder" label="gall bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455226" start="24568" end="24585" title="corpus cavernosum penis" label="corpora cavernosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q133993" start="24622" end="24630" title="erection" label="erection"/>
<link wikidata="Q58" start="24729" end="24734" title="penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384" start="24915" end="24923" title="testicle" label="testicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q174471" start="24944" end="24951" title="scrotum" label="scrotum"/>
<link wikidata="Q682466" start="24973" end="24989" title="abdominal cavity" label="abdominal cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9631" start="24995" end="25002" title="ovaries" label="ovaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q748286" start="25094" end="25106" title="pelvic inlet" label="pelvic inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q405478" start="25134" end="25149" title="lumbar vertebra" label="lumbar vertebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="25155" end="25161" title="uterus" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3693643" start="25177" end="25192" title="Uterine horns" label="uterus bicornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189961" start="25222" end="25235" title="mammary gland" label="mammary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479906" start="25289" end="25300" title="litter size" label="litter size"/>
<link wikidata="Q206718" start="25388" end="25392" title="teat" label="teat"/>
<link wikidata="Q624043" start="25546" end="25551" title="udder" label="udder"/>
<link wikidata="Q754845" start="25574" end="25590" title="Exocrine gland" label="Secretory glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q189124" start="25795" end="25807" title="carotid rete" label="carotid rete"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="26289" end="26296" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="26301" end="26311" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="26437" end="26456" title="tropical rainforest" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="26462" end="26468" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="26473" end="26479" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="26490" end="26506" title="Mountain range" label="mountain regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="26521" end="26533" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="26568" end="26577" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="26826" end="26835" title="Social hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021044" start="26893" end="26905" title="Harem (zoology)" label="harem groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914623" start="27111" end="27124" title="mating season" label="mating season"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="27149" end="27160" title="Territory (animal)" label="territorial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27205" end="27234" title="Territory (animal)#Scent marking" label="glandular secretions or urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193145" start="27304" end="27311" title="Animal migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="27335" end="27342" title="diurnality" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255068" start="27344" end="27355" title="crepuscular" label="crepuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="27361" end="27370" title="nocturnal" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490716" start="27547" end="27563" title="gestation period" label="gestation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="27663" end="27672" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193372" start="27676" end="27681" title="Polar climate" label="polar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914623" start="27703" end="27716" title="mating season" label="mating season"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="27733" end="27741" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105315" start="27781" end="27791" title="Polygyny in animals" label="polygynous"/>
<link wikidata="Q110576835" start="28203" end="28212" title="precocial" label="precocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="28898" end="28914" title="natural predator" label="natural predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="28971" end="28980" title="carnivore" label="carnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667323" start="29011" end="29020" title="large cat" label="large cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="29029" end="29033" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="29040" end="29044" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q43169" start="29067" end="29076" title="crocodile" label="crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="29079" end="29085" title="wolves" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="29090" end="29093" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="29102" end="29109" title="raptor (bird)" label="raptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="29158" end="29163" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="29310" end="29319" title="Parasites" label="Parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="29328" end="29336" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q27485" start="29339" end="29347" title="botflies" label="botflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q388162" start="29349" end="29353" title="flea" label="flea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481228" start="29356" end="29360" title="lice" label="lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q207547" start="29365" end="29371" title="fluke (parasite)" label="flukes"/>
<link wikidata="Q197195" start="29580" end="29583" title="Fur clothing" label="fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="29652" end="29665" title="domestication" label="domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="29723" end="29727" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="29730" end="29735" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="29737" end="29743" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="29774" end="29777" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q217043" start="29974" end="29987" title="Olduvai Gorge" label="Olduvai Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384313" start="30001" end="30018" title="Kenyan Rift Valley" label="Great Rift Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="30020" end="30030" title="Cro-Magnon" label="Cro-Magnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130827" start="30303" end="30307" title="Céou" label="Céou"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="30410" end="30416" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q335308" start="30455" end="30460" title="Suina" label="Suina"/>
<link wikidata="Q213336" start="30478" end="30491" title="hippopotamidae" label="hippopotamids"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="30524" end="30536" title="ruminants" label="chew the cud"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="30545" end="30552" title="Cetacea" label="Cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="30580" end="30592" title="Halakha" label="rabbinic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="30718" end="30722" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291230" start="30732" end="30736" title="hide (skin)" label="hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q42710" start="30772" end="30785" title="water buffalo" label="water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408062" start="30791" end="30794" title="yak" label="yak"/>
<link wikidata="Q622377" start="30842" end="30853" title="pack animal" label="pack animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166242" start="30952" end="30964" title="synanthropic" label="synanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="30978" end="30987" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q123102" start="31214" end="31229" title="Tasmanian tiger" label="Tasmanian tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="31416" end="31428" title="over-hunting" label="over-hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="31450" end="31469" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q168903" start="31517" end="31524" title="aurochs" label="aurochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25796510" start="31530" end="31551" title="Malagasy hippopotamus" label="Malagasy hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746580" start="31557" end="31565" title="bluebuck" label="bluebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q749836" start="31571" end="31593" title="Schomburgk&amp;#x27;s deer" label="Schomburgk&amp;#x27;s deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q369817" start="31612" end="31632" title="scimitar-horned oryx" label="scimitar-horned oryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q207906" start="31637" end="31659" title="Père David&amp;#x27;s deer" label="Père David&amp;#x27;s deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q239509" start="31665" end="31684" title="extinct in the wild" label="extinct in the wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="31712" end="31733" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q190154" start="31749" end="31754" title="addax" label="addax"/>
<link wikidata="Q321255" start="31760" end="31767" title="kouprey" label="kouprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030198" start="31773" end="31792" title="wild Bactrian camel" label="wild Bactrian camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q382925" start="31794" end="31819" title="Przewalski&amp;#x27;s gazelle" label="Przewalski&amp;#x27;s gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q126683" start="31825" end="31830" title="saiga" label="saiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q244447" start="31840" end="31849" title="pygmy hog" label="pygmy hog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="31877" end="31887" title="endangered" label="endangered"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46765" wikidata="Q13575" url="?curid=46765" title="François Quesnay">
<text>François Quesnay (; ; 4 June 1694 – 16 December 1774) was a French economist and physician of the Physiocratic school. He is known for publishing the &quot;Tableau économique&quot; (Economic Table) in 1758, which provided the foundations of the ideas of the Physiocrats. This was perhaps the first work attempting to describe the workings of the economy in an analytical way, and as such can be viewed as one of the first important contributions to economic thought. His &quot;Le Despotisme de la Chine&quot;, written in 1767, describes Chinese politics and society, and his own political support for enlightened despotism.

== Life ==
Quesnay was born at Méré near Versailles, the son of an advocate and small landed proprietor. Apprenticed at the age of sixteen to a surgeon, he soon went to Paris, studied medicine and surgery there, and, having qualified as a master-surgeon, settled down to practice at Mantes. In 1737 he was appointed perpetual secretary of the academy of surgery founded by François Gigot de la Peyronie, and became surgeon in ordinary to King Louis XV. In 1744 he graduated as a doctor of medicine; he became the physician in ordinary to the king, and afterwards his first consulting physician, and was installed in the Palace of Versailles. His apartments were on the &quot;entresol&quot;, whence the Réunions de l&#x27;entresol received their name. Louis XV esteemed Quesnay highly, and used to call him his thinker. When he ennobled him he gave him for arms three flowers of the pansy (derived from &quot;pensée&quot;, in French meaning &quot;thought&quot;), with the Latin motto &quot;Propter cogitationem mentis&quot;.

He now devoted himself principally to economic studies, taking no part in the court intrigues which were perpetually going on around him. Around 1750 he became acquainted with Jacques C. M. V. de Gournay (1712–1759), who was also an earnest inquirer in the economic field; and round these two distinguished men was gradually formed the philosophic sect of the Économistes, or, as for distinction&#x27;s sake they were afterwards called, the Physiocrates. The most remarkable men in this group of disciples were the elder Mirabeau (author of &quot;L&#x27;Ami des hommes&quot;, 1756–60, and &quot;Philosophie rurale&quot;, 1763), Nicolas Baudeau (&quot;Introduction a la philosophie économique&quot;, 1771), Guillaume-François Le Trosne (&quot;De l&#x27;ordre social&quot;, 1777), André Morellet (best known by his controversy with Galiani on the freedom of the grain trade during the Flour War), Lemercier de La Rivière, and du Pont de Nemours. Adam Smith, during his stay on the continent with the young Duke of Buccleuch in 1764–1766, spent some time in Paris, where he made the acquaintance of Quesnay and some of his followers; he paid a high tribute to their scientific services in his &quot;Wealth of Nations&quot;.

In 1717, Quesnay married Jeanne-Cathérine Dauphin, and had a son and a daughter; his grandson by the former was a member of the first Legislative Assembly. He died on 16 December 1774, having lived long enough to see his great pupil, Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, Baron de Laune, in office as minister of finance.

== Works ==

His economic writings are collected in the 2nd vol. of the &quot;Principaux économistes&quot;, published by Guillaumin, Paris, with preface and notes by Eugène Daire; also his &quot;Oeuvres économiques et philosophiques&quot; were collected with an introduction and note by August Oncken (Frankfort, 1888); a facsimile reprint of the &quot;Tableau économique&quot;, from the original MS., was published by the British Economic Association (London, 1895). His other writings were the article &quot;Évidence&quot; in the &quot;Encyclopédie&quot;, and &quot;Recherches sur l&#x27;évidence des vérites geometriques&quot;, with a &quot;Projet de nouveaux éléments de géometrie&quot;, 1773. Quesnay&#x27;s Eloge was pronounced in the Academy of Sciences by Grandjean de Fouchy (see the Recueil of that Academy, 1774, p. 134). See also F.J. Marmontel, &quot;Mémoires&quot;; &quot;Mémoires de Mme. du Hausset&quot;; H. Higgs, &quot;The Physiocrats&quot; (London, 1897).

=== Economics ===

In 1758 he published the &quot;Tableau économique&quot; (Economic Table), which provided the foundations of the ideas of the Physiocrats. This was perhaps the first work to attempt to describe the workings of the economy in an analytical way, and as such can be viewed as one of the first important contributions to economic thought.

The publications in which Quesnay expounded his system were the following: two articles, on &quot;Fermiers&quot; (Farmers) and on &quot;Grains&quot;, in the &quot;Encyclopédie&quot; of Diderot and Jean le Rond d&#x27;Alembert (1756, 1757); a discourse on the law of nature in the &quot;Physiocratie&quot; of Dupont de Nemours (1768); &quot;Maximes générales de gouvernement economique d&#x27;un royaume agricole&quot; (1758), and the simultaneously published &quot;Tableau économique avec son explication, ou extrait des économies royales de Sully&quot; (with the celebrated motto, &quot;Pauvres paysans, pauvre royaume; pauvre royaume, pauvre roi&quot;); &quot;Dialogue sur le commerce et les travaux des artisans&quot;; and other minor pieces.

The &quot;Tableau économique&quot;, though on account of its dryness and abstract form it met with little general favor, may be considered the principal manifesto of the school. It was regarded by the followers of Quesnay as entitled to a place amongst the foremost products of human wisdom, and is named by the elder Mirabeau, in a passage quoted by Adam Smith, as one of the three great inventions which have contributed most to the stability of political societies, the other two being those of writing and of money. Its object was to exhibit by means of certain formulas the way in which the products of agriculture, which is the only source of wealth, would in a state of perfect liberty be distributed among the several classes of the community (namely, the productive classes of the proprietors and cultivators of land, and the unproductive class composed of manufacturers and merchants), and to represent by other formulas the modes of distribution which take place under systems of Governmental restraint and regulation, with the evil results arising to the whole society from different degrees of such violations of the natural order. It follows from Quesnay&#x27;s theoretic views that the one thing deserving the solicitude of the practical economist and the statesman is the increase of the net product; and he infers also what Smith afterwards affirmed, on not quite the same ground, that the interest of the landowner is strictly and indissolubly connected with the general interest of the society. A small edition de luxe of this work, with other pieces, was printed in 1758 in the Palace of Versailles under the king&#x27;s immediate supervision, some of the sheets, it is said, having been pulled by the royal hand. Already in 1767 the book had disappeared from circulation, and no copy of it is now procurable; but, the substance of it has been preserved in the &quot;Ami des hommes&quot; of Mirabeau, and the &quot;Physiocratie&quot; of Dupont de Nemours.

=== Orientalism and China ===
Quesnay is known for his writings on Chinese politics and society. His book &quot;Le Despotisme de la Chine&quot;, written in 1767, describes his views of the Chinese imperial system. He was supportive of the meritocratic concept of giving scholars political power, without the cumbersome aristocracy that characterized French politics, and the importance of agriculture to the welfare of a nation. Gregory Blue writes that Quesnay &quot;praised China as a constitutional despotism and openly advocated the adoption of Chinese institutions, including a standardized system of taxation and universal education.&quot; Blue speculates that this may have influenced the 1793 establishment of the Permanent Settlement in Bengal by the British Empire. Quesnay&#x27;s interests in Orientalism has also been a source of criticism. Carol Blum, in her book &quot;Strength in Numbers&quot; on 18th century France, labels Quesnay an &quot;apologist for Oriental despotism.&quot;

Because of his admiration of Confucianism, Quesnay&#x27;s followers bestowed him with the title &quot;Confucius of Europe.&quot; Quesnay&#x27;s infatuation for Chinese culture, as described by Jesuits, led him to persuade the son of Louis XV to mirror the &quot;plowing of sacred land&quot; by the Chinese emperor to symbolize the link between government and agriculture.

===On Taxation===

Quesnay acknowledged three economic classes in France: the &quot;proprietary&quot; class consisting of only landowners, the &quot;productive&quot; class of agricultural workers, and the &quot;sterile&quot; class of merchants. Quesnay saw no benefit to the sterile class and believed the productive to be all important. Quesnay viewed France&#x27;s agriculture as backward and unproductive compared to Britain during the time he was residing in the Palace of Versailles [13] . Despite residing in the Palace, Quesnay believed agriculture was the heart of the economy and of special importance to him. Quesnay argued that taxes placed on cultivators are only harmful to society as these taxes will reduce the incentive for agricultural production. Taxing proprietors (property holders) does not destroy the means of production meaning there is no decline in output. Quesnay wanted proprietors to bear the full burden of the tax in the country as taxing cultivators is a negative consequence for everyone. Removing incentive from cultivators reduces agricultural production and the agricultural surplus Quesnay believed to be the heart of the economy [14]. Quesnay also opposed indirect taxes in contrast to direct taxes. These &quot;indirect taxes&quot; are placed on the French public by proprietors whose greed demands immunity from taxation. Direct taxes on proprietors has no impact on reproduction and economic decline [14]. Reducing indirect taxes and increasing direct taxes gives the French a surplus of agriculture and the funding the country needs. However, this opinion was not very popular among the wealthy of which Quesnay spent time regularly with. He spent some of his time fearing for his life in the Palace.

== See also ==
* Contributions to liberal theory
* History of economic thought
* Liberalism
* Ronald L. Meek
* Circular flow of income

== Notes ==
== References ==

== External links ==
* Le Despotisme de la Chine (1767) by François Quesnay, hosted on the University of Massachusetts website
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13575" start="0" end="16" title="François Quesnay" label="François Quesnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="67" end="76" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="81" end="90" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="98" end="110" title="Physiocrats" label="Physiocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747160" start="156" end="174" title="Tableau économique" label="Tableau économique"/>
<link wikidata="Q179352" start="613" end="622" title="despotism" label="despotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q759590" start="656" end="660" title="Méré, Yvelines" label="Méré"/>
<link wikidata="Q621" start="666" end="676" title="Versailles (commune)" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q20773771" start="730" end="741" title="Apprenticeship" label="Apprenticed"/>
<link wikidata="Q207253" start="908" end="914" title="Mantes" label="Mantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363488" start="998" end="1027" title="François Gigot de la Peyronie" label="François Gigot de la Peyronie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="1063" end="1076" title="Louis XV of France" label="King Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="1245" end="1265" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1507" end="1512" title="pansy#Name origin and significance" label="pansy"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1596" end="1601" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42470" start="1602" end="1607" title="motto" label="motto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1688" end="1704" title="economics" label="economic studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q966434" start="1826" end="1853" title="Jacques Claude Marie Vincent de Gournay" label="Jacques C. M. V. de Gournay"/>
<link wikidata="Q947485" start="2171" end="2179" title="Victor de Riqueti, marquis de Mirabeau" label="Mirabeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q923557" start="2278" end="2293" title="Nicolas Baudeau" label="Nicolas Baudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q955848" start="2356" end="2384" title="Guillaume-François Le Trosne" label="Guillaume-François Le Trosne"/>
<link wikidata="Q178653" start="2429" end="2443" title="André Morellet" label="André Morellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q979496" start="2480" end="2487" title="Ferdinando Galiani" label="Galiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593509" start="2510" end="2521" title="grain trade" label="grain trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635316" start="2533" end="2542" title="Flour War" label="Flour War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926227" start="2545" end="2568" title="Pierre-Paul Lemercier de La Rivière de Saint-Médard" label="Lemercier de La Rivière"/>
<link wikidata="Q573712" start="2574" end="2592" title="Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours" label="du Pont de Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="2594" end="2604" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q335286" start="2654" end="2671" title="Henry Scott, 3rd Duke of Buccleuch" label="Duke of Buccleuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q221303" start="3106" end="3148" title="Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, Baron de Laune" label="Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, Baron de Laune"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="3926" end="3945" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q379923" start="4027" end="4041" title="Jean-François Marmontel" label="F.J. Marmontel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747160" start="4211" end="4229" title="Tableau économique" label="Tableau économique"/>
<link wikidata="Q447" start="4678" end="4690" title="Encyclopédie" label="Encyclopédie"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="4700" end="4707" title="Denis Diderot" label="Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q153232" start="4712" end="4740" title="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert" label="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q379953" start="5057" end="5062" title="Maximilien de Bethune, duc de Sully" label="Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="5613" end="5623" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="7985" end="7991" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="7999" end="8013" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057234" start="8210" end="8228" title="Oriental despotism" label="Oriental despotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="8266" end="8278" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="8470" end="8478" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q831027" start="10371" end="10402" title="Contributions to liberal theory" label="Contributions to liberal theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q268194" start="10405" end="10432" title="History of economic thought" label="History of economic thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="10435" end="10445" title="Liberalism" label="Liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365040" start="10448" end="10462" title="Ronald L. Meek" label="Ronald L. Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455756" start="10465" end="10488" title="Circular flow of income" label="Circular flow of income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061122" start="10611" end="10638" title="University of Massachusetts" label="University of Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46769" wikidata="Q13509" url="?curid=46769" title="Léon Walras">
<text>Marie-Esprit-Léon Walras (; 16 December 1834 – 5 January 1910) was a French mathematical economist and Georgist. He formulated the marginal theory of value (independently of William Stanley Jevons and Carl Menger) and pioneered the development of general equilibrium theory. Walras is best known for his book &quot;Éléments d&#x27;économie politique pure&quot;, a work that has contributed greatly to the mathematization of economics through the concept of general equilibrium. The definition of the role of the entrepreneur found in it was also taken up and amplified by Joseph Schumpeter.
For Walras, exchanges only take place after a Walrasian &quot;tâtonnement&quot; (French for &quot;trial and error&quot;), guided by the auctioneer, has made it possible to reach market equilibrium. It was the general equilibrium obtained from a single hypothesis, rarity, that led Joseph Schumpeter to consider him &quot;the greatest of all economists&quot;. The notion of general equilibrium was very quickly adopted by major economists such as Vilfredo Pareto, Knut Wicksell and Gustav Cassel. John Hicks and Paul Samuelson used the Walrasian contribution in the elaboration of the neoclassical synthesis. For their part, Kenneth Arrow and Gérard Debreu, from the perspective of a logician and a mathematician, determined the conditions necessary for equilibrium.

==Biography==
Walras was the son of a French school administrator Auguste Walras. His father was not a professional economist, yet his economic thinking had a profound effect on his son. He found the value of goods by setting their scarcity relative to human wants.

Walras enrolled in the École des Mines de Paris, but grew tired of engineering. He worked as a bank manager, journalist, romantic novelist and railway clerk before turning to economics. Walras received an appointment as the professor of political economy at the University of Lausanne.

Walras also inherited his father&#x27;s interest in social reform. Much like the Fabians, Walras called for the nationalization of land, believing that land&#x27;s productivity would always increase and that rents from that land would be sufficient to support the nation without taxes. He also asserted that all other taxes (i.e. on goods, labor, capital) eventually realize effects exactly identical to a consumption tax, so they can hurt the economy (unlike a land tax).

Another of Walras&#x27;s influences was Augustin Cournot, a former schoolmate of his father. Through Cournot, Walras came under the influence of rationalism and was introduced to the use of mathematics in economics. He later motivated his use of mathematics with the analogy that the pure theory of economics is “a physico-mathematical science like mechanics” and argued that the way economics proceeds is rigorously identical to the one of rational and celestial mechanics.

As Professor of Political Economy at the University of Lausanne, Walras is credited with founding the Lausanne school of economics, along with his successor Vilfredo Pareto.

Because most of Walras&#x27;s publications were only available in French, many economists were unfamiliar with his work. This changed in 1954 with the publication of William Jaffé&#x27;s English translation of Walras&#x27;s &quot;Éléments d&#x27;économie politique pure&quot;. Walras&#x27;s work was also too mathematically complex for many contemporary readers of his time. On the other hand, it has a great insight into the market process under idealized conditions so it has been far more read in the modern era.

Although Walras came to be regarded as one of the three leaders of the marginalist revolution,
he was not familiar with the two other leading figures of marginalism, William Stanley Jevons and Carl Menger, and developed his theories independently. &quot;Elements&quot; has Walras disagreeing with Jevons on the applicability, while the findings adopted by Carl Menger, he says, are completely in alignment with the ideas present in the book (even though expressed non-mathematically).

==Main ideas==
=== Walras&#x27;s law ===
Walras&#x27;s law implies that the sum of the values of excess demands across all markets must equal zero, whether or not the economy is in a general equilibrium. This implies that if positive excess demand exists in one market, negative excess demand must exist in some other market. Thus, if all markets but one are in equilibrium, then that last market must also be in equilibrium.

===General equilibrium theory===
In 1874 and 1877 Walras published the work that led him to be considered the father of the general equilibrium theory, &quot;Éléments d&#x27;économie politique pure&quot; [see next section for bibliographical details].

His main goal was to solve a problem presented by A. A. Cournot: Does a general equilibrium exist? Though it had been demonstrated that prices would equate supply and demand to clear individual markets (&quot;partial equilibrium&quot;), it was unclear that an equilibrium existed for all markets simultaneously (&quot;general equilibrium&quot;).

While teaching at the Lausanne Academy, Walras began constructing a mathematical model that assumes a &quot;regime of perfectly free competition&quot;, in which productive factors, products, and prices automatically adjust in equilibrium. Walras began with the theory of exchange in 1873 and proceeded to map out his theories of production, capitalization and money in his first edition.

His theory of exchange began with an expansion of Cournot&#x27;s demand curve to include more than two commodities, also realizing the value of the quantity sold must equal the quantity purchased thus the ratio of prices must be equal to the inverse ratio of quantities. Walras then drew a supply curve from the demand curve and set equilibrium prices at the intersection. His model could now determine prices of commodities but only the relative price. In order to deduce the absolute price, Walras could choose one price to serve as the &quot;numeraire&quot;, such that all other prices are measured in units of this commodity. Using the numeraire, he determined that marginal utility [&quot;rareté&quot;] divided by the price must be equal for all commodities.

Then he argued that, because each individual consumer consumes as much value as the value of that individual&#x27;s stock of goods, the value of total sales equals the value of total purchase. That is, Walras&#x27;s law holds.

Walras then expanded the theory to include production with the assumption of an existence of fixed coefficients in said production making possible a generalization that the marginal productivity of the factors of production varied with the amount of input, making factor substitution possible.

Walras constructed his basic theory of general equilibrium by beginning with simple equations and then increasing the complexity in the next equations. He began with a two-person bartering system, then moved on to the derivation of downward-sloping consumer demands. Next he moved on to exchanges involving multiple parties, and finally ended with credit and money.

Walras wrote down four sets of equations:

* the quantity of goods demanded;
* relating the prices of goods to their costs of production;
* the quantities of inputs supplied;
* the quantities of inputs demanded.

There are four sets of variables to solve for:

* the price of each good;
* the quantity of each good sold;
* the price of each factor of production;
* the quantity of each of those factor bought by businesses.

To simplify matters, Walras added one further equation (the Walras&#x27;s law equation), requiring that all the money received must be spent, one way or the other.

By Walras&#x27;s law, any particular market must be in equilibrium if all other markets in an economy are also in equilibrium, because the excess market demands sum to zero. Thus, in an economy with n markets, it is sufficient to solve n-1 simultaneous equations for market clearing. Taking one good as the numéraire in terms of which prices are specified, the economy has n-1 unknown prices that can be determined by the n-1 simultaneous equations, he thus concluded that the general equilibrium exists.

Though this argument works when all equations are linear, it does not hold when the equations are nonlinear. It is easy to construct a pairs of equations in two variables with no solutions. A more rigorous version of the argument was developed independently by Lionel McKenzie and the pair Kenneth Arrow and Gérard Debreu in the 1950s.

=== Walrasian auction ===
The Walrasian auction is a type of simultaneous auction where each agent calculates its demand for the good at every possible price and submits this to an auctioneer. The price is then set so that the total demand across all agents equals the total amount of the good. Thus, a Walrasian auction perfectly matches the supply and the demand. Walras suggests that equilibrium will be achieved through a process of &quot;tâtonnement&quot; (French for &quot;trial and error&quot;), a form of incremental hill climbing.

=== Economic value definition of utility ===

Léon Walras provides a definition of economic utility based on economic value as opposed to an ethical theory of value:

I state that things are useful as soon as they may serve whatever usage, as soon as they match whatever need and allow its fulfillment. Thus, there is here no point to deal with &#x27;nuances&#x27; by way of which one classes, in the language of everyday conversation, utility beside what is pleasant and between the necessary and the superfluous. Necessary, useful, pleasant and superfluous, all of this is, for us, more or less useful. There is here as well no need to take into account the morality or immorality of the need that the useful things matches and permits to fulfill. Whether a substance is searched for by a doctor to heal an ill person, or by an assassin to poison his family, this is an important question from other points of view, albeit totally indifferent from ours. The substance is useful, for us, in both cases, and may well be more useful in the second case than in the first one.

In economic theories of value, the term &quot;value&quot; is unrelated to any notions of value used in ethics, they are homonyms.

==Legacy==
In 1941 George Stigler wrote about Walras: What caused the re-appraisal of Walras&#x27;s consideration in the US, was the influx of German-speaking scientists – the German version of his &quot;Théorie Mathématique de la Richesse Sociale&quot; was published in 1881.

According to Schumpeter:

==Major works==
===&quot;Éléments d&#x27;Économie Politique Pure&quot;===

The &quot;Éléments&quot; of 1874/1877 are the work by which Léon Walras is best known. The full title is 
* Éléments d&#x27;Économie Politique Pure, ou Théorie de la richesse sociale.
The half title page uses only the title (&#x27;Éléments d&#x27;Économie Politique Pure&#x27;) whereas inside the body (e.g. p. 1 and the contents page) the subtitle (&#x27;Théorie de la richesse sociale&#x27;) is used as if it were the title.

====Plan of work====
The work was issued in two instalments (&quot;fascicules&quot;) in separate years. It was intended as the first of three parts of a systematic treatise as follows:
* 1re partie:– Éléments d&#x27;Économie Politique Pure, ou Théorie de la richesse sociale.
** Section I. Objet et divisions de l&#x27;économie politique et sociale.
** Section II. Théorie mathématique de l&#x27;échange.
** Section III. Du numéraire et de la monnaie.
** Section IV. Théorie naturelle de la production et de la conommation de la richesse.
** Section V. Conditions et conséquences du progrès économique.
** Section VI. Effets naturels et nécessaires des divers modes d&#x27;organisation économique de la société.
* 2e partie:– Éléments d&#x27;Économie Politique Appliquée, ou Théorie de la production agricole, industrielle et commerciale de la richesse.
* 3e partie:– Éléments d&#x27;Économie Sociale, ou Théorie de la répartition de la richesse par la propriété et l&#x27;impôt.
Works with titles echoing those proposed for Parts II and III were published in 1898 and 1896. They are included in the list of other works below.

====Editions====
* &quot;First&quot; (1874/1877). Most readily available. Described by Walker and van Daal as a &#x27;brilliant expression of pure originality, containing many theoretical innovations&#x27; which &#x27;needed alteration and development in a variety of important respects&#x27;.
* &quot;Second&quot; (1889). Revised, corrected and enlarged.
* &quot;Third&quot; (1896). A minor revision with new appendices. This is considered the best edition by Walker and van Daal.
* &quot;Fourth&quot; (1900). Revised and extended. According to Walker and van Daal, &#x27;these changes resulted in an incomplete, internally contradictory, and occasionally incoherent text&#x27;.
* &quot;Fifth&quot; (1926). Posthumous; published by his daughter Aline. &#x27;Édition définitive, revue et augmentée&#x27;. Follows the fourth.

====Derived work====
The &#x27;Théorie Mathématique de la Richesse Sociale&#x27; included in the list of other works (below) is described by the National Library of Australia as &#x27;a series of lectures and articles that together summarize the mathematical elements of the author&#x27;s &quot;Élements&quot; &#x27;.

====English Translations====
* William Jaffé (1954) of the &quot;fifth&quot; edition as &quot;Elements of Pure Economics&quot;.
* Donald A. Walker and Jan van Daal (2014) of the &quot;third&quot; edition as &quot;Elements of Theoretical Economics&quot;.
Walker and van Daal describe Jaffé&#x27;s translation of the word &quot;crieur&quot; as &#x27;a momentous error that has misled generations of readers&#x27;.

====Online and facsimile editions====
* Online: 
* Facsimile: cheap photographic reprints are produced by .
Both of these are made from the &quot;first&quot; edition and are defective in respect of illustrations. The original figures were included as folding plates (presumably at the end of each &quot;fascicule&quot;). The online edition contains only Figs. 3, 4, 10, and 12 whereas the facsimile contains only Figs. 5 and 6.

===Other works===
* &quot;Francis Saveur&quot;, 1858.
* &quot;De la propriété intellectuelle&quot;, 1859, &quot;Journal des économistes&quot;.
* &quot;Paradoxes économiques I&quot;, 1860, &quot;Journal des économistes&quot;.
* &quot;Théorie critique de l&#x27;impôt&quot;, 1861.
* &quot;De l&#x27;impôt dans le Canton de Vaud&quot;, 1861.
* &quot;La bourse et le crédit&quot;, 1867, &quot;Paris Guide&quot;.
* &quot;Correspondance entre M. Jevons, professeur a Manchester, et M. Walras, professeur a Lausanne&quot;, 1874, &quot;Journal des économistes&quot;.
* &quot;Un nuovo ramo della matematica. Dell&#x27; applicazione delle matematiche all&#x27; economia politica&quot;, 1876, &quot;Giornale degli economisti&quot;.
* &quot;Théorie mathématique de la richesse sociale&quot;, 1883.
* &quot;Notice autobiographique de Léon Walras&quot;, 1893.
* &quot;Études d&#x27;économie sociale; Théorie de la répartition de la richesse sociale&quot;, 1896.
* &quot;Études d&#x27;économie politique appliquée; Théorie de la production de la richesse sociale&quot;, 1898.
* &quot;Théorie du crédit&quot;, 1898, &quot;Revue d&#x27;économie politique&quot;.
* &quot;Sur les équations de la circulation&quot;, 1899, &quot;Giornale degli economisti&quot;
* &quot;Cournot et l&#x27;Économique Mathématique&quot;, 1905, &quot;Gazette de Lausanne&quot;.
* &quot;La Paix par la Justice Sociale et le Libre Échange&quot;, 1907, &quot;Questions Pratiques de Legislation Ouvrière&quot;.
* &quot;L&#x27;état et le chemin de fer&quot; (1875).
* &quot;Leone Walras, Autobiografia&quot;, 1908, &quot;Giornale degli Economist&quot;i.
* &quot;Un initiateur en économie politique, A.A. Walras&quot;, 1908, &quot;La Revue du Mois&quot;.
* &quot;Économique et méchanique&quot;, 1909, &quot;Bulletin de la Société Vaudoise de Sciences Naturelles&quot;
* &quot;Correspondence of Léon Walras and related papers&quot; (ed. by William Jaffé, 3 vols.), 1965.

==See also==
* Leon Walras at Wikipedia France
* Walras&#x27;s law
* Walrasian auction
* General equilibrium
* Cost the limit of price
* Progressive theory of capital

==Note==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Jaffé, William, and Donald A. Walker (ed.) (1983). &quot;Essays on Walras&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Morishima, Michio (1977). &quot;Walras&#x27; economics : a pure theory of capital and money&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Medema S.G. &amp; Samuels W.J. (2003). &quot;The history of economic thought: a reader&quot; Routledge, London and New York.

==External links==

* Biography and major works
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13509" start="0" end="24" title="Léon Walras" label="Marie-Esprit-Léon Walras"/>
<link wikidata="Q747534" start="76" end="98" title="mathematical economics" label="mathematical economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="103" end="111" title="Georgist" label="Georgist"/>
<link wikidata="Q910816" start="131" end="155" title="Marginalism" label="marginal theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q312546" start="174" end="196" title="William Stanley Jevons" label="William Stanley Jevons"/>
<link wikidata="Q84177" start="201" end="212" title="Carl Menger" label="Carl Menger"/>
<link wikidata="Q282640" start="247" end="273" title="general equilibrium theory" label="general equilibrium theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q78477" start="572" end="589" title="Joseph Schumpeter" label="Joseph Schumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423059" start="653" end="664" title="tâtonnement" label="tâtonnement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11031" start="1037" end="1052" title="Vilfredo Pareto" label="Vilfredo Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q365858" start="1054" end="1067" title="Knut Wicksell" label="Knut Wicksell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555719" start="1072" end="1085" title="Gustav Cassel" label="Gustav Cassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184862" start="1087" end="1097" title="John Hicks" label="John Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q102454" start="1102" end="1116" title="Paul Samuelson" label="Paul Samuelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192592" start="1215" end="1228" title="Kenneth Arrow" label="Kenneth Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q210960" start="1233" end="1246" title="Gérard Debreu" label="Gérard Debreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q786234" start="1424" end="1438" title="Auguste Walras" label="Auguste Walras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189954" start="1648" end="1672" title="Mines ParisTech" label="École des Mines de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323572" start="1964" end="1977" title="social reform" label="social reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="1993" end="2000" title="Fabians" label="Fabians"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="2024" end="2039" title="nationalization" label="nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351853" start="2318" end="2333" title="consumption tax" label="consumption tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q323245" start="2426" end="2442" title="Augustin Cournot" label="Augustin Cournot"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="2531" end="2542" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397" start="2827" end="2835" title="Classical mechanics" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="2840" end="2859" title="celestial mechanics" label="celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="2878" end="2895" title="Political Economy" label="Political Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q658975" start="2903" end="2925" title="University of Lausanne" label="University of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492519" start="2964" end="2979" title="Lausanne school" label="Lausanne school"/>
<link wikidata="Q11031" start="3019" end="3034" title="Vilfredo Pareto" label="Vilfredo Pareto"/>
<link wikidata="Q910816" start="3625" end="3636" title="Marginalism" label="marginalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q312546" start="3720" end="3742" title="William Stanley Jevons" label="William Stanley Jevons"/>
<link wikidata="Q84177" start="3747" end="3758" title="Carl Menger" label="Carl Menger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089697" start="4081" end="4098" title="Walras&amp;#x27;s law" label="Walras&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q282640" start="4591" end="4617" title="general equilibrium theory" label="general equilibrium theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4676" end="4688" title="Léon Walras#Major works" label="next section"/>
<link wikidata="Q323245" start="4770" end="4783" title="A. A. Cournot" label="A. A. Cournot"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="4876" end="4893" title="supply and demand" label="supply and demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713661" start="4897" end="4902" title="Market clearing" label="clear"/>
<link wikidata="Q645415" start="6001" end="6010" title="Numéraire" label="numeraire"/>
<link wikidata="Q842271" start="6126" end="6142" title="marginal utility" label="marginal utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q702933" start="8397" end="8420" title="Arrow–Debreu model" label="A more rigorous version"/>
<link wikidata="Q4275767" start="8468" end="8483" title="Lionel McKenzie" label="Lionel McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q192592" start="8497" end="8510" title="Kenneth Arrow" label="Kenneth Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q210960" start="8515" end="8528" title="Gérard Debreu" label="Gérard Debreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423059" start="8574" end="8591" title="Walrasian auction" label="Walrasian auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q243534" start="10310" end="10324" title="George Stigler" label="George Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q78477" start="10582" end="10592" title="Schumpeter" label="Schumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q24586" start="10858" end="10868" title="half title" label="half title"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16151" end="16182" title=":fr:Léon Walras" label="Leon Walras at Wikipedia France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089697" start="16185" end="16202" title="Walras&amp;#x27;s law" label="Walras&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423059" start="16205" end="16222" title="Walrasian auction" label="Walrasian auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q282640" start="16225" end="16244" title="General equilibrium" label="General equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174823" start="16247" end="16270" title="Cost the limit of price" label="Cost the limit of price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248878" start="16273" end="16302" title="Progressive theory of capital" label="Progressive theory of capital"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46770" wikidata="Q2875704" url="?curid=46770" title="Fixed-wing aircraft">
<text>A fixed-wing aircraft is a heavier-than-air aircraft, such as an airplane, which is capable of flight using aerodynamic lift. Fixed-wing aircraft are distinct from rotary-wing aircraft (in which a rotor mounted on a spinning shaft generates lift), and ornithopters (in which the wings oscillate to generate lift). The wings of a fixed-wing aircraft are not necessarily rigid; kites, hang gliders, variable-sweep wing aircraft, and airplanes that use wing morphing are all classified as fixed wing.

Gliding fixed-wing aircraft, including free-flying gliders and tethered kites, can use moving air to gain altitude. Powered fixed-wing aircraft (airplanes) that gain forward thrust from an engine include powered paragliders, powered hang gliders and ground effect vehicles. Most fixed-wing aircraft are operated by a pilot, but some are unmanned and controlled either remotely or autonomously.

==History==
===Kites===
Kites were used approximately 2,800 years ago in China, where kite building materials were available. Leaf kites may have been flown earlier in what is now Sulawesi, based on their interpretation of cave paintings on nearby Muna Island. By at least 549 AD paper kites were flying, as recorded that year, a paper kite was used as a message for a rescue mission. Ancient and medieval Chinese sources report kites used for measuring distances, testing the wind, lifting men, signaling, and communication for military operations.
Kite stories were brought to Europe by Marco Polo towards the end of the 13th century, and kites were brought back by sailors from Japan and Malaysia in the 16th and 17th centuries. Although initially regarded as curiosities, by the 18th and 19th centuries kites were used for scientific research.

===Gliders and powered devices===
Around 400 BC in Greece, Archytas was reputed to have designed and built the first self-propelled flying device, shaped like a bird and propelled by a jet of what was probably steam, said to have flown some . This machine may have been suspended during its flight.

One of the earliest attempts with gliders was by 11th-century monk Eilmer of Malmesbury, which failed. A 17th-century account states that 9th-century poet Abbas Ibn Firnas made a similar attempt, though no earlier sources record this event.
In 1799, Sir George Cayley laid out the concept of the modern airplane as a fixed-wing machine with systems for lift, propulsion, and control. Cayley was building and flying models of fixed-wing aircraft as early as 1803, and built a successful passenger-carrying glider in 1853. In 1856, Frenchman Jean-Marie Le Bris made the first powered flight, had his glider L&#x27;Albatros artificiel towed by a horse along a beach. In 1884, American John J. Montgomery made controlled flights in a glider as a part of a series of gliders he built between 1883 and 1886. Other aviators who made similar flights at that time were Otto Lilienthal, Percy Pilcher, and protégés of Octave Chanute.

In the 1890s, Lawrence Hargrave conducted research on wing structures and developed a box kite that lifted the weight of a man. His designs were widely adopted. He also developed a type of rotary aircraft engine, but did not create a powered fixed-wing aircraft.

===Powered flight===

Sir Hiram Maxim built a craft that weighed 3.5 tons, with a 110-foot (34-meter) wingspan powered by two 360-horsepower (270-kW) steam engines driving two propellers. In 1894, his machine was tested with overhead rails to prevent it from rising. The test showed that it had enough lift to take off. The craft was uncontrollable, and Maxim abandoned work on it.

The Wright brothers&#x27; flights in 1903 with their &quot;Flyer I&quot; are recognized by the &quot;Fédération Aéronautique Internationale&quot; (FAI), the standard setting and record-keeping body for aeronautics, as &quot;the first sustained and controlled heavier-than-air powered flight&quot;. By 1905, the Wright Flyer III was capable of fully controllable, stable flight for substantial periods.

In 1906, Brazilian inventor Alberto Santos Dumont designed, built and piloted an aircraft that set the first world record recognized by the Aéro-Club de France by flying the 14 bis in less than 22 seconds. The flight was certified by the FAI.

The Bleriot VIII design of 1908 was an early aircraft design that had the modern monoplane tractor configuration. It had movable tail surfaces controlling both yaw and pitch, a form of roll control supplied either by wing warping or by ailerons and controlled by its pilot with a joystick and rudder bar. It was an important predecessor of his later Bleriot XI Channel-crossing aircraft of the summer of 1909.
===World War I===

World War I served initiated the use of aircraft as weapons and observation platforms. The earliest known aerial victory with a synchronized machine gun-armed fighter aircraft occurred in 1915, flown by German Luftstreitkräfte Lieutenant Kurt Wintgens. Fighter aces appeared; the greatest (by number of air victories) was Manfred von Richthofen.

Alcock and Brown crossed the Atlantic non-stop for the first time in 1919. The first commercial flights traveled between the United States and Canada in 1919.

===Interwar aviation; the &quot;Golden Age&quot;===

The so-called Golden Age of Aviation occurred between the two World Wars, during which updated interpretations of earlier breakthroughs. Innovations include Hugo Junkers&#x27; all-metal air frames in 1915 leading to multi-engine aircraft of up to 60+ meter wingspan sizes by the early 1930s, adoption of the mostly air-cooled radial engine as a practical aircraft power plant alongside V-12 liquid-cooled aviation engines, and longer and longer flights – as with a Vickers Vimy in 1919, followed months later by the U.S. Navy&#x27;s NC-4 transatlantic flight; culminating in May 1927 with Charles Lindbergh&#x27;s solo trans-Atlantic flight in the Spirit of St. Louis spurring ever-longer flight attempts.

===World War II===

Airplanes had a presence in the major battles of World War II. They were an essential component of military strategies, such as the German Blitzkrieg or the American and Japanese aircraft carrier campaigns of the Pacific.

Military gliders were developed and used in several campaigns, but were limited by the high casualty rate encountered. The Focke-Achgelis Fa 330 &quot;Bachstelze&quot; (Wagtail) rotor kite of 1942 was notable for its use by German U-boats.

Before and during the war, British and German designers worked on jet engines. The first jet aircraft to fly, in 1939, was the German Heinkel He 178. In 1943, the first operational jet fighter, the Messerschmitt Me 262, went into service with the German Luftwaffe. Later in the war the British Gloster Meteor entered service, but never saw action – top air speeds for that era went as high as , with the early July 1944 unofficial record flight of the German Me 163B V18 rocket fighter prototype.

===Postwar===
In October 1947, the Bell X-1 was the first aircraft to exceed the speed of sound, flown by Chuck Yeager.

In 1948–49, aircraft transported supplies during the Berlin Blockade. New aircraft types, such as the B-52, were produced during the Cold War.

The first jet airliner, the de Havilland Comet, was introduced in 1952, followed by the Soviet Tupolev Tu-104 in 1956. The Boeing 707, the first widely successful commercial jet, was in commercial service for more than 50 years, from 1958 to 2010. The Boeing 747 was the world&#x27;s largest passenger aircraft from 1970 until it was surpassed by the Airbus A380 in 2005. The most successful aircraft is the Douglas DC-3 and its military version, the C-47, a medium sized twin engine passenger or transport aircraft that has been in service since 1936 and is still used throughout the world. Some of the hundreds of versions found other purposes, like the AC-47, a Vietnam War era gunship, which is still used in the Colombian Air Force.

==Types==
===Airplane/aeroplane===
An airplane (aeroplane or plane) is a powered fixed-wing aircraft propelled by thrust from a jet engine or propeller. Planes come in many sizes, shapes, and wing configurations. Uses include recreation, transportation of goods and people, military, and research.

====Seaplane====

A seaplane (hydroplane) is capable of taking off and landing (alighting) on water. Seaplanes that can also operate from dry land are a subclass called amphibian aircraft. Seaplanes and amphibians divide into two categories: float planes and flying boats.

* A float plane is similar to a land-based airplane. The fuselage is not specialized. The wheels are replaced/enveloped by floats, allowing the craft to make remain afloat for water landings.
* A flying boat is a seaplane with a watertight hull for the lower (ventral) areas of its fuselage. The fuselage lands and then rests directly on the water&#x27;s surface, held afloat by the hull. It does not need additional floats for buoyancy, although small underwing floats or fuselage-mounted sponsons may be used to stabilize it. Large seaplanes are usually flying boats, embodying most classic amphibian aircraft designs.

====Powered gliders====

Many forms of glider may include a small power plant. These include:
*Motor glider – a conventional glider or sailplane with an auxiliary power plant that may be used when in flight to increase performance.
*Powered hang glider – a hang glider with a power plant added.
*Powered parachute – a paraglider type of parachute with an integrated air frame, seat, undercarriage and power plant hung beneath.
*Powered paraglider or paramotor – a paraglider with a power plant suspended behind the pilot.

====Ground effect vehicle====

A ground effect vehicle (GEV) flies close to the terrain, making use of the ground effect – the interaction between the wings and the surface. Some GEVs are able to fly higher out of ground effect (OGE) when required – these are classed as powered fixed-wing aircraft.

===Glider===
A glider is a heavier-than-air craft whose free flight does not require an engine. A sailplane is a fixed-wing glider designed for soaring – gaining height using updrafts of air and to fly for long periods.

Gliders are mainly used for recreation but have found use for purposes such as aerodynamics research, warfare and spacecraft recovery.

Motor gliders are equipped with a limited propulsion system for takeoff, or to extend flight duration.

As is the case with planes, gliders come in diverse forms with varied wings, aerodynamic efficiency, pilot location, and controls. 

Large gliders are most commonly born aloft by a tow-plane or by a winch. Military gliders have been used in combat to deliver troops and equipment, while specialized gliders have been used in atmospheric and aerodynamic research. Rocket-powered aircraft and spaceplanes have made unpowered landings similar to a glider.

Gliders and sailplanes that are used for the sport of gliding have high aerodynamic efficiency. The highest lift-to-drag ratio is 70:1, though 50:1 is common. After take-off, further altitude can be gained through the skillful exploitation of rising air. Flights of thousands of kilometers at average speeds over 200 km/h have been achieved.

One small-scale example of a glider is the paper airplane. An ordinary sheet of paper can be folded into an aerodynamic shape fairly easily; its low mass relative to its surface area reduces the required lift for flight, allowing it to glide some distance.

Gliders and sailplanes share many design elements and aerodynamic principles with powered aircraft. For example, the Horten H.IV was a tailless flying wing glider, and the delta-winged Space Shuttle orbiter glided during its descent phase. Many gliders adopt similar control surfaces and instruments as airplanes.

====Types ====
The main application of modern glider aircraft is sport and recreation.

=====Sailplane=====

Gliders were developed in the 1920s for recreational purposes. As pilots began to understand how to use rising air, sailplane gliders were developed with a high lift-to-drag ratio. These allowed the craft to glide to the next source of &quot;lift&quot;, increasing their range. This gave rise to the popular sport of gliding.

Early gliders were built mainly of wood and metal, later replaced by composite materials incorporating glass, carbon or aramid fibers. To minimize drag, these types have a streamlined fuselage and long narrow wings incorporating a high aspect ratio. Single-seat and two-seat gliders are available.

Initially, training was done by short &quot;hops&quot; in primary gliders, which have no cockpit and minimal instruments. Since shortly after World War II, training is done in two-seat dual control gliders, but high-performance two-seaters can make long flights. Originally skids were used for landing, later replaced by wheels, often retractable. Gliders known as motor gliders are designed for unpowered flight, but can deploy piston, rotary, jet or electric engines. Gliders are classified by the FAI for competitions into glider competition classes mainly on the basis of wingspan and flaps.

A class of ultralight sailplanes, including some known as microlift gliders and some known as airchairs, has been defined by the FAI based on weight. They are light enough to be transported easily, and can be flown without licensing in some countries. Ultralight gliders have performance similar to hang gliders, but offer some crash safety as the pilot can strap into an upright seat within a deform-able structure. Landing is usually on one or two wheels which distinguishes these craft from hang gliders. Most are built by individual designers and hobbyists.

=====Military gliders=====

Military gliders were used during World War II for carrying troops (glider infantry) and heavy equipment to combat zones. The gliders were towed into the air and most of the way to their target by transport planes, e.g. C-47 Dakota, or by one-time bombers that had been relegated to secondary activities, e.g. Short Stirling. The advantage over paratroopers were that heavy equipment could be landed and that troops were quickly assembled rather than dispersed over a parachute drop zone. The gliders were treated as disposable, constructed from inexpensive materials such as wood, though a few were re-used. By the time of the Korean War, transport aircraft had become larger and more efficient so that even light tanks could be dropped by parachute, obsoleting gliders.

=====Research gliders=====
Even after the development of powered aircraft, gliders continued to be used for aviation research. The NASA Paresev Rogallo flexible wing was developed to investigate alternative methods of recovering spacecraft. Although this application was abandoned, publicity inspired hobbyists to adapt the flexible-wing airfoil for hang gliders.

Initial research into many types of fixed-wing craft, including flying wings and lifting bodies was also carried out using unpowered prototypes.

=====Hang glider=====

A hang glider is a glider aircraft in which the pilot is suspended in a harness suspended from the air frame, and exercises control by shifting body weight in opposition to a control frame. Hang gliders are typically made of an aluminum alloy or composite-framed fabric wing. Pilots can soar for hours, gain thousands of meters of altitude in thermal updrafts, perform aerobatics, and glide cross-country for hundreds of kilometers.

=====Paraglider=====
A paraglider is a lightweight, free-flying, foot-launched glider with no rigid body. The pilot is suspended in a harness below a hollow fabric wing whose shape is formed by its suspension lines. Air entering vents in the front of the wing and the aerodynamic forces of the air flowing over the outside power the craft. Paragliding is most often a recreational activity.

====Unmanned gliders====
A paper plane is a toy aircraft (usually a glider) made out of paper or paperboard.

Model glider aircraft are models of aircraft using lightweight materials such as polystyrene and balsa wood. Designs range from simple glider aircraft to accurate scale models, some of which can be very large.

Glide bombs are bombs with aerodynamic surfaces to allow a gliding flight path rather than a ballistic one. This enables stand-off aircraft to attack a target from a distance.

===Kite===

A kite is a tethered aircraft held aloft by wind that blows over its wing(s). High pressure below the wing deflects the airflow downwards. This deflection generates horizontal drag in the direction of the wind. The resultant force vector from the lift and drag force components is opposed by the tension of the tether.

Kites are mostly flown for recreational purposes, but have many other uses. Early pioneers such as the Wright Brothers and J.W. Dunne sometimes flew an aircraft as a kite in order to confirm its flight characteristics, before adding an engine and flight controls.

====Applications====
=====Military =====
Kites have been used for signaling, for delivery of munitions, and for observation, by lifting an observer above the field of battle, and by using kite aerial photography.

=====Science and meteorology=====
Kites have been used for scientific purposes, such as Benjamin Franklin&#x27;s famous experiment proving that lightning is electricity. Kites were the precursors to the traditional aircraft, and were instrumental in the development of early flying craft. Alexander Graham Bell experimented with large man-lifting kites, as did the Wright brothers and Lawrence Hargrave. Kites had a historical role in lifting scientific instruments to measure atmospheric conditions for weather forecasting.

=====Radio aerials and light beacons=====
Kites can be used to carry radio antennas. This method was used for the reception station of the first transatlantic transmission by Marconi. Captive balloons may be more convenient for such experiments, because kite-carried antennas require strong wind, which may be not always available with heavy equipment and a ground conductor.

Kites can be used to carry light sources such as light sticks or battery-powered lights.

=====Kite traction=====

Kites can be used to pull people and vehicles downwind. Efficient foil-type kites such as power kites can also be used to sail upwind under the same principles as used by other sailing craft, provided that lateral forces on the ground or in the water are redirected as with the keels, center boards, wheels and ice blades of traditional sailing craft. In the last two decades, kite sailing sports have become popular, such as kite buggying, kite landboarding, kite boating and kite surfing. Snow kiting is also popular.

Kite sailing opens several possibilities not available in traditional sailing:

* Wind speeds are greater at higher altitudes
* Kites may be maneuvered dynamically, which dramatically increases the available force
* Mechanical structures are not needed to withstand bending forces; vehicles/hulls can be light or eliminated.

=====Power generation=====

Research and development projects investigate kites for harnessing high altitude wind currents for electricity generation.

===== Cultural uses =====
Kite festivals are a popular form of entertainment throughout the world. They include local events, traditional festivals and major international festivals.

====Designs====

*Bermuda kite
*Bowed kite, e.g. Rokkaku
*Cellular or box kite
*Chapi-chapi
*Delta kite
*Foil, parafoil or bow kite
*Malay kite see also wau bulan
*Tetrahedral kite

====Types====

*Expanded polystyrene kite
*Fighter kite
*Indoor kite
*Inflatable single-line kite
*Kytoon
*Man-lifting kite
*Rogallo parawing kite
*Stunt (sport) kite
*Water kite

==Characteristics==
===Air frame===

The structural element of a fixed-wing aircraft is the air frame. It varies according to the aircraft&#x27;s type, purpose, and technology. Early airframes were made of wood with fabric wing surfaces, When engines became available for powered flight, their mounts were made of metal. As speeds increased metal became more common until by the end of World War II, all-metal (and glass) aircraft were common. In modern times, composite materials became more common.

Typical structural elements include:

* One or more mostly horizontal wings, often with an airfoil cross-section. The wing deflects air downward as the aircraft moves forward, generating lifting force to support it in flight. The wing also provides lateral stability to stop the aircraft level in steady flight. Other roles are to hold the fuel and mount the engines.

* A fuselage, typically a long, thin body, usually with tapered or rounded ends to make its shape aerodynamically slippery. The fuselage joins the other parts of the air frame and contains the payload, and flight systems.
* A vertical stabilizer or fin is a rigid surface mounted at the rear of the plane and typically protruding above it. The fin stabilizes the plane&#x27;s yaw (turn left or right) and mounts the rudder which controls its rotation along that axis.
* A horizontal stabilizer, usually mounted at the tail near the vertical stabilizer. The horizontal stabilizer is used to stabilize the plane&#x27;s pitch (tilt up or down) and mounts the elevators that provide pitch control.
* Landing gear, a set of wheels, skids, or floats that support the plane while it is not in flight. On seaplanes, the bottom of the fuselage or floats (pontoons) support it while on the water. On some planes, the landing gear retracts during the flight to reduce drag.

===Wings===
The wings of a fixed-wing aircraft are static planes extending to either side of the aircraft. When the aircraft travels forwards, air flows over the wings that are shaped to create lift.

====Structure====

Kites and some lightweight gliders and airplanes have flexible wing surfaces that are stretched across a frame and made rigid by the lift forces exerted by the airflow over them. Larger aircraft have rigid wing surfaces.

Whether flexible or rigid, most wings have a strong frame to give them shape and to transfer lift from the wing surface to the rest of the aircraft. The main structural elements are one or more spars running from root to tip, and ribs running from the leading (front) to the trailing (rear) edge.

Early airplane engines had little power and light weight was critical. Also, early airfoil sections were thin, and could not support a strong frame. Until the 1930s, most wings were so fragile that external bracing struts and wires were added. As engine power increased, wings could be made heavy and strong enough that bracing was unnecessary. Such an unbraced wing is called a cantilever wing.

====Configuration====
The number and shape of wings vary widely. Some designs blend the wing with the fuselage, while left and right wings separated by the fuselage are more common. 

Occasionally more wings have been used, such as the three-winged triplane from World War I. Four-winged quadruplanes and other multiplane designs have had little success.

Most planes are monoplanes, with one or two parallel wings. Biplanes and triplanes stack one wing above the other. Tandem wings place one wing behind the other, possibly joined at the tips. When the available engine power increased during the 1920s and 1930s and bracing was no longer needed, the unbraced or cantilever monoplane became the most common form.

The planform is the shape when seen from above/below. To be aerodynamically efficient, wings are straight with a long span, but a short chord (high aspect ratio). To be structurally efficient, and hence lightweight, wingspan must be as small as possible, but offer enough area to provide lift.

To travel at transonic speeds, variable geometry wings change orientation, angling backward to reduce drag from supersonic shock waves. The variable-sweep wing transforms between an efficient straight configuration for takeoff and landing, to a low-drag swept configuration for high-speed flight. Other forms of variable planform have been flown, but none have gone beyond the research stage. The swept wing is a straight wing swept backward or forwards.

The delta wing is a triangular shape that serves various purposes. As a flexible Rogallo wing, it allows a stable shape under aerodynamic forces, and is often used for kites and other ultralight craft. It is supersonic capable, combining high strength with low drag.

Wings are typically hollow, also serving as fuel tanks. They are equipped with flaps, which allow the wing to increase/decrease drag/lift, for take-off and landing, and acting in opposition, to change direction.

===Fuselage===
The fuselage is typically long and thin, usually with tapered or rounded ends to make its shape aerodynamically smooth. Most fixed-wing aircraft have a single fuselage. Others may have multiple fuselages, or the fuselage may be fitted with booms on either side of the tail to allow the extreme rear of the fuselage to be utilized.

The fuselage typically carries the flight crew, passengers, cargo, and sometimes fuel and engine(s). Gliders typically omit fuel and engines, although some variations such as motor gliders and rocket gliders have them for temporary or optional use.

Pilots of manned commercial fixed-wing aircraft control them from inside a cockpit within the fuselage, typically located at the front/top, equipped with controls, windows, and instruments, separated from passengers by a secure door. In small aircraft, the passengers typically sit behind the pilot(s) in the cabin, Occasionally, a passenger may sit beside or in front of the pilot. Larger passenger aircraft have a separate passenger cabin or occasionally cabins that are physically separated from the cockpit.

Aircraft often have two or more pilots, with one in overall command (the &quot;pilot&quot;) and one or more &quot;co-pilots&quot;. On larger aircraft a navigator is typically also seated in the cockpit as well. Some military or specialized aircraft may have other flight crew members in the cockpit as well.

===Wings vs. bodies===

====Flying wing====
A flying wing is a tailless aircraft that has no distinct fuselage, housing the crew, payload, and equipment inside.

The flying wing configuration was studied extensively in the 1930s and 1940s, notably by Jack Northrop and Cheston L. Eshelman in the United States, and Alexander Lippisch and the Horten brothers in Germany. After the war, numerous experimental designs were based on the flying wing concept. General interest continued into the 1950s, but designs did not offer a great advantage in range and presented technical problems. The flying wing is most practical for designs in the slow-to-medium speed range, and drew continual interest as a tactical airlifter design.

Interest in flying wings reemerged in the 1980s due to their potentially low radar cross-sections. Stealth technology relies on shapes that reflect radar waves only in certain directions, thus making it harder to detect. This approach eventually led to the Northrop B-2 Spirit stealth bomber (pictured). The flying wing&#x27;s aerodynamics are not the primary concern. Computer-controlled fly-by-wire systems compensated for many of the aerodynamic drawbacks, enabling an efficient and stable long-range aircraft.
====Blended wing body====
Blended wing body aircraft have a flattened airfoil-shaped body, which produces most of the lift to keep itself aloft, and distinct and separate wing structures, though the wings are blended with the body.

Blended wing bodied aircraft incorporate design features from both fuselage and flying wing designs. The purported advantages of the blended wing body approach are efficient, high-lift wings and a wide, airfoil-shaped body. This enables the entire craft to contribute to lift generation with potentially increased fuel economy.

====Lifting body====
A lifting body is a configuration in which the body produces lift. In contrast to a flying wing, which is a wing with minimal or no conventional fuselage, a lifting body can be thought of as a fuselage with little or no conventional wing. Whereas a flying wing seeks to maximize cruise efficiency at subsonic speeds by eliminating non-lifting surfaces, lifting bodies generally minimize the drag and structure of a wing for subsonic, supersonic, and hypersonic flight, or, spacecraft re-entry. All of these flight regimes pose challenges for flight stability.

Lifting bodies were a major area of research in the 1960s and 1970s as a means to build small and lightweight manned spacecraft. The US built lifting body rocket planes to test the concept, as well as several rocket-launched re-entry vehicles. Interest waned as the US Air Force lost interest in the manned mission, and major development ended during the Space Shuttle design process when it became clear that highly shaped fuselages made it difficult to fit fuel tanks.
===Empennage and foreplane===

The classic airfoil section wing is unstable in flight. Flexible-wing planes often rely on an anchor line or the weight of a pilot hanging beneath to maintain the correct attitude. Some free-flying types use an adapted airfoil that is stable, or other mechanisms including electronic artificial stability.

In order to achieve trim, stability, and control, most fixed-wing types have an empennage comprising a fin and rudder that act horizontally, and a tailplane and elevator that act vertically. This is so common that it is known as the conventional layout. Sometimes two or more fins are spaced out along the tailplane.
Some types have a horizontal &quot;canard&quot; foreplane ahead of the main wing, instead of behind it. This foreplane may contribute to the trim, stability or control of the aircraft, or to several of these.

===Aircraft controls===

====Kite control====
Kites are controlled by one or more tethers.

====Free-flying aircraft controls====

Gliders and airplanes have sophisticated control systems, especially if they are piloted.
The controls allow the pilot to direct the aircraft in the air and on the ground. Typically these are:
*The yoke or joystick controls rotation of the plane about the pitch and roll axes. A yoke resembles a steering wheel. The pilot can pitch the plane down by pushing on the yoke or joystick, and pitch the plane up by pulling on it. Rolling the plane is accomplished by turning the yoke in the direction of the desired roll, or by tilting the joystick in that direction.
*Rudder pedals control rotation of the plane about the yaw axis. Two pedals pivot so that when one is pressed forward the other moves backward, and vice versa. The pilot presses on the right rudder pedal to make the plane yaw to the right, and pushes on the left pedal to make it yaw to the left. The rudder is used mainly to balance the plane in turns, or to compensate for winds or other effects that push the plane about the yaw axis.
*On powered types, an engine stop control (&quot;fuel cutoff&quot;, for example) and, usually, a Throttle or thrust lever and other controls, such as a fuel-mixture control (to compensate for air density changes with altitude change).

Other common controls include:
*Flap levers, which are used to control the deflection position of flaps on the wings.
*Spoiler levers, which are used to control the position of spoilers on the wings, and to arm their automatic deployment in planes designed to deploy them upon landing. The spoilers reduce lift for landing.
*Trim controls, which usually take the form of knobs or wheels and are used to adjust pitch, roll, or yaw trim. These are often connected to small airfoils on the trailing edge of the control surfaces and are called &quot;trim tabs&quot;. Trim is used to reduce the amount of pressure on the control forces needed to maintain a steady course.
*On wheeled types, brakes are used to slow and stop the plane on the ground, and sometimes for turns on the ground.

A craft may have two pilot seats with dual controls, allowing two to take turns. 

The control system may allow full or partial automation, such as an autopilot, a wing leveler, or a flight management system. An unmanned aircraft has no pilot and is controlled remotely or via gyroscopes, computers/sensors or other forms of autonomous control.

===Cockpit instrumentation===
On manned fixed-wing aircraft, instruments provide information to the pilots, including flight, engines, navigation, communications, and other aircraft systems that may be installed.

The six basic instruments, sometimes referred to as the six pack, are:
* The airspeed indicator (ASI) shows the speed at which the plane is moving through the air.
* The attitude indicator (AI), sometimes called the artificial horizon, indicates the exact orientation of the aircraft about its pitch and roll axes.
* The altimeter indicates the altitude or height of the plane above mean sea level (AMSL).
* The vertical speed indicator (VSI), or variometer, shows the rate at which the plane is climbing or descending.
* The heading indicator (HI), sometimes called the directional gyro (DG), shows the magnetic compass orientation of the fuselage. The direction is affected by wind conditions and magnetic declination.
* The turn coordinator (TC), or turn and bank indicator, helps the pilot to control the plane in a coordinated attitude while turning.

Other cockpit instruments include:
* A two-way radio, to enable communications with other planes and with air traffic control. 
* A horizontal situation indicator (HSI) indicates the position and movement of the plane as seen from above with respect to the ground, including course/heading and other information.
* Instruments showing the status of the plane&#x27;s engines (operating speed, thrust, temperature, and other variables).
* Combined display systems such as primary flight displays or navigation aids.
* Information displays such as onboard weather radar displays.
* A radio direction finder (RDF), to indicate the direction to one or more radio beacons, which can be used to determine the plane&#x27;s position.
* A satellite navigation (satnav) system, to provide an accurate position.
Some or all of these instruments may appear on a computer display and be operated with touches, ala a phone.

==See also==

* Aircraft flight mechanics
* Airliner
* Aviation
* Aviation and the environment
* Aviation history
* Fuel efficiency
* List of altitude records reached by different aircraft types
* Maneuvering speed
* Rotorcraft

==References==

===Notes===
* In 1903, when the Wright brothers used the word, &quot;aeroplane&quot; (a British English term that can also mean airplane in American English) meant wing, not the whole aircraft. See text of their patent. Patent 821,393 – Wright brothers&#x27; patent for &quot;Flying Machine&quot;

===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* Blatner, David. &quot;The Flying Book: Everything You&#x27;ve Ever Wondered About Flying on Airplanes&quot;. 

==External links==
* The airplane centre
* Airliners.net
* Aerospaceweb.org
* How Airplanes Work – Howstuffworks.com
* Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum&#x27;s How Things Fly website
*&quot;Hops and Flights – a Roll Call of Early Powered Take-offs&quot; a 1959 &quot;Flight&quot; article</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="2" end="21" title="Fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="44" end="52" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="65" end="73" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q206021" start="95" end="101" title="flight" label="flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="108" end="124" title="Lift (force)" label="aerodynamic lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q949801" start="164" end="184" title="rotorcraft" label="rotary-wing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343028" start="197" end="202" title="Helicopter rotor" label="rotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q667431" start="252" end="263" title="ornithopter" label="ornithopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="383" end="394" title="hang glider" label="hang glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q838974" start="397" end="416" title="variable-sweep wing" label="variable-sweep wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417140" start="450" end="463" title="wing morphing" label="wing morphing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705171" start="499" end="506" title="Gliding flight" label="Gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="550" end="557" title="Glider (aircraft)" label="gliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q42861" start="571" end="575" title="kite" label="kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="615" end="622" title="Powered aircraft" label="Powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="673" end="679" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="688" end="694" title="aircraft engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074276" start="703" end="721" title="powered paraglider" label="powered paraglider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236691" start="724" end="743" title="powered hang glider" label="powered hang glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q309398" start="749" end="770" title="ground effect vehicle" label="ground effect vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095549" start="816" end="821" title="pilot (aviator)" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="836" end="844" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436167" start="867" end="875" title="Radio control" label="remotely"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="1074" end="1082" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q428076" start="1142" end="1153" title="Muna Island" label="Muna Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="1483" end="1493" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1585" end="1593" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1784" end="1800" title="Ancient Greece" label="400 BC in Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q202001" start="1802" end="1810" title="Archytas" label="Archytas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="2077" end="2084" title="Glider aircraft" label="gliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q615250" start="2110" end="2130" title="Eilmer of Malmesbury" label="Eilmer of Malmesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q305975" start="2198" end="2214" title="Abbas Ibn Firnas" label="Abbas Ibn Firnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q319362" start="2293" end="2310" title="Sir George Cayley" label="Sir George Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="2548" end="2554" title="Glider aircraft" label="glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566527" start="2583" end="2601" title="Jean-Marie Le Bris" label="Jean-Marie Le Bris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111121" start="2725" end="2743" title="John J. Montgomery" label="John J. Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q57162" start="2903" end="2918" title="Otto Lilienthal" label="Otto Lilienthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930595" start="2920" end="2933" title="Percy Pilcher" label="Percy Pilcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351565" start="2951" end="2965" title="Octave Chanute" label="Octave Chanute"/>
<link wikidata="Q522744" start="2982" end="2999" title="Lawrence Hargrave" label="Lawrence Hargrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356218" start="3054" end="3062" title="box kite" label="box kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q315601" start="3254" end="3269" title="Sir Hiram Maxim" label="Sir Hiram Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="3619" end="3634" title="Wright brothers" label="Wright brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q688605" start="3668" end="3687" title="Wright Flyer" label="&amp;quot;Flyer I&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q214130" start="3716" end="3754" title="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale" label="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="3817" end="3828" title="aeronautics" label="aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973387" start="3926" end="3942" title="Wright Flyer III" label="Wright Flyer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q313211" start="4046" end="4067" title="Alberto Santos Dumont" label="Alberto Santos Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q647341" start="4078" end="4107" title="Santos-Dumont 14-bis" label="built and piloted an aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478857" start="4158" end="4177" title="Aéro-Club de France" label="Aéro-Club de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q647341" start="4192" end="4198" title="14 bis" label="14 bis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907456" start="4266" end="4278" title="Bleriot VIII" label="Bleriot VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="4343" end="4352" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831650" start="4353" end="4374" title="tractor configuration" label="tractor configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="4542" end="4550" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q887098" start="4612" end="4622" title="Bleriot XI" label="Bleriot XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="4623" end="4630" title="English Channel" label="Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4691" end="4702" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="4832" end="4843" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="4850" end="4866" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighter aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q678503" start="4901" end="4917" title="Luftstreitkräfte" label="Luftstreitkräfte"/>
<link wikidata="Q75225" start="4929" end="4942" title="Kurt Wintgens" label="Kurt Wintgens"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="4944" end="4956" title="Fighter aces" label="Fighter aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701" start="5013" end="5035" title="Manfred von Richthofen" label="Manfred von Richthofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q431538" start="5038" end="5054" title="Alcock and Brown" label="Alcock and Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q60363" start="5408" end="5420" title="Hugo Junkers" label="Hugo Junkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q315769" start="5448" end="5455" title="Junkers J 1" label="in 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q433102" start="5489" end="5516" title="Tupolev ANT-20" label="of up to 60+ meter wingspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214098" start="5577" end="5590" title="radial engine" label="radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q431538" start="5714" end="5736" title="Transatlantic flight of Alcock and Brown" label="a Vickers Vimy in 1919"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5763" end="5809" title="Curtiss NC-4#The transatlantic flight" label="the U.S. Navy&amp;#x27;s NC-4 transatlantic flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="5840" end="5857" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q939784" start="5899" end="5918" title="Spirit of St. Louis" label="Spirit of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="6117" end="6127" title="Blitzkrieg" label="Blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="6157" end="6173" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q601924" start="6201" end="6216" title="Military glider" label="Military glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q564171" start="6324" end="6345" title="Focke-Achgelis Fa 330" label="Focke-Achgelis Fa 330"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="6432" end="6439" title="U-boats" label="U-boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="6508" end="6518" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="6531" end="6543" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q161540" start="6576" end="6590" title="Heinkel He 178" label="Heinkel He 178"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="6640" end="6660" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Messerschmitt Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="6696" end="6705" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q140318" start="6736" end="6750" title="Gloster Meteor" label="Gloster Meteor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6901" end="6912" title="Messerschmitt Me 163#Later versions" label="Me 163B V18"/>
<link wikidata="Q223365" start="6975" end="6983" title="Bell X-1" label="Bell X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q271939" start="7046" end="7058" title="Chuck Yeager" label="Chuck Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q151349" start="7114" end="7129" title="Berlin Blockade" label="Berlin Blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="7163" end="7167" title="B-52" label="B-52"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="7194" end="7202" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120025" start="7215" end="7227" title="jet airliner" label="jet airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q26159" start="7233" end="7251" title="de Havilland Comet" label="de Havilland Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q506090" start="7300" end="7314" title="Tupolev Tu-104" label="Tupolev Tu-104"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394" start="7328" end="7338" title="Boeing 707" label="Boeing 707"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="7457" end="7467" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830" start="7556" end="7567" title="Airbus A380" label="Airbus A380"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="7613" end="7625" title="Douglas DC-3" label="Douglas DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="7656" end="7660" title="C-47" label="C-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720258" start="7861" end="7866" title="Douglas AC-47 Spooky" label="AC-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="7870" end="7881" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q500407" start="7922" end="7941" title="Colombian Air Force" label="Colombian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q533668" start="8058" end="8064" title="thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="8072" end="8082" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q922654" start="8086" end="8095" title="Propeller (aircraft)" label="propeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q854248" start="8299" end="8309" title="takeoff" label="taking off"/>
<link wikidata="Q17164719" start="8314" end="8321" title="water landing" label="landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q474709" start="8412" end="8430" title="amphibian aircraft" label="amphibian aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119075" start="8485" end="8496" title="floatplane" label="float plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="8502" end="8513" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119075" start="8521" end="8532" title="floatplane" label="float plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="8574" end="8582" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q693340" start="8640" end="8646" title="Float (nautical)" label="floats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="8713" end="8724" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940" start="8730" end="8738" title="seaplane" label="seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="8757" end="8761" title="hull (watercraft)" label="hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390565" start="9007" end="9014" title="sponson" label="sponson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930290" start="9234" end="9246" title="Motor glider" label="Motor glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="9264" end="9270" title="glider aircraft" label="glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q180173" start="9274" end="9283" title="sailplane" label="sailplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236691" start="9372" end="9391" title="Powered hang glider" label="Powered hang glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="9396" end="9407" title="hang glider" label="hang glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915520" start="9435" end="9452" title="Powered parachute" label="Powered parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="9457" end="9467" title="paraglider" label="paraglider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074276" start="9567" end="9585" title="Powered paraglider" label="Powered paraglider"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="9603" end="9613" title="paraglider" label="paraglider"/>
<link wikidata="Q862682" start="9769" end="9782" title="Ground effect (aerodynamics)" label="ground effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930290" start="10320" end="10333" title="motor glider" label="Motor gliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q258534" start="10623" end="10628" title="winch" label="winch"/>
<link wikidata="Q601924" start="10630" end="10645" title="Military glider" label="Military glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="10765" end="10776" title="Aerodynamics" label="aerodynamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849237" start="10787" end="10810" title="Rocket-powered aircraft" label="Rocket-powered aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414565" start="10815" end="10825" title="spaceplane" label="spaceplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q624161" start="10932" end="10939" title="gliding" label="gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q845727" start="10986" end="11004" title="lift-to-drag ratio" label="lift-to-drag ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q73767" start="11264" end="11279" title="paper aeroplane" label="paper airplane."/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="11370" end="11374" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q382776" start="11596" end="11607" title="Horten H.IV" label="Horten H.IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414106" start="11623" end="11634" title="flying wing" label="flying wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q850097" start="11651" end="11663" title="Delta wing" label="delta-winged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064394" start="11664" end="11685" title="Space Shuttle orbiter" label="Space Shuttle orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180173" start="12019" end="12028" title="sailplane" label="sailplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q845727" start="12064" end="12082" title="lift-to-drag ratio" label="lift-to-drag ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545605" start="12145" end="12149" title="lift (soaring)" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q624161" start="12220" end="12227" title="gliding" label="gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q422054" start="12350" end="12356" title="aramid" label="aramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="12377" end="12381" title="drag (force)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="12414" end="12422" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12461" end="12478" title="Wing configuration#Aspect ratio" label="high aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113195" start="12587" end="12601" title="primary glider" label="primary glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q194156" start="12618" end="12625" title="Cockpit (aviation)" label="cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930290" start="12894" end="12906" title="motor glider" label="motor glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q630010" start="12958" end="12964" title="piston engine" label="piston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043622" start="12966" end="12972" title="rotary engine" label="rotary"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="12974" end="12977" title="jet engine" label="jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="12981" end="12997" title="electric motor" label="electric engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q214130" start="13029" end="13032" title="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale" label="FAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565860" start="13055" end="13081" title="glider competition classes" label="glider competition classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839621" start="13184" end="13200" title="microlift glider" label="microlift glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="13425" end="13437" title="hang gliding" label="hang gliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q601924" start="13717" end="13733" title="Military gliders" label="Military gliders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569583" start="13785" end="13800" title="glider infantry" label="glider infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q714326" start="13937" end="13948" title="C-47 Dakota" label="C-47 Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q875139" start="14027" end="14041" title="Short Stirling" label="Short Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="14185" end="14194" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q357500" start="14195" end="14204" title="drop zone" label="drop zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="14345" end="14355" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384417" start="14598" end="14615" title="aviation research" label="aviation research"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030228" start="14621" end="14655" title="NASA Paresev" label="NASA Paresev Rogallo flexible wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="14828" end="14835" title="airfoil" label="airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414106" start="14919" end="14930" title="flying wing" label="flying wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759837" start="14936" end="14950" title="lifting body" label="lifting bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="15026" end="15037" title="hang glider" label="hang glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="15043" end="15058" title="glider aircraft" label="glider aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q222946" start="15123" end="15132" title="airframe" label="air frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q447725" start="15252" end="15266" title="aluminium alloy" label="aluminum alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="15270" end="15279" title="Composite material" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545605" start="15311" end="15315" title="Lift (soaring)" label="soar"/>
<link wikidata="Q752823" start="15367" end="15374" title="thermal" label="thermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="15481" end="15491" title="paraglider" label="paraglider"/>
<link wikidata="Q333518" start="15592" end="15599" title="Safety harness" label="harness"/>
<link wikidata="Q73767" start="15877" end="15888" title="paper airplane" label="paper plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q60055387" start="15960" end="15981" title="Model glider" label="Model glider aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="16041" end="16052" title="polystyrene" label="polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302824" start="16057" end="16067" title="balsa wood" label="balsa wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498959" start="16123" end="16134" title="scale model" label="scale model"/>
<link wikidata="Q680879" start="16171" end="16181" title="Glide bomb" label="Glide bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="16536" end="16540" title="Drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7706101" start="16671" end="16677" title="tether" label="tether"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="16783" end="16798" title="Wright Brothers" label="Wright Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632506" start="16803" end="16813" title="J.W. Dunne" label="J.W. Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="17038" end="17046" title="munition" label="munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="17057" end="17068" title="observation" label="observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743870" start="17133" end="17156" title="kite aerial photography" label="kite aerial photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="17247" end="17264" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="17303" end="17312" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="17316" end="17327" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="17374" end="17382" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q34286" start="17448" end="17469" title="Alexander Graham Bell" label="Alexander Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009342" start="17494" end="17510" title="man-lifting kite" label="man-lifting kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="17524" end="17539" title="Wright brothers" label="Wright brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q522744" start="17544" end="17561" title="Lawrence Hargrave" label="Lawrence Hargrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q182868" start="17663" end="17682" title="weather forecasting" label="weather forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q36488" start="17860" end="17867" title="Guglielmo Marconi" label="Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256453" start="17869" end="17885" title="moored balloon" label="Captive balloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464154" start="18243" end="18258" title="Foil kite" label="foil-type kites"/>
<link wikidata="Q604913" start="18267" end="18277" title="power kite" label="power kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q219554" start="18554" end="18566" title="Kiteboarding" label="kite sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002529" start="18603" end="18616" title="Kite buggy" label="kite buggying"/>
<link wikidata="Q849925" start="18618" end="18635" title="kite landboarding" label="kite landboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418149" start="18637" end="18649" title="kiteboating" label="kite boating"/>
<link wikidata="Q765992" start="18668" end="18679" title="Snowkiting" label="Snow kiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892696" start="19378" end="19390" title="Bermuda kite" label="Bermuda kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950785" start="19392" end="19402" title="Bowed kite" label="Bowed kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q451502" start="19409" end="19416" title="Rokkaku dako" label="Rokkaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356218" start="19430" end="19438" title="box kite" label="box kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073154" start="19440" end="19451" title="Chapi-chapi" label="Chapi-chapi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19453" end="19463" title="Delta kite" label="Delta kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464154" start="19465" end="19469" title="Foil kite" label="Foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q769299" start="19471" end="19479" title="parafoil" label="parafoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950677" start="19483" end="19491" title="bow kite" label="bow kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6741546" start="19493" end="19503" title="Malay kite" label="Malay kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975102" start="19513" end="19522" title="wau bulan" label="wau bulan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420186" start="19524" end="19540" title="Tetrahedral kite" label="Tetrahedral kite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19558" end="19583" title="Expanded polystyrene kite" label="Expanded polystyrene kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447854" start="19585" end="19597" title="Fighter kite" label="Fighter kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080696" start="19599" end="19610" title="Indoor kite" label="Indoor kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030147" start="19612" end="19639" title="Inflatable single-line kite" label="Inflatable single-line kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817732" start="19641" end="19647" title="Kytoon" label="Kytoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009342" start="19649" end="19665" title="Man-lifting kite" label="Man-lifting kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816539" start="19667" end="19688" title="Rogallo wing" label="Rogallo parawing kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024737" start="19690" end="19708" title="Sport kite" label="Stunt (sport) kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136251" start="19710" end="19720" title="Paravane (water kite)" label="Water kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="20183" end="20201" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="20315" end="20322" title="airfoil" label="airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="20411" end="20424" title="Lift (force)" label="lifting force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="20597" end="20605" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="20691" end="20706" title="aerodynamically" label="aerodynamically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080767" start="20819" end="20838" title="vertical stabilizer" label="vertical stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q360475" start="20969" end="20972" title="Flight dynamics (aircraft)" label="yaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="21009" end="21015" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096168" start="21065" end="21086" title="horizontal stabilizer" label="horizontal stabilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q360475" start="21210" end="21215" title="Flight dynamics (aircraft)" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q252451" start="21249" end="21258" title="Elevator (aircraft)" label="elevators"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="21289" end="21301" title="Landing gear" label="Landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q17227" start="22676" end="22686" title="cantilever" label="cantilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q118240" start="22943" end="22951" title="triplane" label="triplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934854" start="22982" end="22994" title="quadruplane" label="quadruplanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934854" start="23005" end="23015" title="Multiplane (aeronautics)" label="multiplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="23066" end="23075" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q223818" start="23110" end="23118" title="biplane" label="Biplanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q118240" start="23123" end="23132" title="Triplane" label="triplanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323573" start="23165" end="23177" title="tandem wing" label="Tandem wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992500" start="23414" end="23422" title="planform (aeronautics)" label="planform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420076" start="23558" end="23570" title="aspect ratio" label="aspect ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579556" start="23718" end="23727" title="transonic" label="transonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q838974" start="23845" end="23864" title="variable sweep wing" label="variable-sweep wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q20046585" start="23924" end="23943" title="takeoff and landing" label="takeoff and landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929294" start="24102" end="24112" title="swept wing" label="swept wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q850097" start="24165" end="24175" title="delta wing" label="delta wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816539" start="24242" end="24254" title="Rogallo wing" label="Rogallo wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="24508" end="24513" title="Flap (aeronautics)" label="flaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="24753" end="24768" title="aerodynamically" label="aerodynamically"/>
<link wikidata="Q120706493" start="25024" end="25035" title="flight crew" label="flight crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="25090" end="25096" title="Glider (aircraft)" label="Glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930290" start="25164" end="25176" title="motor glider" label="motor glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q849237" start="25182" end="25195" title="rocket glider" label="rocket glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q194156" start="25314" end="25321" title="Cockpit (aviation)" label="cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q210932" start="25629" end="25647" title="Airliner" label="passenger aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q254651" start="25904" end="25913" title="navigator" label="navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326722" start="26124" end="26141" title="tailless aircraft" label="tailless aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="26163" end="26171" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113567" start="26312" end="26325" title="Jack Northrop" label="Jack Northrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070813" start="26330" end="26349" title="Cheston L. Eshelman" label="Cheston L. Eshelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q63390" start="26376" end="26394" title="Alexander Lippisch" label="Alexander Lippisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q64040" start="26403" end="26418" title="Horten brothers" label="Horten brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q256905" start="26768" end="26775" title="airlift" label="airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q560430" start="26864" end="26884" title="Radar cross section" label="radar cross-sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q339042" start="26886" end="26904" title="Stealth technology" label="Stealth technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180285" start="27053" end="27063" title="B-2 Spirit" label="B-2 Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q753283" start="27064" end="27071" title="Stealth aircraft" label="stealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q626658" start="27176" end="27187" title="fly-by-wire" label="fly-by-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="27737" end="27744" title="airfoil" label="airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="27805" end="27809" title="lift (force)" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q194433" start="27945" end="27949" title="lift (force)" label="lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414106" start="27968" end="27979" title="flying wing" label="flying wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="28029" end="28037" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="28184" end="28192" title="Subsonic flight" label="subsonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="28318" end="28328" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830787" start="28334" end="28344" title="hypersonic" label="hypersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="28357" end="28367" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="28368" end="28376" title="re-entry" label="re-entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="28711" end="28723" title="US Air Force" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572496" start="28800" end="28828" title="Space Shuttle design process" label="Space Shuttle design process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506785" start="29334" end="29343" title="empennage" label="empennage"/>
<link wikidata="Q826939" start="29606" end="29612" title="Canard (aeronautics)" label="canard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759012" start="30110" end="30114" title="yoke (aircraft)" label="yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="30118" end="30126" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759012" start="30191" end="30195" title="yoke (aircraft)" label="yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="30475" end="30481" title="Rudder" label="Rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q961356" start="31009" end="31017" title="Throttle" label="Throttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q380813" start="31021" end="31033" title="thrust lever" label="thrust lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="31180" end="31184" title="Flap (aircraft)" label="Flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760097" start="31267" end="31274" title="Spoiler (aeronautics)" label="Spoiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q581516" start="31473" end="31477" title="Trim tab" label="Trim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="31834" end="31839" title="brake" label="brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q220858" start="32083" end="32092" title="autopilot" label="autopilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q657919" start="32115" end="32139" title="flight management system" label="flight management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="32144" end="32161" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q517061" start="32396" end="32402" title="Flight instruments" label="flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q743004" start="32404" end="32411" title="Aircraft engine" label="engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427822" start="32413" end="32423" title="Air navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828695" start="32425" end="32439" title="Aviation communication" label="communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q599112" start="32569" end="32587" title="airspeed indicator" label="airspeed indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q277694" start="32662" end="32680" title="attitude indicator" label="attitude indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q639090" start="32786" end="32805" title="Aircraft principal axes" label="pitch and roll axes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216197" start="32813" end="32822" title="altimeter" label="altimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="32869" end="32889" title="Metres above sea level" label="above mean sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q675186" start="32904" end="32928" title="vertical speed indicator" label="vertical speed indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499786" start="32988" end="32996" title="Climb (aeronautics)" label="climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q624380" start="33000" end="33010" title="Descent (aeronautics)" label="descending"/>
<link wikidata="Q841258" start="33018" end="33035" title="heading indicator" label="heading indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384217" start="33096" end="33124" title="Heading (navigation)" label="magnetic compass orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962728" start="33146" end="33155" title="Course (navigation)" label="direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q243289" start="33191" end="33211" title="magnetic declination" label="magnetic declination"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33219" end="33235" title="Turn and slip indicator#turn coordinator" label="turn coordinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235286" start="33324" end="33332" title="Orientation (geometry)" label="attitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474418" start="33388" end="33401" title="two-way radio" label="two-way radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="33455" end="33474" title="air traffic control" label="air traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q908611" start="33481" end="33511" title="horizontal situation indicator" label="horizontal situation indicator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33724" end="33739" title="Engine#Speed" label="operating speed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33741" end="33747" title="Engine#Thrust" label="thrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q656685" start="33749" end="33760" title="Operating temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450784" start="33819" end="33841" title="primary flight display" label="primary flight display"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565782" start="33846" end="33860" title="navigation aid" label="navigation aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="33902" end="33915" title="weather radar" label="weather radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367488" start="33930" end="33952" title="radio direction finder" label="radio direction finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="34078" end="34098" title="satellite navigation" label="satellite navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q467257" start="34275" end="34300" title="Aircraft flight mechanics" label="Aircraft flight mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210932" start="34303" end="34311" title="Airliner" label="Airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="34314" end="34322" title="Aviation" label="Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q295013" start="34325" end="34353" title="Aviation and the environment" label="Aviation and the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q471043" start="34356" end="34372" title="Aviation history" label="Aviation history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042317" start="34375" end="34390" title="Fuel efficiency" label="Fuel efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q797802" start="34393" end="34453" title="List of altitude records reached by different aircraft types" label="List of altitude records reached by different aircraft types"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891989" start="34456" end="34473" title="Maneuvering speed" label="Maneuvering speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q949801" start="34476" end="34486" title="Rotorcraft" label="Rotorcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="34592" end="34607" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="34632" end="34640" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="34644" end="34660" title="American English" label="American English"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46772" wikidata="Q126307" url="?curid=46772" title="Lake Van">
<text>Lake Van (; ; ) is the largest lake in Turkey. It lies in the Eastern Anatolia Region of Turkey in the provinces of Van and Bitlis, in the Armenian highlands. It is a saline soda lake, receiving water from many small streams that descend from the surrounding mountains. It is one of the world&#x27;s few endorheic lakes (a lake having no outlet) of size greater than and has 38% of the country&#x27;s surface water (including rivers). A volcanic eruption blocked its original outlet in prehistoric times. It is situated at above sea level. Despite the high altitude and winter averages below , high salinity usually prevents it from freezing; the shallow northern section can freeze, but rarely.

==Hydrology and chemistry==
Lake Van is across at its widest point. It averages deep. Its greatest known depth is . The surface lies above sea level and the shore length is . It covers and contains (has a volume of) .

The western portion of the lake is deepest, with a large basin deeper than lying northeast of Tatvan and south of Ahlat. The eastern arms of the lake are shallower. The Van-Ahtamar portion shelves gradually, with a maximum depth of about on its northwest side where it joins the rest of the lake. The Erciş arm is much shallower, mostly less than , with a maximum depth of about .

The lake water is strongly alkaline (pH 9.7–9.8) and rich in sodium carbonate and other salts. Some is extracted in salt evaporation ponds alongside, used in or as detergents.

==Geology==

Lake Van is primarily a tectonic lake, formed more than 600,000 years ago by the gradual subsidence of a large block of the Earth&#x27;s crust due to movement on several major faults that run through this portion of Eastern Anatolia. The lake&#x27;s southern margin demarcates: a metamorphic rock zone of the Bitlis Massif and volcanic strata of the Neogene and Quaternary periods. The deep, western portion of the lake is an antidome basin in a tectonic depression. This was formed by normal and strike-slip faulting and thrusting.

The lake&#x27;s proximity to the Karlıova triple junction has led to molten fluids of the Earth&#x27;s mantle accumulating in the strata beneath, still driving gradual change. Dominating the lake&#x27;s northern shore is the stratovolcano Mount Süphan. The broad crater of a second, dormant volcano, Mount Nemrut, is close to the western tip of the lake. There is hydrothermal activity throughout the region.

For much of its history, until the Pleistocene, Lake Van has had an outlet towards the southwest (into the Murat River and eventually into the Euphrates river). However, the level of this threshold has varied over time, as the lake has been blocked by successive lava flows from Nemrut volcano westward towards the Muş Plain. This threshold has then been lowered at times by erosion.

===Bathymetry===
The first acoustic survey of Lake Van was performed in 1974.

Kempe and Degens later identified three physiographic provinces comprising the lake: 
*a lacustrine shelf (27% of the lake) from the shore to a clear gradient change
*a steeper lacustrine slope (63%)
*a deep, relatively flat basin province (10%) in the western center of the lake.

The deepest part of the lake is the Tatvan basin, which is almost completely bounded by faults.

===Prehistoric lake levels===
Land terraces (remnant dry, upper banks from previous shorelines) above the present shore have long been recognized. On a visit in 1898, geologist Felix Oswald noted three raised beaches at 15, 50 and 100 feet (5, 15 and 30 meters) above the lake then, as well as recently drowned trees. Research in the past century has identified many similar terraces, and the lake&#x27;s level has fluctuated significantly during that time.

As the lake has no outlet, the level over recent millennia rests on inflow and evaporation.

The water level has vacillated greatly. Investigation by a team including Degens in the early 1980s determined that the highest lake levels ( above the current height) had been during the last ice age, about 18,000 years ago. Approximately 9,500 years ago there was a dramatic drop to more than below the present level. This was followed by an equally-dramatic rise around 6,500 years ago.

As a deep lake with no outlet, Lake Van has accumulated great amounts of sediment washed in from surrounding plains and valleys, and occasionally deposited as ash from eruptions of nearby volcanoes.
This layer of sediment is estimated to be up to thick in places, and has attracted climatologists and vulcanologists interested in drilling cores to examine the layered sediments.
In 1989 and 1990, an international team of geologists led by Stephan Kempe from the University of Hamburg retrieved ten sediment cores from depths up to . Although these cores only penetrated the first few meters of sediment, they provided sufficient varves to give proxy climate data for up to 14,570 years BP.

A team of scientists headed by palaeontologist Professor Thomas Litt at the University of Bonn has applied for funding from the International Continental Scientific Drilling Program (ICDP) for an akin deeper-drilling project. This expects to find it &quot;stores the climate history of the last 800,000 years—an incomparable treasure house of data which we want to tap for at least the last 500,000 years.&quot; A test drilling in 2004 detected evidence of 15 volcanic eruptions in the past 20,000 years.

===Recent lake level change===
Similar but smaller fluctuations have been seen recently. The level of the lake rose by at least during the 1990s, drowning much agricultural land, and (after a brief period of stability and then retreat) seems to be rising again. The level rose approximately in the 10 years immediately prior to 2004. But in the early 2020s it fell.

==Climate==
Lake Van is in the highest and largest region of Turkey, which has a Mediterranean-influenced humid continental climate. Average temperatures in July are between 22 and 25 °C, and in January between −3 °C to −12 °C. On some cold winter nights the temperature has reached −30 °C.

The lake, particularly on its urban townscape shore, tempers the climate in the city of Van, where the average temperature in July is 22.5 °C, and in January −3.5 °C. The average annual rainfall in the basin ranges from 400 to 700 mm.

==Ecology==

Prior to 2018, the only fish known to live in the brackish water of Lake Van was &quot;Alburnus tarichi&quot; or Pearl Mullet (), a Cyprinid fish related to chub and dace, which is caught during the spring floods. In May and June, these fish migrate from the lake to less alkaline water, spawning either near the mouths of the rivers feeding the lake or in the rivers themselves. After spawning season it returns to the lake. In 2018, a new species of fish, which is deemed as &quot;Oxynoemacheilus ercisianus&quot;, has been discovered inside a microbialite.

103 species of phytoplankton have been recorded in the lake including cyanobacteria, flagellates, diatoms, green algae, and brown algae. 36 species of zooplankton have also been recorded including Rotatoria, Cladocera, and Copepoda in the lake.

In 1991, researchers reported the discovery of tall microbialites in the lake. These are solid towers on the lake bed formed by coccoid cyanobacteria (&quot;Pleurocapsa&quot; group), which create mats of aragonite that combine with calcite precipitating out of the lake water.

The region hosts the rare Van cat breed of cat, having – among other things – an unusual fascination with water. The lake is mainly surrounded by fruit orchards and grain fields, interspersed by some non-agricultural trees.

==Monster myth==

According to legend, the lake hosts the mysterious Lake Van Monster that lurks below the surface, long with brown scaly skin, an elongated reptilian head and flippers. Apart from some inconclusive amateur photographs and videos, there has never been any evidence of it. The claimed profile resembles an extinct mosasaurus or basilosaurus.

==History==
Tushpa, the capital of Urartu, near the shores, on the site of what became medieval Van&#x27;s castle, west of present-day Van city. The ruins of the medieval city of Van are still visible below the southern slopes of the rock on which Van Castle stands.

In 2017, archaeologists from Van Yüzüncü Yil University and a team of independent divers who were exploring Lake Van reported the discovery of a large underwater fortress spanning roughly one kilometer. The team estimates that this fortress was constructed during the Urartian period, based on their visual assessments. The archaeologists believe that the fortress, along with other parts of the ancient city that surrounded it at the time, had slowly become submerged over the millennia by the gradually rising lake.

===Armenian kingdoms===
The lake was the centre of the kingdom of Urartu from about 1000 BC, afterwards of the Satrapy of Armenia, Kingdom of Greater Armenia, and the Armenian Kingdom of Vaspurakan.

Along with Lake Sevan in today&#x27;s Armenia and Lake Urmia in today&#x27;s Iran, Van was one of the three great lakes of the Armenian Kingdom, referred to as &quot;the seas of Armenia&quot; (in ancient Assyrian sources: &quot;tâmtu ša mât Nairi&quot; (Upper Sea of Nairi), the Lower Sea being Lake Urmia). Over time, the lake was known by various Armenian names, including .

===Eastern Roman Empire===
By the 11th century the lake was on the border between the Eastern Roman Empire, with its capital at Constantinople, and the Turko-Persian Seljuk Empire, with its capital at Isfahan. In the uneasy peace between the two empires, local Armenian-Byzantine landowners employed Turcoman gazis and Byzantine akritai for protection. The Greek-speaking Byzantines called the lake &quot;Thospitis limne&quot; ().

In the second half of the 11th century Emperor Romanus IV Diogenes launched a campaign to re-conquer Armenia and head off growing Seljuk control. Diogenes and his large army crossed the Euphrates and confronted a much smaller Seljuk force led by Alp Arslan at the Battle of Manzikert, north of Lake Van on 26 August 1071. Despite their greater numbers, the cumbersome Byzantine force was defeated by the more mobile Turkish horsemen and Diogenes was captured.

===Seljuk Empire===

Alp Arslan divided the conquered eastern portions of the Byzantine empire among his Turcoman generals, with each ruled as a hereditary beylik, under overall sovereignty of the Seljuq Empire. Alp Arslan gave the region around Lake Van to his commander Sökmen el-Kutbî, who set up his capital at Ahlat on the western side of the lake. The dynasty of Shah-Armens, also known as &quot;Sökmenler&quot;, ruled this area from 1085 to 1192.

The Ahlatshahs were succeeded by the Ayyubid dynasty.

===Ottoman Empire===
Following the disintegration of the Seljuq-ruled Sultanate of Rum, Lake Van and its surroundings were conquered by the Ilkhanate Mongols, and later switched hands between the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Iran until Sultan Selim I took control for good.

Reports of the Lake Van Monster surfaced in the late 1800s and gained popularity. A news article was published by &quot;Saadet Gazetesi&quot; issue number 1323, dated 28 Shaban 1306 Hijri year, corresponding to 29 April 1889 during the reign of Sultan Abdul Hamid II.

==Architecture==
Near the Van Fortress and the southern shore, on Akdamar Island lies the 10th century Cathedral of the Holy Cross, Aghtamar (, Surb Khach), which served as a royal church to the kingdom of Vaspurakan. The ruins of Armenian monasteries also exist on the other three islands of Lake Van: Lim, Arter, and Ktuts. The area around Lake Van was also the home to a large number of Armenian monasteries, among the most prominent of these being the 10th century Narekavank and the 11th century Varagavank, the former now destroyed.

The Ahlatshahs left a large number of historic headstones in and around the town of Ahlat. Local administrators are currently trying to have the tombstones included in UNESCO&#x27;s World Heritage List, where they are currently listed tentatively.

==Transportation==
The railway connecting Turkey and Iran was built in the 1970&#x27;s, sponsored by CENTO. It uses a train ferry (ferry for decanted passengers) across between the cities Tatvan and Van, rather than building tracks around rugged terrain. This limits passenger capacity. In May 2008, talks started between Turkey and Iran to replace the ferry with a double-track electrified railway.

In December 2015, the new generation of train ferries operated by the Turkish State Railways, the largest of their kind in Turkey, entered service in Lake Van.
Ferit Melen Airport abuts Van. Turkish Airlines, AnadoluJet, Pegasus Airlines, and SunExpress are the airlines which have regular flights.

==Sports==

Lake Van occasionally hosts several water sports, sailing, and inshore powerboat racing events, such as the UIM World Offshore 225 Championship&#x27;s IOC Van Grand Prix, and the Van Lake Festival.

== Islands and nearby lakes ==
=== Islands ===
The four main islands in Lake Van are Adır, Akdamar, Çarpanak, and Kuş islands. Adır Island is the biggest Island in Lake Van.

Each island has Armenian religious structures: Lim Monastery (Adır Island), Holy Cross Cathedral (Akdamar Island), Ktuts monastery (Çarpanak Island) and a small monastery on Kuş Island.

=== Nearby Lakes ===
Large lakes near Lake Van are Lake Erçek (16km), Lake Turna (23km), Lake Nemrut (12km), Lake Nazik (16km), Lake Batmış (10km), Lake Aygır (5km) and Lake Süphan (18km). Lake Erçek is by far the biggest, with an area of 106.2 square kilometres (41.0 sq mi), and is the second biggest Van Province.

==See also==
* List of lakes of Turkey
* Ark of Nuh or Noah
* Mount Judi

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q126307" start="0" end="8" title="Lake Van" label="Lake Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="39" end="45" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155542" start="62" end="85" title="Eastern Anatolia Region" label="Eastern Anatolia Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q80550" start="116" end="119" title="Van Province" label="Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q83239" start="124" end="130" title="Bitlis Province" label="Bitlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211263" start="139" end="157" title="Armenian highlands" label="Armenian highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q188025" start="167" end="173" title="Salt lake" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349558" start="174" end="178" title="Soda lake" label="soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9019918" start="304" end="318" title="endorheic lake" label="endorheic lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183269" start="455" end="462" title="volcanic dam" label="blocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="594" end="607" title="Brine" label="high salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012862" start="1010" end="1016" title="Tatvan" label="Tatvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q400362" start="1030" end="1035" title="Ahlat" label="Ahlat"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="1325" end="1333" title="alkaline" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="1335" end="1337" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="1359" end="1375" title="sodium carbonate" label="sodium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q244326" start="1414" end="1435" title="salt evaporation pond" label="salt evaporation pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q334637" start="1462" end="1471" title="detergent" label="detergent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1512" end="1525" title="Lake#Tectonic lakes" label="tectonic lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="1612" end="1630" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="1838" end="1845" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="1850" end="1860" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="1974" end="1980" title="normal fault" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="1985" end="1996" title="strike-slip fault" label="strike-slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115877" start="2055" end="2079" title="Karlıova triple junction" label="Karlıova triple junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="2125" end="2131" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="2247" end="2260" title="stratovolcano" label="stratovolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433508" start="2261" end="2273" title="Mount Süphan" label="Mount Süphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q948747" start="2322" end="2334" title="Nemrut (volcano)" label="Mount Nemrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="2467" end="2478" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q913193" start="2539" end="2550" title="Murat River" label="Murat River"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="2575" end="2590" title="Euphrates river" label="Euphrates river"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="2695" end="2705" title="lava flows" label="lava flows"/>
<link wikidata="Q948747" start="2711" end="2717" title="Nemrut (volcano)" label="Nemrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16393752" start="2747" end="2756" title="Muş Plain" label="Muş Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18911210" start="3452" end="3464" title="Felix Leopold Oswald" label="Felix Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q835591" start="4848" end="4854" title="varves" label="varves"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="4905" end="4907" title="Before Present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q152171" start="4986" end="5004" title="University of Bonn" label="University of Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137602" start="5038" end="5091" title="International Continental Scientific Drilling Program" label="International Continental Scientific Drilling Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q155542" start="5834" end="5840" title="Eastern Anatolia Region" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="5889" end="5914" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="6374" end="6388" title="brackish water" label="brackish water"/>
<link wikidata="Q612453" start="6411" end="6427" title="Alburnus tarichi" label="Alburnus tarichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35047" start="6456" end="6464" title="Cyprinid" label="Cyprinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26821893" start="6481" end="6485" title="European chub" label="chub"/>
<link wikidata="Q143326" start="6490" end="6494" title="Common Dace" label="dace"/>
<link wikidata="Q308332" start="6807" end="6833" title="Oxynoemacheilus ercisianus" label="Oxynoemacheilus ercisianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60794802" start="6870" end="6882" title="microbialite" label="microbialite"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="6900" end="6913" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="6955" end="6968" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q240433" start="6970" end="6980" title="flagellate" label="flagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="6983" end="6989" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q271844" start="6992" end="7003" title="green algae" label="green algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q184573" start="7009" end="7020" title="brown algae" label="brown algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q842627" start="7036" end="7047" title="zooplankton" label="zooplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q180148" start="7082" end="7091" title="Rotatoria" label="Rotatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q768012" start="7093" end="7102" title="Cladocera" label="Cladocera"/>
<link wikidata="Q189973" start="7108" end="7116" title="Copepoda" label="Copepoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q60794802" start="7183" end="7196" title="microbialites" label="microbialites"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="7267" end="7280" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q21215732" start="7288" end="7299" title="Pleurocapsaceae" label="Pleurocapsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="7335" end="7344" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="7363" end="7370" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863021" start="7435" end="7442" title="Van cat" label="Van cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="7574" end="7579" title="cereal" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q425806" start="7703" end="7719" title="Lake Van Monster" label="Lake Van Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q312131" start="7963" end="7973" title="mosasaurus" label="mosasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134884" start="7977" end="7989" title="basilosaurus" label="basilosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q766324" start="8004" end="8010" title="Tushpa" label="Tushpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q185068" start="8027" end="8033" title="Urartu" label="Urartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83061" start="8127" end="8135" title="Van, Turkey" label="Van city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187042" start="8240" end="8250" title="Van Castle" label="Van Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3671573" start="8289" end="8315" title="Van Yüzüncü Yıl University" label="Van Yüzüncü Yil University"/>
<link wikidata="Q185068" start="8845" end="8851" title="Urartu" label="Urartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18083901" start="8890" end="8908" title="Satrapy of Armenia" label="Satrapy of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208404" start="8910" end="8936" title="Kingdom of Armenia (antiquity)" label="Kingdom of Greater Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322562" start="8966" end="8976" title="Vaspurakan" label="Vaspurakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181932" start="8990" end="9000" title="Lake Sevan" label="Lake Sevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="9017" end="9024" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199551" start="9029" end="9039" title="Lake Urmia" label="Lake Urmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="9056" end="9060" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="9157" end="9164" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q560342" start="9246" end="9251" title="Nairi" label="Nairi"/>
<link wikidata="Q199551" start="9274" end="9284" title="Lake Urmia" label="Lake Urmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9443" end="9463" title="East Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="9485" end="9499" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="9509" end="9536" title="Seljuk Empire" label="Turko-Persian Seljuk Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="9558" end="9565" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="9657" end="9665" title="Turkmen people" label="Turcoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128777" start="9666" end="9670" title="gazi" label="gazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q333539" start="9686" end="9693" title="akritai" label="akritai"/>
<link wikidata="Q41834" start="9836" end="9855" title="Romanus IV Diogenes" label="Romanus IV Diogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="9975" end="9984" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q200193" start="10035" end="10045" title="Alp Arslan" label="Alp Arslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200032" start="10053" end="10072" title="Battle of Manzikert" label="Battle of Manzikert"/>
<link wikidata="Q200193" start="10271" end="10281" title="Alp Arslan" label="Alp Arslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181217" start="10406" end="10409" title="bey" label="bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708094" start="10447" end="10460" title="Seljuq Empire" label="Seljuq Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q20988517" start="10522" end="10537" title="Sökmen el-Kutbî" label="Sökmen el-Kutbî"/>
<link wikidata="Q400360" start="10619" end="10630" title="Shah-Armens" label="Shah-Armens"/>
<link wikidata="Q400360" start="10709" end="10718" title="Ahlatshah" label="Ahlatshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="10742" end="10757" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q975405" start="10830" end="10846" title="Sultanate of Rum" label="Sultanate of Rum"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="10900" end="10909" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="10975" end="10987" title="Safavid Iran" label="Safavid Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q494660" start="11001" end="11008" title="Selim I" label="Selim I"/>
<link wikidata="Q425806" start="11048" end="11064" title="Lake Van Monster" label="Lake Van Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146861" start="11215" end="11225" title="Hijri year" label="Hijri year"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="11285" end="11299" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Abdul Hamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187042" start="11328" end="11340" title="Van Fortress" label="Van Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q32083" start="11368" end="11382" title="Akdamar Island" label="Akdamar Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281985" start="11405" end="11442" title="Cathedral of the Holy Cross, Aghtamar" label="Cathedral of the Holy Cross, Aghtamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322562" start="11508" end="11518" title="Vaspurakan" label="Vaspurakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825493" start="11605" end="11608" title="Adır Island" label="Lim"/>
<link wikidata="Q706943" start="11610" end="11615" title="Kuş Island" label="Arter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122010" start="11621" end="11626" title="Çarpanak Island" label="Ktuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336090" start="11771" end="11781" title="Narekavank" label="Narekavank"/>
<link wikidata="Q291045" start="11803" end="11813" title="Varagavank" label="Varagavank"/>
<link wikidata="Q203443" start="11889" end="11899" title="headstones" label="headstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q400362" start="11926" end="11931" title="Ahlat" label="Ahlat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="12010" end="12016" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="12024" end="12043" title="World Heritage List" label="World Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="12144" end="12148" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q379850" start="12192" end="12197" title="CENTO" label="CENTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262" start="12209" end="12220" title="train ferry" label="train ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012862" start="12279" end="12285" title="Tatvan" label="Tatvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83061" start="12290" end="12293" title="Van, Turkey" label="Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262" start="12532" end="12545" title="train ferry" label="train ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q499967" start="12562" end="12584" title="Turkish State Railways" label="Turkish State Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431293" start="12652" end="12671" title="Van Ferit Melen Airport" label="Ferit Melen Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q83061" start="12678" end="12681" title="Van, Turkey" label="Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548" start="12683" end="12699" title="Turkish Airlines" label="Turkish Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q483676" start="12701" end="12711" title="AnadoluJet" label="AnadoluJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100424" start="12713" end="12729" title="Pegasus Airlines" label="Pegasus Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137136" start="12735" end="12745" title="SunExpress" label="SunExpress"/>
<link wikidata="Q61065" start="12840" end="12852" title="water sports" label="water sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q192520" start="12854" end="12861" title="sailing" label="sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22570310" start="12867" end="12891" title="inshore powerboat racing" label="inshore powerboat racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814268" start="12912" end="12915" title="Union Internationale Motonautique" label="UIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967908" start="12916" end="12947" title="World Offshore Championship, Turkey" label="World Offshore 225 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825493" start="13088" end="13092" title="Adır Island" label="Adır"/>
<link wikidata="Q32083" start="13094" end="13101" title="Akdamar Island" label="Akdamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122010" start="13103" end="13111" title="Çarpanak Island" label="Çarpanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q706943" start="13117" end="13120" title="Kuş Island" label="Kuş"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281985" start="13254" end="13274" title="Armenian Cathedral of the Holy Cross" label="Holy Cross Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119451" start="13293" end="13308" title="Ktuts monastery" label="Ktuts monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366366" start="13416" end="13426" title="Lake Erçek" label="Lake Erçek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740373" start="13435" end="13445" title="Lake Turna" label="Lake Turna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988251" start="13454" end="13465" title="Lake Nemrut" label="Lake Nemrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478029" start="13474" end="13484" title="Lake Nazik" label="Lake Nazik"/>
<link wikidata="Q97217841" start="13493" end="13504" title="Lake Batmış" label="Lake Batmış"/>
<link wikidata="Q21695302" start="13513" end="13523" title="Lake Aygır" label="Lake Aygır"/>
<link wikidata="Q49312867" start="13534" end="13545" title="Lake Süphan" label="Lake Süphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80550" start="13668" end="13680" title="Van Province" label="Van Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551907" start="13698" end="13721" title="List of lakes of Turkey" label="List of lakes of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q126553" start="13724" end="13727" title="Noah&amp;#x27;s Ark" label="Ark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13731" end="13734" title="Noah in Islam#In culture" label="Nuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="13738" end="13742" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143135" start="13745" end="13755" title="Mount Judi" label="Mount Judi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46774" wikidata="Q1179711" url="?curid=46774" title="Malagasy">
<text>Malagasy may refer to:

*Someone or something from Madagascar
*Malagasy people
*Malagasy language
*Malagasy Republic
*Related to the culture of Madagascar

==See also==
*Madagascar (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1179711" start="0" end="8" title="Malagasy" label="Malagasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="51" end="61" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="63" end="78" title="Malagasy people" label="Malagasy people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930" start="80" end="97" title="Malagasy language" label="Malagasy language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740997" start="99" end="116" title="Malagasy Republic" label="Malagasy Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007213" start="133" end="154" title="culture of Madagascar" label="culture of Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q225789" start="170" end="197" title="Madagascar (disambiguation)" label="Madagascar (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46776" wikidata="Q1395834" url="?curid=46776" title="Fanorona">
<text>Fanorona () is a strategy board game for two players. The game is indigenous to Madagascar.

==Rules==
Fanorona has three standard versions: Fanoron-Telo, Fanoron-Dimy, and Fanoron-Sivy. The difference between these variants is the size of board. Fanoron-Telo is played on a 3×3 board and the difficulty can be compared to the game of Tic-tac-toe. Fanoron-Dimy is played on a 5×5 board and Fanoron-Sivy is played on a 9×5 board—Sivy being the most popular. The Sivy board consists of lines and intersections that create a grid with 5 rows and 9 columns subdivided diagonally to form part of the tetrakis square tiling of the plane. A line represents the path where a stone can move during the game. There are weak and strong intersections. At a weak intersection, it is only possible to move a stone horizontally and vertically, while on a strong intersection, it is also possible to move a stone diagonally. A stone can only move from one intersection to an adjacent intersection. Black and white pieces, twenty-two each, are arranged on all points except the center. The objective of the game is to capture all the opponents pieces. The game is a draw if neither player succeeds in this. 

Players alternate turns, starting with White.

* There are two kinds of moves: non-capturing and capturing. A non-capturing move is called a &quot;paika&quot; move.
* A paika move consists of moving one stone along a line to an adjacent intersection.
* Capturing moves are obligatory and have to be played in preference to paika moves.
* Capturing implies removing one or more pieces of the opponent, in one of two ways:
** Approach—moving the capturing stone to a point adjacent to an opponent&#x27;s stone, which must be on the continuation of the capturing stone&#x27;s movement line.
** Withdrawal—the capturing stone moves from a point adjacent to the opponent&#x27;s stone, away from the stone along the continuation of the line between them.
* When an opponent stone is captured, all opponent pieces in line beyond that stone (as long as there is no interruption by an empty point or an own stone) are captured as well.
* An approach capture and a withdrawal capture cannot be made at the same time – the player must choose one or the other.
* As in checkers, the capturing piece is allowed to continue making successive captures, with these restrictions:
** The piece is not allowed to arrive at the same position twice.
** It is not permitted to move twice consecutively in the same direction (first to make a withdrawal capture, and then to make an approach capture) as part of a capturing sequence.
* However, unlike in checkers, continuing the capturing sequence is optional.
* The game ends when one player captures all stones of the opponent. If neither player can achieve this—for instance if the game reaches a state where neither player can attack the other without overly weakening their own position—then the game is a draw.

== History ==
Fanorona is very popular in Madagascar. According to one version of a popular legend, an astrologer had advised King Ralambo to choose his successor by, while his sons were away from the capital, feigning sickness and urging their return; his kingdom would be given to the first son who returned home to him. When the king&#x27;s messenger reached Ralambo&#x27;s elder son Prince Andriantompokoindrindra, he was playing fanorona and trying to win a &quot;telo noho dimy&quot; (3 against 5) situation, one that is infamously difficult to resolve. As a result, his younger brother Prince Andrianjaka was the first to arrive and inherited the throne.

Fanorona inspired Christian Freeling&#x27;s draughts variant Bushka, which in turn inspired the game Dameo.

==Analysis==
Using 10,000 games with Alpha-beta pruning players, the game-tree complexity and state-space complexity can be computed. Fanorona has a game-tree complexity of ~1046 and a state-space complexity of ~1021.

In 2007, the game of Fanorona and smaller variants were solved weakly as a draw under perfect play. Both the moves f2-e3A and d3-e3A lead to a draw.

==See also==
*Kōnane

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1395834" start="0" end="8" title="Fanorona" label="Fanorona"/>
<link wikidata="Q573573" start="17" end="25" title="Abstract strategy game" label="strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="26" end="36" title="board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="80" end="90" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q210339" start="335" end="346" title="Tic-tac-toe" label="Tic-tac-toe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070803" start="595" end="617" title="tetrakis square tiling" label="tetrakis square tiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="2249" end="2257" title="checkers" label="checkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418104" start="3068" end="3075" title="Ralambo" label="Ralambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q510246" start="3537" end="3548" title="Andrianjaka" label="Andrianjaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q382288" start="3618" end="3643" title="Christian Freeling" label="Christian Freeling&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3661" end="3667" title="Bushka" label="Bushka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212163" start="3701" end="3706" title="Dameo" label="Dameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q570496" start="3746" end="3764" title="Alpha-beta pruning" label="Alpha-beta pruning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3778" end="3798" title="Game complexity#Game-tree complexity" label="game-tree complexity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3803" end="3825" title="Game complexity#State-space complexity" label="state-space complexity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3858" end="3878" title="Game complexity#Game-tree complexity" label="game-tree complexity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3894" end="3916" title="Game complexity#State-space complexity" label="state-space complexity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3984" end="3997" title="Solved_game#Weak_solution" label="solved weakly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428765" start="4092" end="4098" title="Kōnane" label="Kōnane"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46779" wikidata="Q63247926" url="?curid=46779" title="Human-powered transport">
<text>Human-powered transport is the transport of person(s) and/or goods (freight) using human muscle power. Unlike animal-powered transport, human-powered transport has existed since time immemorial in the form of walking, running and swimming, as well as small vehicles such as litters, rickshaws, wheelchairs and wheelbarrows. Modern technology has allowed mechanical advantage devices and machines to enhance human-power.

Although motorization has increased speed and load capacity, many forms of human-powered transport remain popular for reasons of cost, convenience, leisure, physical exercise and environmentalism. Human-powered transport is sometimes the only type available, especially in underdeveloped or inaccessible regions.

==Modes==
===Non-vehicular===

*Crawling (human)
*Walking (233 watts at )
** Walking bus
*Running (1,150 watts at )
*Sprinting (1,690 watts at )
*Swimming
*Climbing and mountaineering
*Ice skating, roller skating, and inline skating
*Cross-country skiing

===Human-powered vehicles (HPVs)===

====Land vehicles====

Skateboards have the advantage of being so small and light that users can easily carry them when not skating.

The most efficient and most popular human-powered land vehicle is the bicycle. Compared to the much more common upright bicycle, the recumbent bicycle may be faster on level ground or down hills due to better aerodynamics while having similar power transfer efficiency.

The velomobile has potential to be useful in colder and wetter climates due to increased protection offered against the environment. Cargo bikes are used to transport cargo. Cycle rickshaws can be used as taxicabs.

In 2016, AeroVelo cyclist Todd Reichert achieved the human-powered speed record of with a velomobile at Battle Mountain, Nevada.

Dutch cyclist Fred Rompelberg set a speed record at the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah on October 3, 1995, while cycling in the wake of a motor dragster pace-car. The wake of the pace-car reduced the aerodynamic drag against which Rompelberg pedalled to almost zero.

Greg Kolodziejzyk set two world records recognized by both the International Human Powered Vehicle Association and Guinness (TM) World Records on July 17, 2006, on a race track in Eureka, California. The first record is for the most distance traveled in 24 hours by human power , and the second for the world&#x27;s fastest time trial (23 hours, 2 minutes).
Both records were broken on August 6, 2010, by Christian von Ascheberg who drove in 19 hours, 27 minutes and managed to go in 24 hours with his Milan SL Velomobile. In the same race he also raised the 12-hour record to , which is an average of .
In 1969, artists in a small Northern California town began the Kinetic sculpture race which has grown to a , three-day all terrain, human-powered sculpture race and county wide event. It is held every year on the last weekend in May.

The Shweeb system is a proposed transit network using recumbent bicycle technology to power pods suspended from monorails. A test built in Rotorua, New Zealand is open to the public as a leisure attraction. In September 2010 the system was chosen to receive funding from Google as part of project 10100. There are no active proposals for its implementation.

====Aircraft====
=====Fixed wing=====
The &quot;Pedaliante&quot; flew short distances fully under human power in 1936, but the distances were not significant enough to win the prize of the Italian competition for which it was built. The flights were deemed to be a result of the pilot&#x27;s significant strength and endurance, and not attainable by a typical human. Additional attempts were made in 1937 and 1938 using a catapult system, launching the plane to a height of . With the catapult launch, the plane successfully traveled the distance outlined by the competition, but was declined the prize due to the takeoff method.

The first officially authenticated regularly feasible take-off and landing of a human-powered aircraft (one capable of powered takeoffs, unlike a glider) was made on 9 November 1961 by Derek Piggott in Southampton University&#x27;s Man Powered Aircraft (SUMPAC).

Perhaps the best-known human-powered plane is the Gossamer Albatross, which flew across the English Channel in 1979.

The current distance and duration record recognized by the FAI, a straight distance of in 3 hours and 54 minutes, was achieved on 23 April 1988 from Heraklion on Crete to Santorini in a MIT Daedalus 88 piloted by Greek cyclist Kanellos Kanellopoulos.

The current speed record recognized by the FAI is held by Musculair 2, built by Günther Rochelt, which was flown at by Holger Rochelt in 1985.

=====Helicopters=====
The first officially observed human-powered helicopter to have left the ground was the Da Vinci III in 1989. It was designed and built by students at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo in California, USA. It flew for 7.1 seconds and reached a height of . The second was the Yuri I in 1994, designed and built by students at Nihon University in Japan. It flew for 19.46 seconds and reached an altitude of . On 13 June 2013, the AeroVelo Atlas was the first to complete a flight that lasted 64 seconds and reached an altitude of 3.3 meters, thus winning the Sikorsky Prize.

=====Airships and balloons=====
French inventors have built man-powered airships and balloons. Solar balloons and solar airships are new types of balloons and airships. Because lift is supplied through buoyancy, human power can be devoted to thrust.

====Watercraft====

Human-powered watercraft include prehistoric, historic and well-known traditional and sporting craft such as canoes, rowing boats and galleys. The term &quot;human-powered boat&quot; is often used for more modern craft using propellers and water wheels for propulsion. These can be more efficient than paddles or oars and especially allow the use of the leg muscles which are generally stronger than arm muscles, even for non-athletes. Competitive rowing boats use sliding seats to engage the legs for propulsion with an oar for this reason, but require considerable skill to use efficiently. In addition, there is little skill required for forward propulsion while looking forwards and craft such as pedalos are popular at resorts.

=====Hydrofoils=====
Hydrofoils have less water resistance at the highest speeds attainable by humans and are thus usually faster than displacement boats on short courses. The world speed record on water was set 27 October 1991 by MIT professor Mark Drela who pedalled a human-powered hydrofoil, &quot;Decavitator&quot;, to over a 100-meter course in Boston, Massachusetts, US.

=====Submarines=====
In 1989, the first human-powered International Submarine Race (ISR) was held in Florida with 17 craft. Since then nine more races have been held. The races themselves have been moved from the waters of Florida to the David Taylor Model Basin at the Carderock Division of the Naval Surface Warfare Center in Bethesda, Maryland, and are held biennially. At the 9th ISR in 2007 (in which 23 submarines participated) several new records were set: A single-person craft, Omer5 achieved a record speed of breaking the Omer team&#x27;s previous record of set by Omer 4 in 2004. Also Omer 6 snatched up a record for non-propeller driven craft with a speed of .

==See also==
* Active mobility
* Adirondack guideboat
* Animal locomotion
* Bicycle and human powered vehicle museums, list of
* Carfree city
* Carrying on the head
* Erden Eruç
* Energy efficiency in transportation
* Jason Lewis
* Rowing
* Utility cycling

==References==
==External links==
* Human Powered Vehicle Records
* Human Powered Vehicle Challenge - American Society Of Mechanical Engineers

===Air===
* Human Powered Aircraft Group - Virginia Tech
* Human Powered Helicopters - History, technology, people
* Human powered blimp

===Land===
* Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology Human Powered Vehicle Team - Videos, photos, links, and other information about human powered land vehicles

===Water===
* Human Powered Boats - Events, photos, links
* Human Powered Hydrofoils from 1953 to 2005
* &quot;Decavitator&quot; Human-Powered Hydrofoil - videos, documentation
* Human Powered Submarine of Virginia Tech</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q63247926" start="0" end="23" title="Human-powered transport" label="Human-powered transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="31" end="40" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q319604" start="44" end="53" title="passenger" label="person(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877" start="61" end="66" title="goods" label="goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="68" end="75" title="freight" label="freight"/>
<link wikidata="Q11014191" start="83" end="101" title="human power" label="human muscle power"/>
<link wikidata="Q228534" start="110" end="134" title="animal-powered transport" label="animal-powered transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635276" start="178" end="193" title="time immemorial" label="time immemorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537379" start="209" end="216" title="walking" label="walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q105674" start="218" end="225" title="running" label="running"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="230" end="238" title="human swimming" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q476850" start="274" end="280" title="litter (vehicle)" label="litter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16337999" start="283" end="291" title="pulled rickshaw" label="rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="294" end="304" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q175334" start="310" end="321" title="wheelbarrow" label="wheelbarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q14861286" start="354" end="381" title="mechanical advantage device" label="mechanical advantage device"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="387" end="394" title="machine" label="machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q752870" start="430" end="442" title="motor vehicle" label="motorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="600" end="616" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="694" end="708" title="less developed countries" label="underdeveloped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411725" start="767" end="783" title="Crawling (human)" label="Crawling (human)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537379" start="785" end="792" title="Walking" label="Walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="798" end="802" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q631012" start="812" end="823" title="Walking bus" label="Walking bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105674" start="825" end="832" title="Running" label="Running"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="840" end="844" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q624482" start="852" end="861" title="Sprint (running)" label="Sprinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="869" end="873" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="881" end="889" title="human swimming" label="Swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q22857" start="891" end="899" title="Climbing" label="Climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="904" end="918" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q779272" start="920" end="931" title="Ice skating" label="Ice skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707432" start="933" end="947" title="roller skating" label="roller skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034982" start="953" end="967" title="inline skating" label="inline skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="969" end="989" title="Cross-country skiing" label="Cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q15783" start="1051" end="1062" title="Skateboards" label="Skateboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="1232" end="1239" title="bicycle" label="bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281298" start="1274" end="1289" title="upright bicycle" label="upright bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q750483" start="1295" end="1312" title="recumbent bicycle" label="recumbent bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="1371" end="1383" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11271324" start="1405" end="1419" title="power transfer" label="power transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q892572" start="1437" end="1447" title="velomobile" label="velomobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q573863" start="1566" end="1576" title="Cargo bike" label="Cargo bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="1600" end="1605" title="cargo" label="cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362895" start="1607" end="1621" title="Cycle rickshaw" label="Cycle rickshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="1638" end="1645" title="taxicab" label="taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q892572" start="1739" end="1749" title="velomobile" label="velomobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q745972" start="1753" end="1768" title="Battle Mountain, Nevada" label="Battle Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q350012" start="1793" end="1808" title="Fred Rompelberg" label="Fred Rompelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081023" start="1835" end="1856" title="Bonneville Salt Flats" label="Bonneville Salt Flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="1860" end="1864" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116656" start="2109" end="2156" title="International Human Powered Vehicle Association" label="International Human Powered Vehicle Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q488702" start="2226" end="2244" title="Eureka, California" label="Eureka, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q892572" start="2557" end="2567" title="Velomobile" label="Velomobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="2678" end="2697" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410798" start="2713" end="2735" title="Kinetic sculpture race" label="Kinetic sculpture race"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482704" start="2889" end="2895" title="Shweeb" label="Shweeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q208948" start="3024" end="3031" title="Rotorua" label="Rotorua"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="3033" end="3044" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3292" end="3302" title="Enea Bossi, Sr.#Pedaliante" label="Pedaliante"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165278" start="4021" end="4027" title="glider aircraft" label="glider"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262277" start="4060" end="4073" title="Derek Piggott" label="Derek Piggott"/>
<link wikidata="Q76473" start="4077" end="4099" title="Southampton University" label="Southampton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394996" start="4129" end="4135" title="SUMPAC" label="SUMPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q636203" start="4189" end="4207" title="Gossamer Albatross" label="Gossamer Albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="4231" end="4246" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214130" start="4316" end="4319" title="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale" label="FAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q160544" start="4406" end="4415" title="Heraklion" label="Heraklion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="4419" end="4424" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q129296" start="4428" end="4437" title="Santorini" label="Santorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157053" start="4443" end="4455" title="MIT Daedalus" label="MIT Daedalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q331163" start="4484" end="4506" title="Kanellos Kanellopoulos" label="Kanellos Kanellopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q214130" start="4552" end="4555" title="Fédération Aéronautique Internationale" label="FAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274972" start="4567" end="4578" title="Musculair" label="Musculair 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907561" start="4762" end="4774" title="Da Vinci III" label="Da Vinci III"/>
<link wikidata="Q13894311" start="5092" end="5106" title="AeroVelo Atlas" label="AeroVelo Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504256" start="5221" end="5235" title="Sikorsky Prize" label="Sikorsky Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q133585" start="5310" end="5317" title="airship" label="airship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9706" start="5323" end="5331" title="balloons" label="balloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q371064" start="5333" end="5346" title="Solar balloon" label="Solar balloon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5352" end="5366" title="solar airships" label="solar airships"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="5643" end="5649" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335189" start="6210" end="6216" title="pedalo" label="pedalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q623195" start="6514" end="6537" title="human-powered hydrofoil" label="human-powered hydrofoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017142" start="6545" end="6556" title="Decavitator" label="Decavitator"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="6594" end="6600" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q666140" start="6860" end="6884" title="David Taylor Model Basin" label="David Taylor Model Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038292" start="6892" end="6946" title="Carderock Division of the Naval Surface Warfare Center" label="Carderock Division of the Naval Surface Warfare Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090084" start="7109" end="7114" title="Omer5" label="Omer5"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010939" start="7312" end="7327" title="Active mobility" label="Active mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682999" start="7330" end="7350" title="Adirondack guideboat" label="Adirondack guideboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q925958" start="7353" end="7370" title="Animal locomotion" label="Animal locomotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607533" start="7373" end="7423" title="List of bicycle and human powered vehicle museums" label="Bicycle and human powered vehicle museums, list of"/>
<link wikidata="Q581830" start="7426" end="7438" title="Carfree city" label="Carfree city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046830" start="7441" end="7461" title="Carrying on the head" label="Carrying on the head"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385273" start="7464" end="7474" title="Erden Eruç" label="Erden Eruç"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377047" start="7477" end="7512" title="Energy efficiency in transportation" label="Energy efficiency in transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683941" start="7515" end="7526" title="Jason Lewis (adventurer)" label="Jason Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21368803" start="7529" end="7535" title="Rowing" label="Rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888694" start="7538" end="7553" title="Utility cycling" label="Utility cycling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46780" wikidata="Q3154075" url="?curid=46780" title="Iolanthe">
<text>Iolanthe; or, The Peer and the Peri () is a comic opera with music by Arthur Sullivan and libretto by W. S. Gilbert, first performed in 1882. It is one of the Savoy operas and is the seventh of fourteen operatic collaborations by Gilbert and Sullivan. In the opera, the fairy Iolanthe has been banished from fairyland because she married a mortal; this is forbidden by fairy law. Her son, Strephon, is an Arcadian shepherd who wants to marry Phyllis, a Ward of Chancery. All the members of the House of Peers also want to marry Phyllis. When Phyllis sees Strephon hugging a young woman (not knowing that it is his mother – immortal fairies all appear young), she assumes the worst and sets off a climactic confrontation between the peers and the fairies. The opera satirises many aspects of British government, law and society. The confrontation between the fairies and the peers is a version of one of Gilbert&#x27;s favourite themes: a tranquil civilisation of women is disrupted by a male-dominated world through the discovery of mortal love.

&quot;Iolanthe&quot; opened in London on 25 November 1882, at the Savoy Theatre to a warm reception, and ran for 398 performances, the fourth consecutive hit by Gilbert and Sullivan. It was the first work to premiere at the Savoy (although &quot;Patience&quot; had transferred to the theatre in 1881) and was the first new theatre production in the world to be illuminated entirely with electric lights, permitting some special effects that had not been possible in the era of gas lighting. The opera opened simultaneously in New York, and touring companies were sent around the UK and US to play the piece. The first Australasian touring production followed in 1885, and the opera was revived in London beginning in 1901. The D&#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company toured the opera nearly continuously in repertory from 1891 until 1982, and made several recordings of the opera over that period. Numerous other professional and amateur productions have been given of this enduring work, and various other recordings have been issued.

==Background==

W. S. Gilbert presented his basic idea for a new opera to Arthur Sullivan in October 1881. Gilbert&#x27;s earliest ideas for the story of &quot;Iolanthe&quot; originated in his &quot;Bab Ballad&quot;, &quot;The Fairy Curate&quot;: &quot;Once a fairy / Light and airy / Married with a mortal&quot;. The fairy marries a &quot;prosaic&quot; attorney and bears him a son. After her son grows up, she visits him on Earth, but she is mistaken for his lover, since fairies perpetually appear young and beautiful. Sullivan found the premise funny, and Gilbert set to work on fleshing out the story. By December, he had written some lyrics for Sullivan to look at, but he struggled with the plot for several months, whereas he had dashed off earlier operas in a matter of weeks. During these months, Sullivan took an extended trip to Egypt, Italy and elsewhere. Upon his return to London in April 1882, he moved into a new home; in May, his beloved mother died rather suddenly. By the end of July 1882, Gilbert had supplied Sullivan with lyrics to several of the songs, and Sullivan began work setting them to music. Over the next two months, Sullivan met Gilbert to discuss the libretto as more lyrics were completed. Music rehearsals began in September, and staging began in October, scheduled around performances of Gilbert and Sullivan&#x27;s previous opera, &quot;Patience&quot;, which had transferred to the Savoy Theatre a year earlier. Sullivan was still composing more numbers for the opera until 20 October, with a few modifications continuing into early November. Uncharacteristically, Sullivan composed the overture himself, instead of assigning it to an assistant. Two casts rehearsed simultaneously, as the opera was to open on the same night in London and New York City, a historic first for any play.

Gilbert had targeted the aristocracy and political officials for satiric treatment in earlier works. In this opera, the House of Lords is lampooned as a bastion of the ineffective, privileged and dim-witted, whose only qualification to govern is noble birth. The political party system, the law and other institutions also come in for a dose of satire. Throughout &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, however, both author and composer managed to couch the criticism among such bouncy, amiable absurdities and &quot;splendid pageantry&quot; that it is all received as good humour, with Prime Minister Gladstone complimenting the opera&#x27;s good taste. In fact, Gilbert later refused to allow quotes from the piece to be used as part of the campaign to diminish the powers of the House of Lords.

Although titled &quot;Iolanthe&quot; all along in Gilbert&#x27;s plot book, for a time the piece was advertised as &quot;Perola&quot; and rehearsed under that name. According to an often-repeated myth, Gilbert and Sullivan did not change the name to &quot;Iolanthe&quot; until just before the première. In fact, however, the title was advertised as &quot;Iolanthe&quot; as early as 13 November 1882 – eleven days before the opening – so the cast had at least that much time to learn the name. It is also clear that Sullivan&#x27;s musical setting was written to match the cadence of the word &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, and could only accommodate the word &quot;Perola&quot; by preceding it (awkwardly) with &quot;O&quot;, &quot;Come&quot; or &quot;Ah&quot;. Henry Irving had produced a W. G. Wills adaptation of &quot;King René&#x27;s Daughter&quot; in London in 1880, under the name &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, and in October 1882 Gilbert asked his producer, Richard D&#x27;Oyly Carte, to request Irving&#x27;s permission to use the name. It is not known whether Irving replied.

&quot;Iolanthe&quot; premiered only three days after &quot;Patience&quot; closed at the Savoy. The Savoy Theatre, opened only a year earlier, was a state-of-the-art facility, the first theatre in the world to be lit entirely by electricity. &quot;Patience&quot; had transferred to the Savoy from the Opera Comique, upon the theatre&#x27;s opening, but &quot;Iolanthe&quot; was the first show to premiere at the theatre. New lighting technologies made such special effects as sparkling fairy wands possible for the first time. The principal fairies&#x27; heads were also lit by wreaths of small illuminated stars attached to a battery. The audience that attended the opening night in London included Captain (later Captain Sir) Eyre Massey Shaw, head of the Metropolitan Fire Brigade, whom the Fairy Queen apostrophises in the second act (&quot;Oh, Captain Shaw / Type of true love kept under / Could thy brigade with cold cascade / Quench my great love, I wonder?&quot;). On the first night Alice Barnett, as the Queen of the Fairies, sang the verses directly to Captain Shaw, who was sitting in the centre of the stalls.

The opera&#x27;s premiere was received by an enthusiastic audience and earned critical praise, although there was general agreement that the second act needed some trimming. &quot;Iolanthe&quot; became the fourth consecutive major success for Gilbert, Sullivan and their producer, Richard D&#x27;Oyly Carte, following &quot;H.M.S. Pinafore&quot; (1878), &quot;The Pirates of Penzance&quot; (1879) and &quot;Patience&quot; (1881). Increasingly viewing his work with Gilbert as frivolous, beneath his skills and repetitious, Sullivan had intended to resign from the partnership with Gilbert and Carte after &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, but on the day of its premiere, he received a letter from his broker, Edward Hall, notifying him that Hall had lost all his money, including £7,000 of Sullivan&#x27;s investments, the bulk of his fortune. Sullivan&#x27;s lifestyle was not inexpensive, and he was helping to support his late brother&#x27;s large family, as well as his mistress, Fanny Ronalds, and her family. He soon concluded that the only certain way to restore his financial security was to continue writing Savoy operas. On 8 February 1883, he signed a new five-year creative partnership agreement with Gilbert and Carte; Gilbert was already at work on their next piece, &quot;Princess Ida&quot;. On 22 May 1883, Sullivan was knighted by Queen Victoria for his &quot;services ... rendered to the promotion of the art of music&quot; in Britain.

==Roles==

*The Lord Chancellor (comic baritone)
*George, Earl of Mountararat (baritone)
*Thomas, Earl Tolloller (tenor)
*Private Willis, of the Grenadier Guards (bass)
*Strephon, an Arcadian Shepherd (baritone)
*Queen of the Fairies (contralto)
*Iolanthe, a Fairy, Strephon&#x27;s mother (mezzo-soprano)
*Celia, a Fairy (soprano)
*Leila, a Fairy (mezzo-soprano)
*Fleta, a Fairy (speaking role/chorus)
*Phyllis, an Arcadian Shepherdess and Ward in Chancery (soprano)
*Chorus of Dukes, Marquises, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, and Fairies

== Synopsis ==
Act I

The beloved fairy Iolanthe, who arranged the fairies&#x27; songs and dances, committed the capital crime (under fairy law) of marrying a mortal man. The Queen of the fairies commuted Iolanthe&#x27;s sentence of death to banishment for life on the condition that she left her husband and never communicated with him again. After the passage of 25 years, the fairies, still missing Iolanthe deeply, plead with their Queen to pardon Iolanthe and to restore her place in fairyland (&quot;Tripping hither, tripping thither&quot;).
Summoned by the Fairy Queen (&quot;Iolanthe! From thy dark exile thou art summoned&quot;), Iolanthe rises from the frog-infested stream that has been her home in exile. The Queen, unable to bear punishing her any longer, pardons Iolanthe, who is warmly greeted by the other fairies. Iolanthe tells her sisters that she has a son, Strephon, noting that he&#x27;s a fairy down to the waist, but his legs are mortal. The fairies laugh that Iolanthe appears too young to have a grown son, as one of the advantages of a fairy&#x27;s immortality is that they never grow old. Strephon, a handsome Arcadian shepherd, arrives and meets his aunts (&quot;Good-morrow, good mother&quot;). He tells Iolanthe of his love for the Lord Chancellor&#x27;s ward of court, the beautiful Phyllis, who does not know of Strephon&#x27;s mixed origin. Strephon is despondent, however, as the Lord Chancellor has forbidden them to marry, partly because he feels that a shepherd is unsuitable for Phyllis, but partly because the Lord Chancellor wishes to marry Phyllis himself. In fact, so do half the members of Britain&#x27;s House of Lords. The Fairy Queen promises her assistance (&quot;Fare thee well, attractive stranger&quot;). Soon Phyllis arrives, and she and Strephon share a moment of tenderness as they plan their future and possible elopement (&quot;Good-morrow, good lover&quot;; &quot;None shall part us from each other&quot;).

A cadre of the peers of the realm arrive in noisy splendour (&quot;Loudly let the trumpet bray&quot;) with the Lord Chancellor (&quot;The law is the true embodiment&quot;). They are all smitten with Phyllis, and they have appealed to the Lord Chancellor to decide who will have her hand. The Lord Chancellor hesitates to act upon his own regard for Phyllis due to his position as her guardian. The Lords send for Phyllis to choose one of their number, but she will not marry any of them, as virtue is found only in a &quot;lowly&quot; cottage (&quot;My well-loved Lord&quot; and &quot;Nay, tempt me not&quot;). The peers beg her not to scorn them simply because of their &quot;blue blood&quot; (&quot;Spurn not the nobly born&quot; and &quot;My lords, it may not be&quot;). Strephon approaches the Lord Chancellor, pleading that Nature bids him marry Phyllis. But the Lord Chancellor wryly notes that Strephon has not presented sufficient evidence that Nature has interested herself in the matter. He refuses his consent to the marriage between Strephon and Phyllis (&quot;When I went to the Bar&quot;).

Disappointed, Strephon calls on Iolanthe for help. She appears and promises to support her son. Spying on the two, the peers – led by the brainless and stuffy Earls Tolloller and Mountararat – together with Phyllis, see Iolanthe and Strephon in a warm embrace. All three jump to the obvious conclusion, since the centuries-old Iolanthe appears to be a girl of seventeen (&quot;When darkly looms the day&quot;). The peers scoff at the seemingly absurd claim that Iolanthe is Strephon&#x27;s mother as Strephon pleads: &quot;She is, has been, my mother from my birth!&quot; Phyllis angrily rejects Strephon for his supposed infidelity and declares that she will marry either Lord Tolloller or Lord Mountararat (&quot;...and I don&#x27;t care which!&quot;). Strephon then calls for help from the fairies, who appear but are mistaken by the peers for a girls&#x27; school on an outing. Offended, the Fairy Queen pronounces a magical &quot;sentence&quot; upon the peers: Strephon shall not only become a member of parliament but will also have the power to pass any bill he proposes (&quot;With Strephon for your foe, no doubt&quot;).

Act II

Private Willis, on night guard duty, marches outside the Palace of Westminster and muses on political life (&quot;When all night long a chap remains&quot;). The fairies arrive and tease the peers about Strephon&#x27;s parliamentary success; he is advancing a bill to open the peerage to competitive examination (&quot;Strephon&#x27;s a member of Parliament&quot;). The peers ask the fairies to stop Strephon&#x27;s mischief, stating that the House of Peers is not susceptible of any improvement (&quot;When Britain really ruled the waves&quot;). Although the fairies say that they cannot stop Strephon, they have become strongly attracted to the peers (&quot;In vain to us you plead&quot;). The fairy Queen is dismayed by this. Pointing to Private Willis of the First Grenadier Guards, who is still on duty, the Queen claims that she is able to subdue her response to the effects of his manly beauty (&quot;Oh, foolish fay&quot;).
Phyllis cannot decide whether she ought to marry Tolloller or Mountararat, and so she leaves the choice up to them. Tolloller tells Mountararat that his family&#x27;s tradition would require the two Earls to duel to the death if the latter were to claim Phyllis. The two decide that their friendship is more important than love and renounce their claims to her (&quot;Though p&#x27;r&#x27;aps I may incur thy blame&quot;). The Lord Chancellor arrives dressed for bed and describes a nightmare caused by his unrequited love for Phyllis (&quot;Love, unrequited, robs me of my rest&quot;). The two peers try to cheer him up and urge him to make another effort to persuade himself to award Phyllis to ... himself (&quot;If you go in you&#x27;re sure to win&quot;).

Strephon now leads both parties in Parliament, but he is miserable at losing Phyllis. He sees Phyllis and reveals to her that his mother is a fairy, which accounts for her apparent youth (&quot;If we&#x27;re weak enough to tarry&quot;). Phyllis and Strephon ask Iolanthe to plead with the Lord Chancellor to allow their marriage, for &quot;none can resist your fairy eloquence.&quot; This is impossible, she replies, for the Lord Chancellor is her husband. He believes Iolanthe to have died childless, and she is bound not to &quot;undeceive&quot; him, under penalty of death. However, to save Strephon from losing his love, Iolanthe resolves to present his case to the Lord Chancellor while veiled (&quot;My lord, a suppliant at your feet&quot;).

Although the Lord Chancellor is moved by her appeal, which evokes the memory of his wife, he declares that he himself will marry Phyllis. Desperate, Iolanthe unveils, ignoring the warnings of the unseen Fairies, revealing that she is his long-lost wife, and Strephon is his son. The Lord Chancellor is amazed to see her alive, but Iolanthe has again broken fairy law, and the Fairy Queen is now left with no choice but to punish Iolanthe with death (&quot;It may not be ... Once again thy vow is broken&quot;). As she prepares to execute Iolanthe, the Queen learns that the rest of the fairies have chosen husbands from among the peers, thus also incurring death sentences – but the Queen blanches at the prospect of slaughtering all of them. The Lord Chancellor suggests a solution: change the law by inserting a single word: &quot;every fairy shall die who marry a mortal.&quot; The Fairy Queen cheerfully agrees and, to save her life, the dutiful soldier, Private Willis, agrees to marry her. Seeing no reason to stay in the mortal realm if peers are to be recruited &quot;from persons of intelligence&quot;, the peers join the fairy ranks and &quot;away [they] go to fairyland&quot; (&quot;Soon as we may, off and away&quot;).

==Musical numbers==
*Overture

Act I
*1. &quot;Tripping hither, tripping thither&quot; (Celia, Leila, and Chorus of Fairies)
*2. &quot;Iolanthe! From thy dark exile thou art summoned&quot; (Queen, Iolanthe, Celia, Leila, and Chorus of Fairies)
*3. &quot;Good-morrow, good mother&quot; (Strephon and Chorus of Fairies)
*4. &quot;Fare thee well, attractive stranger&quot; (Queen and Chorus of Fairies)
*4a. &quot;Good-morrow, good lover&quot; (Phyllis and Strephon)
*5. &quot;None shall part us from each other&quot; (Phyllis and Strephon)
*6. &quot;Loudly let the trumpet bray&quot; (Chorus of Peers)
*7. &quot;The law is the true embodiment&quot; (Lord Chancellor and Chorus of Peers)
*8. &quot;My well-loved Lord&quot; and Barcarole, &quot;Of all the young ladies I know&quot; (Phyllis, Lord Tolloller, and Lord Mountararat)
*9. &quot;Nay, tempt me not&quot; (Phyllis)
*10. &quot;Spurn not the nobly born&quot; (Lord Tolloller and Chorus of Peers)
*11. &quot;My lords, it may not be&quot; (Phyllis, Lord Tolloller, Lord Mountararat, Strephon, Lord Chancellor, and Chorus of Peers)
*12. &quot;When I went to the Bar&quot; (Lord Chancellor)
*13. Finale Act I (Ensemble)
**&quot;When darkly looms the day&quot;
**&quot;The lady of my love has caught me talking to another&quot;
**&quot;Go away, madam&quot;
**&quot;Henceforth Strephon, cast away&quot;
**&quot;With Strephon for your foe, no doubt / Young Strephon is the kind of lout&quot;

Act II
*14. &quot;When all night long a chap remains&quot; (Private Willis)
*15. &quot;Strephon&#x27;s a member of Parliament&quot; (Chorus of Fairies and Peers)
*16. &quot;When Britain really ruled the waves&quot; (Lord Mountararat and Chorus)
*17. &quot;In vain to us you plead&quot; (Leila, Celia, Chorus of Fairies, Mountararat, Tolloller, and Chorus of Peers)
*18. &quot;Oh, foolish fay&quot; (Queen with Chorus of Fairies)
*19. &quot;Though p&#x27;r&#x27;aps I may incur thy blame&quot; (Phyllis, Lord Mountararat, Lord Tolloller, and Private Willis)
*20. &quot;Love, unrequited, robs me of my rest&quot; ... &quot;When you&#x27;re lying awake&quot; (Lord Chancellor)
*21. &quot;If you go in you&#x27;re sure to win&quot; (Lord Tolloller, Lord Mountararat, and Lord Chancellor)
*22. &quot;If we&#x27;re weak enough to tarry&quot; (Phyllis and Strephon)
*23. &quot;My lord, a suppliant at your feet&quot; (Iolanthe)
*24. &quot;It may not be&quot; (Lord Chancellor, Iolanthe, and Chorus of Fairies)
*25. &quot;Soon as we may, off and away&quot; (Ensemble)

===Deleted songs===
*18a. &quot;De Belville was regarded as the Crichton of his age&quot; (Mountararat) was cut soon after the opening night of &quot;Iolanthe&quot;. The number appeared soon after Mountararat&#x27;s Act II entrance, after Phyllis&#x27;s comment about Strephon going about &quot;with a mother considerably younger than himself&quot;. After a short dialogue (which would also be cut) about how people become peers, Mountararat sings a long song about De Belville, a polymath whose talents ranged from painting to literature to inventions. Government was at a loss as to how to reward him – until he inherited millions and obtained a seat in Parliament and &quot;a taste for making inconvenient speeches in the House (of Commons)&quot;. He was promptly rewarded by being removed from that House by being given a peerage. According to Reginald Allen&#x27;s &quot;The First Night Gilbert and Sullivan&quot;, as well as contemporaneous reviews, it was recited on the first night, rather than sung, and the middle stanza omitted. The music has been lost, except for a leader violin part found in a private collection of band parts in 1999.
*21a. &quot;Fold your flapping wings&quot; (Strephon) was sung on the first night and cut soon afterwards. The song, preceded by a recitative for Strephon (&quot;My bill has now been read a second time&quot;) appeared shortly after #21, following the exit of the two Earls and the Lord Chancellor and the entrance of Strephon. The tone of the song is dark and angry, in marked contrast with the generally genial tone of &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, and the lyrics make the case that bad behaviour by the underclasses is caused by their unfortunate circumstances: &quot;I might be as bad – as unlucky, rather – if I only had Fagin for a father.&quot; The music to this song survives, and although most productions continue to omit it, the song has been used in some modern productions and as a separate concert piece.

==Musical and textual analysis==

At the time they wrote &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, both Gilbert and Sullivan were in their peak creative years, and &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, their seventh work together, drew the best from both composer and author. Sullivan&#x27;s biographer, Arthur Jacobs, wrote: &quot;[Sullivan] had composed a brilliant new score (his most subtle yet) to a scintillating libretto. ... &quot;Iolanthe&quot; is the work in which Sullivan&#x27;s operetta style takes a definite step forward, and metamorphosis of musical themes is its characteristic new feature. ... By recurrence and metamorphosis of themes Sullivan made the score more fluid&quot;. Sullivan&#x27;s overture was superior in structure and orchestration to those that his assistants had constructed for the earlier operas. Much of his &quot;fairy&quot; music pays deliberate homage to the incidental music written by Felix Mendelssohn for an 1842 production of Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;A Midsummer Night&#x27;s Dream&quot;. Richard Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Ring&quot; cycle premiered in London earlier in 1882. The music for the fairies reflects Wagner&#x27;s style, and the score uses leitmotifs, including a distinctive four-note theme associated with the character of Iolanthe. The Fairy Queen&#x27;s music parodies that of Wagnerian heroines such as Brünnhilde. The score is wider in range of emotion and style, with innovative use of pizzicato strings, clever and varied underscoring of patter, the tender, sentimental eleventh-hour number for the title character, apt matching of the music to the absurd comedy of the lyrics, and a sustained first act finale with a series of dramatic situations that ends with the confrontation between the fairies and peers.

Gilbert, too, was influenced by earlier works, including &quot;The Mountain Sylph&quot; by John Barnett. Two characters in &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, Strephon and Phyllis, are described as &quot;Arcadian&quot; shepherds. Arcadia was a legendary site of rural perfection, first described by the Ancient Greeks, that was a popular setting for writers of the 19th century. Gilbert had written an earlier work called &quot;Happy Arcadia&quot;. He had also created several &quot;fairy comedies&quot; at the Haymarket Theatre in the early 1870s. These plays, influenced by the fairy work of James Planché, are founded upon the idea of self-revelation by characters under the influence of some magic or some supernatural interference. Several of &quot;Iolanthe&#x27;s&quot; themes are continued from &quot;Patience&quot;, including the battle between the sexes and the satire on legal and political themes. &quot;Iolanthe&quot; is one of several of Gilbert&#x27;s works, including among others &quot;The Wicked World&quot;, &quot;Broken Hearts&quot;, &quot;Fallen Fairies&quot; and &quot;Princess Ida&quot;, where the introduction of males into a tranquil world of women brings &quot;mortal love&quot; that wreaks havoc with the status quo.

Gilbert&#x27;s absurdist style is on full display in &quot;Iolanthe&quot;. For example, all the members of the House of Lords are in love with Phyllis, a ward of the Lord Chancellor. Gilbert satirically sets up the fantastical fairies as the agents of common sense in contrast with the nonsensical peers, who should be sober parliamentarians, while the most poetically romantic of the fairies, the &quot;Arcadian&quot; shepherd, Strephon, is chosen to lead both houses of Parliament. One of Gilbert&#x27;s biographers, Andrew Crowther wrote: &quot;The things that make [the opera] memorable as a work of art [include] the peers entering in the full pomp of their formal robes, magnificent and ridiculous.&quot; Among many pot-shots that Gilbert takes at lawyers in this opera, the Lord Chancellor sings that, as a young lawyer, he decided to &quot;work on a new and original plan&quot; similar to the practice in other professions, that diligence, honesty, honour and merit should lead to promotion. Gilbert uses the &quot;fairy law&quot; as a proxy for mortal law, in which an &quot;equity draughtsman&quot; can, with &quot;the insertion of a single word&quot;, change the entire meaning of the law. Crowther notes: &quot;All kinds of tone ... mingle in this opera: whimsy, fantasy, romance, wit and political satire.&quot;

==Productions==

&quot;Iolanthe&quot; had a successful initial run in London of 398 performances, spanning the holiday seasons of both 1882 and 1883. Gilbert designed the costumes himself, and sets were by the Drury Lane designer Henry Emden. In an unprecedented first for any play, the New York premiere was given on the same date – 25 November 1882, with the composer&#x27;s assistant, Alfred Cellier, conducting there. In Australia, &quot;Iolanthe&quot; was first seen on 9 May 1885 at the Theatre Royal, Melbourne, produced by J. C. Williamson.

In the British provinces, &quot;Iolanthe&quot; played – either by itself, or in repertory – continuously from February 1882 through 1885, then not again until late 1891. From then on, it was always present in the D&#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company&#x27;s touring repertory, being included in some part of every season until the company&#x27;s closure in 1982. Most of the costumes were redesigned by Percy Anderson in 1915 and by George Sheringham in 1932, and Peter Goffin designed new sets in 1957 and some new costumes in 1960. After its original production, &quot;Iolanthe&quot; was not revived in London until 1901, making it the first of the operas to be revived after the composer&#x27;s death the year before. It was also included in two Savoy repertory seasons, in 1907 and 1908–09.

&quot;Iolanthe&quot; was the first Gilbert and Sullivan opera performed professionally in Britain by a non-D&#x27;Oyly Carte company. It was produced by the Sadler&#x27;s Wells Opera (now English National Opera) in January 1962, immediately after the Gilbert copyrights expired. It was well received and was successfully revived for many seasons by Sadler&#x27;s Wells until 1978. Michael Heyland restaged &quot;Iolanthe&quot; for D&#x27;Oyly Carte in 1977, the year of Queen Elizabeth&#x27;s Silver Jubilee, with silver-themed designs. &quot;Iolanthe&quot; has remained one of the most popular of the Gilbert and Sullivan works. Thousands of professional and amateur productions of the opera have been given throughout the English-speaking world, and the opera continues to be performed regularly today. The Internet Broadway Database lists 20 productions of the opera on Broadway alone.

The following table shows the history of the D&#x27;Oyly Carte productions in Gilbert&#x27;s lifetime (not including touring companies):

==Historical casting==
The following tables show the casts of the principal original productions and D&#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company touring repertory at various times through to the company&#x27;s 1982 closure:


==Selected recordings==
Of the D&#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company recordings of this opera, the 1930 and 1960 recordings have been the best received, and the latter includes the dialogue. The revived D&#x27;Oyly Carte&#x27;s 1991 recording contains Strephon&#x27;s cut number &quot;Fold Your Flapping Wings&quot; as a bonus track.

On video are the 1982 Brent Walker production and more recent performances from the International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival.

*1930 D&#x27;Oyly Carte – Conductor: Malcolm Sargent
*1951 D&#x27;Oyly Carte – Conductor: Isidore Godfrey
*1960 D&#x27;Oyly Carte (with dialogue) – New Symphony Orchestra of London, Band of the Grenadier Guards, Conductor: Isidore Godfrey
*1982 Brent Walker Productions (video) – Ambrosian Opera Chorus, London Symphony Orchestra, Conductor: Alexander Faris; Stage Director: David Pountney
*1991 D&#x27;Oyly Carte – Conductor: John Pryce-Jones
*2013 Lamplighters Music Theatre (with dialogue) – Conductor: Baker Peeples

==Cultural influence==
;British politics
When Margaret Thatcher was elected as Prime Minister, the press joked about the line from the opera, &quot;This comes of women interfering in politics!&quot; Lord Falconer, who served as Tony Blair&#x27;s second Lord Chancellor, was reportedly influenced by &quot;Iolanthe&quot; in his moves to reform or disband the office.

;Effect upon Chief Justice Rehnquist
William H. Rehnquist, former Chief Justice of the United States, was an avid Gilbert and Sullivan fan and was inspired by the costume of the Lord Chancellor, in a production of &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, to add four golden stripes to the sleeves of his judicial robes. The next Chief Justice, John G. Roberts Jr., did not retain the ornamentation. In 1980, while an Associate Justice, Rehnquist, in his dissenting opinion in the case of &quot;Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v. Virginia&quot;, compares these words of the Lord Chancellor to the &quot;flavor from the various opinions supporting the judgment in this case&quot;: &quot;The Law is the true embodiment/Of everything that&#x27;s excellent,/It has no kind of fault or flaw,/And I, My Lords, embody the Law.&quot;

;Adaptations
&quot;The Ratepayers&#x27; Iolanthe&quot; was a 1984 musical adapted by Ned Sherrin and Alistair Beaton. Sherrin directed and won a Laurence Olivier Award for Outstanding Achievement in a Musical for the musical&#x27;s &quot;conception&quot;.

;Literature and music
The science fiction writer Isaac Asimov was a Gilbert and Sullivan fan. His Foundation Trilogy was conceived after his reading &quot;Iolanthe&quot; started a train of thought about military empires. Also, in &quot;Runaround&quot;, a story in Asimov&#x27;s &quot;I, Robot&quot;, a robot, while in a state similar to drunkenness, sings snippets of Gilbert and Sullivan songs, including &quot;The Nightmare Song&quot; from &quot;Iolanthe&quot;. In Michael Chabon&#x27;s 2004 novel &quot;The Final Solution&quot;, Bruno the parrot sings bits from &quot;Iolanthe&quot;. The eponymous hero of David Nobbs&#x27; &quot;The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin&quot; has &quot;Iolanthe&quot; as a middle name, allegedly due to his being born during a performance of the opera. An illustrated booklet, &quot;A Parody on Iolanthe&quot;, was written and published by D. Dalziel in 1883 and concerns the Chicago &amp; Alton Railway.

In his 1974 album &quot;Todd&quot;, Todd Rundgren performs the &quot;Lord Chancellor&#x27;s Nightmare Song&quot; (&quot;When you&#x27;re lying awake...&quot;).

==See also==
*Mount Ararat, after which one of the characters, Lord Mountararat, is named.
*Deceased Wife&#x27;s Sister&#x27;s Marriage Act 1907, proposals for which are mentioned in the opera

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Also, five supplements, privately printed.
* 

==External links==

* &quot;Iolanthe&quot; at The Gilbert &amp; Sullivan Archive
* &quot;Iolanthe&quot; at The Gilbert &amp; Sullivan Discography
* Libretto
* Transcription of a review of &quot;Iolanthe&quot; by Clement Scott
* Biographies of the people listed in the historical casting chart
* Gilbert &amp; Sullivan song parodies, including some from &quot;Iolanthe&quot;
* Photos from D&#x27;Oyly Carte productions of &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, 1882 to 1980</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13220650" start="44" end="55" title="comic opera" label="comic opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q212692" start="70" end="85" title="Arthur Sullivan" label="Arthur Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q348513" start="102" end="115" title="W. S. Gilbert" label="W. S. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260479" start="159" end="170" title="Savoy opera" label="Savoy opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="230" end="250" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="270" end="275" title="fairy" label="fairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168786" start="405" end="412" title="Arcadia (utopia)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q831704" start="453" end="457" title="Ward (law)" label="Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q284804" start="461" end="469" title="Court of Chancery" label="Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="494" end="508" title="House of Lords" label="House of Peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="765" end="774" title="satire" label="satirises"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165797" start="1113" end="1126" title="Savoy Theatre" label="Savoy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897647" start="1293" end="1301" title="Patience (opera)" label="Patience"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1524" end="1536" title="Gas lighting#Theatrical use" label="gas lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700153" start="1774" end="1805" title="D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company" label="D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q348513" start="2092" end="2105" title="W. S. Gilbert" label="W. S. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q212692" start="2150" end="2165" title="Arthur Sullivan" label="Arthur Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q797524" start="2275" end="2285" title="Bab Ballads" label="Bab Ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="3402" end="3422" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897647" start="3452" end="3460" title="Patience (opera)" label="Patience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165797" start="3497" end="3510" title="Savoy Theatre" label="Savoy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="4021" end="4035" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="4486" end="4495" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q32505" start="5436" end="5448" title="Henry Irving" label="Henry Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579000" start="5464" end="5475" title="W. G. Wills" label="W. G. Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411990" start="5496" end="5521" title="King René&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="King René&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q953440" start="5632" end="5657" title="Richard D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte" label="Richard D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568785" start="6053" end="6066" title="Opera Comique" label="Opera Comique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422991" start="6480" end="6496" title="Eyre Massey Shaw" label="Eyre Massey Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q620510" start="6558" end="6571" title="apostrophe (figure of speech)" label="apostrophises"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725740" start="6744" end="6757" title="Alice Barnett" label="Alice Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q24354" start="6867" end="6873" title="Stalls (theatre)" label="stalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197244" start="7200" end="7215" title="H.M.S. Pinafore" label="H.M.S. Pinafore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215463" start="7236" end="7259" title="The Pirates of Penzance" label="The Pirates of Penzance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434058" start="7848" end="7861" title="Fanny Ronalds" label="Fanny Ronalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260479" start="7981" end="7992" title="Savoy opera" label="Savoy opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091101" start="8151" end="8163" title="Princess Ida" label="Princess Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="8200" end="8206" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="8212" end="8226" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="8335" end="8350" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q31687" start="8358" end="8366" title="baritone" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31687" start="8398" end="8406" title="baritone" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="8433" end="8438" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27911" start="8482" end="8486" title="Bass (voice type)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q168786" start="8502" end="8510" title="Arcadia (utopia)" label="Arcadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q31687" start="8521" end="8529" title="baritone" label="baritone"/>
<link wikidata="Q37137" start="8554" end="8563" title="contralto" label="contralto"/>
<link wikidata="Q186506" start="8609" end="8622" title="mezzo-soprano" label="mezzo-soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="8641" end="8648" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q186506" start="8667" end="8680" title="mezzo-soprano" label="mezzo-soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q30903" start="8777" end="8784" title="soprano" label="soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="10117" end="10132" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q831704" start="10140" end="10153" title="Ward (law)" label="ward of court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="10503" end="10517" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q51280089" start="10834" end="10838" title="peerage" label="peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="11496" end="11506" title="Nobility" label="blue blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q176763" start="11758" end="11766" title="rules of evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="12923" end="12943" title="member of parliament" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="13120" end="13141" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q772054" start="13831" end="13847" title="Grenadier Guards" label="Grenadier Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="14791" end="14801" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="18564" end="18567" title="fairy" label="fay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255249" start="19301" end="19309" title="James Crichton" label="Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="19718" end="19726" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="19962" end="19980" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House (of Commons)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607599" start="20570" end="20574" title="reading (legislature)" label="read"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392000" start="21004" end="21009" title="Fagin" label="Fagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799218" start="21466" end="21479" title="Arthur Jacobs" label="Arthur Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147752" start="22062" end="22078" title="incidental music" label="incidental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="22090" end="22107" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305214" start="22115" end="22130" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream (Mendelssohn)" label="1842 production"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871" start="22159" end="22189" title="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream" label="A Midsummer Night&amp;#x27;s Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="22197" end="22211" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="22225" end="22229" title="Ring of the Nibelung" label="Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q221117" start="22354" end="22363" title="leitmotif" label="leitmotif"/>
<link wikidata="Q850506" start="22522" end="22532" title="Brünnhilde" label="Brünnhilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752486" start="22998" end="23016" title="The Mountain Sylph" label="The Mountain Sylph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992209" start="23026" end="23038" title="John Barnett" label="John Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q168786" start="23151" end="23158" title="Arcadia (utopia)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="23224" end="23238" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652476" start="23349" end="23362" title="Happy Arcadia" label="Happy Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q540426" start="23432" end="23449" title="Haymarket Theatre" label="Haymarket Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680990" start="23515" end="23528" title="James Planché" label="James Planché"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774745" start="23923" end="23939" title="The Wicked World" label="The Wicked World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973398" start="23953" end="23966" title="Broken Hearts" label="Broken Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432238" start="23980" end="23994" title="Fallen Fairies" label="Fallen Fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091101" start="24011" end="24023" title="Princess Ida" label="Princess Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603318" start="25879" end="25893" title="Alfred Cellier" label="Alfred Cellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="25999" end="26008" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680143" start="26022" end="26038" title="J. C. Williamson" label="J. C. Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700153" start="26254" end="26285" title="D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company" label="D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte Opera Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167225" start="26438" end="26452" title="Percy Anderson (designer)" label="Percy Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544507" start="26468" end="26485" title="George Sheringham" label="George Sheringham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174274" start="26499" end="26511" title="Peter Goffin" label="Peter Goffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342882" start="26988" end="27013" title="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Opera" label="Sadler&amp;#x27;s Wells Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831114" start="27212" end="27227" title="Michael Heyland" label="Michael Heyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q31964" start="27640" end="27666" title="Internet Broadway Database" label="Internet Broadway Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="27704" end="27712" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050745" start="28486" end="28529" title="International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival" label="International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q731292" start="28569" end="28584" title="Malcolm Sargent" label="Malcolm Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493054" start="28622" end="28637" title="Isidore Godfrey" label="Isidore Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28680" end="28712" title="New Symphony Orchestra (London)#Post-war NSO" label="New Symphony Orchestra of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="28836" end="28861" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718828" start="28874" end="28889" title="Alexander Faris" label="Alexander Faris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="29099" end="29116" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q337117" start="29252" end="29265" title="Charles Falconer, Baron Falconer of Thoroton" label="Lord Falconer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="29281" end="29291" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="29457" end="29477" title="William Rehnquist" label="William H. Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="29486" end="29520" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11153" start="29745" end="29764" title="John G. Roberts" label="John G. Roberts Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q48989735" start="29895" end="29932" title="Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v. Virginia" label="Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v. Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945635" start="30306" end="30317" title="Ned Sherrin" label="Ned Sherrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727255" start="30322" end="30337" title="Alistair Beaton" label="Alistair Beaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995973" start="30366" end="30429" title="Laurence Olivier Award for Outstanding Achievement in a Musical" label="Laurence Olivier Award for Outstanding Achievement in a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="30527" end="30539" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564644" start="30576" end="30594" title="Foundation Trilogy" label="Foundation Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074155" start="30714" end="30723" title="Runaround (story)" label="Runaround"/>
<link wikidata="Q393018" start="30762" end="30770" title="I, Robot" label="I, Robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q313466" start="30945" end="30959" title="Michael Chabon" label="Michael Chabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733943" start="30984" end="31002" title="The Final Solution (novel)" label="The Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238053" start="31087" end="31098" title="David Nobbs" label="David Nobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733193" start="31111" end="31147" title="The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin" label="The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840491" start="31387" end="31414" title="Alton Railroad" label="Chicago &amp;amp; Alton Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530242" start="31441" end="31445" title="Todd (album)" label="Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="31453" end="31466" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q72303" start="31592" end="31604" title="Mount Ararat" label="Mount Ararat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248870" start="31670" end="31722" title="Deceased Wife&amp;#x27;s Sister&amp;#x27;s Marriage Act 1907" label="Deceased Wife&amp;#x27;s Sister&amp;#x27;s Marriage Act 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131401" start="32070" end="32083" title="Clement Scott" label="Clement Scott"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46784" wikidata="Q122366" url="?curid=46784" title="Daniel Bernoulli">
<text>Daniel Bernoulli ( ; ; – 27 March 1782) was a Swiss-French mathematician and physicist and was one of the many prominent mathematicians in the Bernoulli family from Basel. He is particularly remembered for his applications of mathematics to mechanics, especially fluid mechanics, and for his pioneering work in probability and statistics. His name is commemorated in the Bernoulli&#x27;s principle, a particular example of the conservation of energy, which describes the mathematics of the mechanism underlying the operation of two important technologies of the 20th century: the carburetor and the aeroplane wing.

==Early life==

Daniel Bernoulli was born in Groningen, in the Netherlands, into a family of distinguished mathematicians. The Bernoulli family came originally from Antwerp, at that time in the Spanish Netherlands, but emigrated to escape the Spanish persecution of the Protestants. After a brief period in Frankfurt the family moved to Basel, in Switzerland.

Daniel was the son of Johann Bernoulli (one of the early developers of calculus) and a nephew of Jacob Bernoulli (an early researcher in probability theory and the discoverer of the mathematical constant e). He had two brothers, Niklaus and Johann II. Daniel Bernoulli was described by W. W. Rouse Ball as &quot;by far the ablest of the younger Bernoullis&quot;.

He is said to have had a bad relationship with his father. Both of them entered and tied for first place in a scientific contest at the University of Paris. Johann banned Daniel from his house, allegedly being unable to bear the &quot;shame&quot; of Daniel being considered his equal. Johann allegedly plagiarized key ideas from Daniel&#x27;s book &quot;Hydrodynamica&quot; in his book &quot;Hydraulica&quot; and backdated them to before &quot;Hydrodynamica&quot;. Daniel&#x27;s attempts at reconciliation with his father were unsuccessful.

When he was in school, Johann encouraged Daniel to study business citing poor financial compensation for mathematicians. Daniel initially refused but later relented and studied both business and medicine at his father&#x27;s behest under the condition that his father would teach him mathematics privately. Daniel studied medicine at Basel, Heidelberg, and Strasbourg, and earned a PhD in anatomy and botany in 1721.

He was a contemporary and close friend of Leonhard Euler. He went to St. Petersburg in 1724 as professor of mathematics, but was very unhappy there. A temporary illness together with the censorship by the Russian Orthodox Church and disagreements over his salary gave him an excuse for leaving St. Petersburg in 1733. He returned to the University of Basel, where he successively held the chairs of medicine, metaphysics, and natural philosophy until his death.

In May 1750 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society.

==Mathematical work==
His earliest mathematical work was the &quot;Exercitationes&quot; (&quot;Mathematical Exercises&quot;), published in 1724 with the help of Goldbach. Two years later he pointed out for the first time the frequent desirability of resolving a compound motion into motions of translation and motion of rotation. His chief work is &quot;Hydrodynamica&quot;, published in 1738. It resembles Joseph Louis Lagrange&#x27;s &quot;Mécanique Analytique&quot; in being arranged so that all the results are consequences of a single principle, namely, conservation of energy. This was followed by a memoir on the theory of the tides, to which, conjointly with the memoirs by Euler and Colin Maclaurin, a prize was awarded by the French Academy: these three memoirs contain all that was done on this subject between the publication of Isaac Newton&#x27;s &quot;Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica&quot; and the investigations of Pierre-Simon Laplace. Bernoulli also wrote a large number of papers on various mechanical questions, especially on problems connected with vibrating strings, and the solutions given by Brook Taylor and by Jean le Rond d&#x27;Alembert.

==Economics and statistics==
In his 1738 book &quot;Specimen theoriae novae de mensura sortis (Exposition of a New Theory on the Measurement of Risk)&quot;, Bernoulli offered a solution to the St. Petersburg paradox as the basis of the economic theory of risk aversion, risk premium, and utility. Bernoulli often noticed that when making decisions that involved some uncertainty, people did not always try to maximize their possible monetary gain, but rather tried to maximize &quot;utility&quot;, an economic term encompassing their personal satisfaction and benefit. Bernoulli realized that for humans, there is a direct relationship between money gained and utility, but that it diminishes as the money gained increases. For example, to a person whose income is $10,000 per year, an additional $100 in income will provide more utility than it would to a person whose income is $50,000 per year.

One of the earliest attempts to analyze a statistical problem involving censored data was Bernoulli&#x27;s 1766 analysis of smallpox morbidity and mortality data to demonstrate the efficacy of inoculation.

==Physics==
In &quot;Hydrodynamica&quot; (1738) he laid the basis for the kinetic theory of gases, and applied the idea to explain Boyle&#x27;s law.

He worked with Euler on elasticity and the development of the Euler–Bernoulli beam equation. Bernoulli&#x27;s principle is of critical use in aerodynamics.

According to Léon Brillouin, the principle of superposition was first stated by Daniel Bernoulli in 1753: &quot;The general motion of a vibrating system is given by a superposition of its proper vibrations.&quot;

==Works==
* 

==Legacy==
In 2002, Bernoulli was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum.

==See also==
* Hydrodynamica
* Mathematical modelling of infectious diseases

==References==
===Footnotes===
===Works cited===

*(Original entry based on the public domain Rouse History of Mathematics&quot;)
*
*
* 
==External links==
* 
* Rothbard, Murray. Daniel Bernoulli and the Founding of Mathematical Economics , &quot;Mises Institute&quot; (excerpted from &quot;An Austrian Perspective on the History of Economic Thought&quot;)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122366" start="0" end="16" title="Daniel Bernoulli" label="Daniel Bernoulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="46" end="51" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="52" end="58" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="59" end="72" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="77" end="86" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q826719" start="143" end="159" title="Bernoulli family" label="Bernoulli family"/>
<link wikidata="Q172145" start="263" end="278" title="fluid mechanics" label="fluid mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="311" end="322" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="327" end="337" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181328" start="371" end="397" title="Bernoulli&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Bernoulli&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="427" end="449" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165435" start="580" end="590" title="carburetor" label="carburetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="609" end="613" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q749" start="661" end="670" title="Groningen (city)" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q826719" start="699" end="705" title="Bernoulli family" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="810" end="829" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="886" end="896" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q227897" start="999" end="1015" title="Johann Bernoulli" label="Johann Bernoulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="1048" end="1056" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122392" start="1074" end="1089" title="Jacob Bernoulli" label="Jacob Bernoulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="1114" end="1132" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q82435" start="1181" end="1182" title="E (mathematical constant)" label="e"/>
<link wikidata="Q124001" start="1206" end="1213" title="Nicolaus II Bernoulli" label="Niklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q123994" start="1218" end="1227" title="Johann II Bernoulli" label="Johann II"/>
<link wikidata="Q429858" start="1263" end="1279" title="W. W. Rouse Ball" label="W. W. Rouse Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="1477" end="1496" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928507" start="1695" end="1708" title="Hydrodynamica" label="Hydrodynamica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="2078" end="2086" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q372608" start="2217" end="2222" title="University of Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="2224" end="2234" title="Heidelberg University" label="Heidelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157575" start="2240" end="2250" title="University of Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="2343" end="2357" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="2370" end="2384" title="Saint Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="2506" end="2529" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q372608" start="2638" end="2657" title="University of Basel" label="University of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="2700" end="2708" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="2710" end="2721" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="2727" end="2745" title="natural philosophy" label="natural philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="2793" end="2820" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q207325" start="2984" end="2992" title="Christian Goldbach" label="Goldbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="3230" end="3251" title="Joseph Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="3382" end="3404" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8755" start="3515" end="3530" title="Colin Maclaurin" label="Colin Maclaurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="3559" end="3573" title="French Academy" label="French Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="3664" end="3676" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q205921" start="3690" end="3734" title="Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica" label="Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="3767" end="3787" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252739" start="3906" end="3922" title="vibrating string" label="vibrating string"/>
<link wikidata="Q212085" start="3952" end="3964" title="Brook Taylor" label="Brook Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q153232" start="3972" end="4000" title="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert" label="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q874375" start="4196" end="4218" title="St. Petersburg paradox" label="St. Petersburg paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426675" start="4258" end="4271" title="risk aversion" label="risk aversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q523022" start="4273" end="4285" title="risk premium" label="risk premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q466707" start="4291" end="4298" title="utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q466707" start="4486" end="4493" title="utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q189813" start="4974" end="4987" title="censoring (statistics)" label="censored data"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="5026" end="5034" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="5035" end="5044" title="morbidity" label="morbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="5049" end="5058" title="Mortality rate" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664296" start="5095" end="5106" title="inoculation" label="inoculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200286" start="5183" end="5206" title="kinetic theory of gases" label="kinetic theory of gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q175974" start="5240" end="5256" title="Boyle&amp;#x27;s law" label="Boyle&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="5283" end="5293" title="Elasticity (physics)" label="elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q805099" start="5321" end="5350" title="Euler–Bernoulli beam equation" label="Euler–Bernoulli beam equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181328" start="5352" end="5378" title="Bernoulli&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Bernoulli&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="5401" end="5413" title="aerodynamics" label="aerodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q364062" start="5429" end="5443" title="Léon Brillouin" label="Léon Brillouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q284885" start="5449" end="5475" title="Superposition principle" label="principle of superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614528" start="5696" end="5738" title="International Air &amp;amp; Space Hall of Fame" label="International Air &amp;amp; Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308955" start="5746" end="5778" title="San Diego Air &amp;amp; Space Museum" label="San Diego Air &amp;amp; Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928507" start="5796" end="5809" title="Hydrodynamica" label="Hydrodynamica"/>
<link wikidata="Q990044" start="5812" end="5857" title="Mathematical modelling of infectious diseases" label="Mathematical modelling of infectious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="5939" end="5952" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q429858" start="5953" end="5981" title="Rouse History of Mathematics" label="Rouse History of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="6020" end="6036" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Rothbard, Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457448" start="6106" end="6121" title="Mises Institute" label="Mises Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749835" start="6150" end="6208" title="An Austrian Perspective on the History of Economic Thought" label="An Austrian Perspective on the History of Economic Thought"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46789" wikidata="Q13513" url="?curid=46789" title="Jean-Baptiste Say">
<text>Jean-Baptiste Say (; 5 January 1767 – 15 November 1832) was a liberal French economist and businessman who argued in favor of competition, free trade and lifting restraints on business. He is best known for Say&#x27;s law—also known as the law of markets—which he popularized, although scholars disagree as to whether it was Say who first articulated the theory. Moreover, he was one of the first economists to study entrepreneurship and conceptualized entrepreneurs as organizers and leaders of the economy. He was also closely involved in the development of the École spéciale de commerce et d&#x27;industrie (ESCP), historically the first business school to be established.

== Early life ==

Say was born in Lyon. His father Jean-Etienne Say was born to a Protestant family which had moved from Nîmes to Geneva for some time in consequence of the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. Say was intended to follow a commercial career and in 1785 was sent with his brother Horace to complete his education in England. He lodged for a time in Croydon and afterwards (following a return visit to France) in Fulham. During the latter period, he was employed successively by two London-based firms of sugar merchants, James Baillie &amp; Co and Samuel and William Hibbert. At the end of 1786, he accompanied Samuel Hibbert on a voyage to France which ended in December with Hibbert&#x27;s death in Nantes. Say returned to Paris, where he found employment in the office of a life assurance company directed by Étienne Clavière. His brother Louis Auguste (1774–1840) also became an economist.

== Writings, teaching and entrepreneurship ==

Say&#x27;s first literary attempt was a pamphlet on the liberty of the press, published in 1789. He later worked under Mirabeau on the &quot;Courrier de Provence&quot;. In 1792, he took part as a volunteer in the campaign of Champagne. In 1793, he assumed in keeping with French Revolutionary fashion the pseudonym Atticus and became secretary to Étienne Clavière, the then finance minister.

From 1794 to 1800, he edited a periodical, entitled &quot;La Decade philosophique, litteraire, et politique&quot;, in which he expounded the doctrines of Adam Smith. He had by this time established his reputation as a publicist and when the consular government was established in 1799 he was selected as one of the 100 members of the Tribunat, resigning the editorship of the &quot;Decade&quot;. In 1800, Say published &quot;Olbie, ou essai sur les moyens de réformer les mœurs d&#x27;une nation&quot;. In 1803, he published his principal work, the &quot;Traité d&#x27;économie politique ou simple exposition de la manière dont se forment, se distribuent et se composent les richesses&quot;. Having proved unwilling to compromise his convictions in the interests of Napoleon, Say was removed from the office of tribune in 1804. He turned to industrial activities and after having familiarised himself with the processes of cotton manufacture he established a spinning-mill at Auchy-lès-Hesdin in the Pas de Calais which employed some 400–500 people, mainly women and children. He devoted his leisure time to revising his economic treatise which had been out of print for some time, but the system of state censorship in place prevented him from republishing it.

In 1814, Say availed himself (to use his own words) of the relative liberty arising from the entrance of the allied powers into France to bring out a second edition of the work dedicated to the emperor Alexander I of Russia, who had professed himself his pupil. In the same year, the French government sent him to study the economic condition of the United Kingdom. The results of his observations appeared in a tract, &quot;De l&#x27;Angleterre et des Anglais&quot;. A third edition of the &quot;Traité&quot; appeared in 1817.

A chair of industrial economy was established for him in 1819 at the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers. In 1825, he became a member of the improvement council of the &quot;École spéciale de commerce et d&#x27;industrie&quot;, later renamed École Supérieure de Commerce de Paris, now ESCP Business School, one of the first business schools in the world. In 1831, he was made professor of political economy at the Collège de France. In 1828–1830, he published his &quot;Cours complet d&#x27;économie politique pratique&quot;.

== Say&#x27;s law ==

Say is well known for Say&#x27;s law, or the law of markets, often controversially summarised as:
* &quot;Aggregate supply creates its own aggregate demand&quot;
* &quot;Supply creates its own demand&quot;

Say&#x27;s law is instead uncontroversially summarized as:
* &quot;Supply constitutes its own demand&quot;
* &quot;Inherent in supply is the wherewithal for its own consumption&quot; (direct translation from French &quot;Traité d&#x27;économie politique&quot;)

The exact phrase &quot;supply creates its own demand&quot; was coined by John Maynard Keynes, who criticized it as in the former two, equating all four of these statements to mean the same thing. Some economists, including some advocates of Say&#x27;s law who dispute this characterization as a misrepresentation, have disputed his interpretation, claiming that Say&#x27;s law can actually be summarized more accurately as &quot;production precedes consumption&quot; and that Say was claiming that in order to consume one must produce something of value so that one can trade this (either in the form of money or barter) in order to consume later.

Similar sentiments through different wordings appear in the work of John Stuart Mill (1848) and his father James Mill (1808). The Scottish classical economist James Mill restates Say&#x27;s law in 1808, writing that &quot;production of commodities creates, and is the one and universal cause which creates a market for the commodities produced&quot;.

In Say&#x27;s language, &quot;products are paid for with products&quot; (1803, p. 153) or &quot;a glut can take place only when there are too many means of production applied to one kind of product and not enough to another&quot; (1803, pp. 178–179). Explaining his point at length, he wrote the following:
Say also wrote that it is not the abundance of money, but the abundance of other products in general that facilitates sales:
Say&#x27;s law may also have been culled from Ecclesiastes 5:11 – &quot;When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their eyes?&quot; (KJV). Say&#x27;s law has been considered by John Kenneth Galbraith as &quot;the most distinguished example of the stability of economic ideas, including when they are wrong&quot;.

Say&#x27;s law emerged during the early period of the Industrial Revolution, at a time when the economic phenomena of increased output merged with England&#x27;s cyclical inability to maintain both sales and unemployment. This led many to believe that there was a limit to the growth of production, and there may come a point when there is no means of purchasing all output generated. Say&#x27;s law of markets deals with the fact that production of commodities causes income to be paid to suppliers of the components of capital, labor, and land used in producing these goods and services. The sale price of these commodities is the sum of the payments of wages, rents, and profit. Income generated during production of a commodity equals the value of that commodity. Therefore, an increase in the supply of output will result in an increase in the income necessary to generate demand for those products.

== Theory of entrepreneurship ==

In the &quot;Treatise&quot;, his main economic work, Say stated that any production process required effort, knowledge and the &quot;application&quot; of the entrepreneur. According to him, entrepreneurs are intermediaries in the production process who combine productive agents such as land, capital and labor in order to meet the demand of consumers. As a result, they play a central role in the economy and fulfil a coordinating role.

Besides studying large-scale entrepreneurs, Say looked at people working for themselves:
Say also thought about which qualities are essential for successful entrepreneurs and highlighted the quality of judgement. To his mind, entrepreneurs have to continuously assess market needs and the means which could meet them, which requires an &quot;unerring market sense&quot;.

As he emphasized the coordinating function of entrepreneurs, Say viewed entrepreneurial income primarily as high wages that are paid in compensation for the skills and expert knowledge of entrepreneurs. He did so by making a distinction between the enterprise function and the supply-of-capital-function which allowed him to look at the earnings of the entrepreneur on the one hand and the remuneration of capital on the other hand. This clearly differentiates his theory from that of Joseph Schumpeter, who described entrepreneurial rent as short-term profits that compensate for high risk (Schumpeterian rent). Say also touched upon risk and uncertainty as well as innovation when discussing entrepreneurship, although he never deeply investigated their relationships. However, Say stated:

== Personal life ==
In 1793, Say married Mlle Deloche, daughter of a former lawyer.

== Honours ==
In 1826, Say was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

== Later years and death ==

In his later years, Say became subject to attacks of nervous apoplexy. He lost his wife in January 1830 and from that time his health declined. When the revolution of that year broke out, Say was named a member of the council-general of the department of the Seine, but he found it necessary to resign.

Say died in Paris on 15 November 1832 and was buried in the Père Lachaise Cemetery.

== References ==

Attribution:
* THe second part of this article is Ingram&#x27;s appreciation of Say&#x27;s work.

== Further reading ==
* .
* Garello, Jacques Garello (29 January 2011). &quot;Portrait: J.B. Say (1767–1832)&quot; . &quot;La nouvelle lettre&quot;. 1064: 8.
* .
* .

== External links ==
* Say&#x27;s Law and Economic Growth
* Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas &quot;Economic Insights&quot; article (Volume 11, Number 1)
* &quot;A Treatise on Political Economy&quot; at McMaster University Archive for the History of Economic Thought
* &quot;Letters to Malthus on Several Subjects of Political Economy&quot; (1821) at McMaster University Archive for the History of Economic Thought
* Guide to the Jean Baptiste Say Collection 1794–1821 at the University of Chicago Special Collections Research Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13513" start="0" end="17" title="Jean-Baptiste Say" label="Jean-Baptiste Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="62" end="69" title="Economic liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q319676" start="126" end="137" title="Competition (economics)" label="competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="139" end="149" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q626021" start="207" end="221" title="Say&amp;#x27;s law" label="Say&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="417" end="433" title="entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q29293" start="564" end="610" title="ESCP Business School" label="École spéciale de commerce et d&amp;#x27;industrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="712" end="716" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="760" end="770" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42807" start="799" end="804" title="Nîmes" label="Nîmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="808" end="814" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="869" end="884" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="1040" end="1047" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="1103" end="1109" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="1392" end="1398" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="1468" end="1482" title="life assurance" label="life assurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q289550" start="1503" end="1519" title="Étienne Clavière" label="Étienne Clavière"/>
<link wikidata="Q628335" start="1533" end="1546" title="Louis Auguste Say" label="Louis Auguste"/>
<link wikidata="Q218747" start="1752" end="1760" title="Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, Comte de Mirabeau" label="Mirabeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q273827" start="1858" end="1867" title="Champagne (province)" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1905" end="1922" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q289550" start="1980" end="1996" title="Étienne Clavière" label="Étienne Clavière"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="2180" end="2190" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q877619" start="2267" end="2286" title="French Consulate" label="consular government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688120" start="2360" end="2368" title="Tribunat" label="Tribunat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536742" start="2581" end="2710" title="Say&amp;#x27;s Political Economy" label="Traité d&amp;#x27;économie politique ou simple exposition de la manière dont se forment, se distribuent et se composent les richesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2792" end="2800" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="2985" end="2998" title="Cotton mill" label="spinning-mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q604447" start="3002" end="3018" title="Auchy-lès-Hesdin" label="Auchy-lès-Hesdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159898" start="3026" end="3039" title="Pas de Calais" label="Pas de Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q138107" start="3382" end="3423" title="War of the Sixth Coalition" label="entrance of the allied powers into France"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="3491" end="3512" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q524289" start="3887" end="3920" title="Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers" label="Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29293" start="4101" end="4121" title="ESCP Business School" label="ESCP Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143635" start="4140" end="4155" title="business school" label="business school"/>
<link wikidata="Q202660" start="4230" end="4247" title="Collège de France" label="Collège de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474789" start="4471" end="4487" title="Aggregate supply" label="Aggregate supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801078" start="4504" end="4520" title="aggregate demand" label="aggregate demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644540" start="4535" end="4564" title="Supply creates its own demand" label="Supply creates its own demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="4907" end="4926" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="5551" end="5567" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q271666" start="5590" end="5600" title="James Mill" label="James Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q131072" start="6313" end="6325" title="Ecclesiastes" label="Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="6493" end="6496" title="King James Version" label="KJV"/>
<link wikidata="Q186042" start="6537" end="6559" title="John Kenneth Galbraith" label="John Kenneth Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="6728" end="6749" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q78477" start="8910" end="8927" title="Joseph Schumpeter" label="Joseph Schumpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433023" start="9017" end="9035" title="Schumpeterian rent" label="Schumpeterian rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q104493" start="9060" end="9064" title="risk" label="risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649246" start="9069" end="9080" title="uncertainty" label="uncertainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="9092" end="9102" title="innovation" label="innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="9366" end="9399" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q8264724" start="9492" end="9500" title="apoplexy" label="apoplexy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="9584" end="9607" title="July Revolution" label="revolution of that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="9690" end="9695" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q311" start="9795" end="9817" title="Père Lachaise Cemetery" label="Père Lachaise Cemetery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46790" wikidata="Q351043" url="?curid=46790" title="Desert varnish">
<text>Desert varnish or rock varnish is an orange-yellow to black coating found on exposed rock surfaces in arid environments. Desert varnish is approximately one micrometer thick and exhibits nanometer-scale layering. Rock rust and desert patina are other terms which are also used for the condition, but less often.

==Formation==
Desert varnish forms only on physically stable rock surfaces that are no longer subject to frequent precipitation, fracturing or wind abrasion. The varnish is primarily composed of particles of clay along with oxides of iron and manganese. There is also a host of trace elements and almost always some organic matter. The color of the varnish varies from shades of brown to black.

It has been suggested that desert varnish should be investigated as a potential candidate for a &quot;shadow biosphere&quot;. However, a 2008 microscopy study posited that desert varnish has already been reproduced with chemistry not involving life in the lab, and that the main component is actually silica and not clay as previously thought. The study notes that desert varnish is an excellent fossilizer for microbes and indicator of water. Desert varnish appears to have been observed by rovers on Mars, and if examined may contain fossilized life from Mars&#x27;s wet period.

==Composition==

Originally scientists thought that the varnish was made from substances drawn out of the rocks it coats. Microscopic and microchemical observations, however, show that a major part of varnish is clay, which could only arrive by wind. Clay, then, acts as a to catch additional substances that chemically react together when the rock reaches high temperatures in the desert sun. Wetting by dew is also important in the process.

An important characteristic of black desert varnish is that it has an unusually high concentration of manganese. Manganese is relatively rare in the Earth&#x27;s crust, making up only 0.12% of its weight. In black desert varnish, however, manganese is 50 to 60 times more abundant. One proposal for a mechanism of desert varnish formation is that it is caused by manganese-oxidizing microbes (mixotrophs) which are common in environments poor in organic nutrients. A micro-environment pH above 7.5 is inhospitable for manganese-concentrating microbes. In such conditions, orange varnishes develop, poor in manganese (Mn) but rich in iron (Fe). An alternative hypothesis for Mn/Fe fluctuation has been proposed that considers Mn-rich and Fe-rich varnishes to be related to humid and arid climates, respectively.

Even though it contains high concentrations of iron and manganese, there are no significant modern uses of desert varnish. However, some Native American peoples created petroglyphs by scraping or chipping away the dark varnish to expose the lighter rock beneath.

Desert varnish often obscures the identity of the underlying rock, and different rocks have varying abilities to accept and retain varnish. Limestones, for example, typically do not have varnish because they are too water-soluble and therefore do not provide a stable surface for varnish to form. Shiny, dense and black varnishes form on basalt, fine quartzites and metamorphosed shales due to these rocks&#x27; relatively high resistance to weathering.

Its presence has been cited as a key factor in the preservation of a large number of petroglyphs dating back to the Iron Age and earlier in areas such as the Wadi Saham in the United Arab Emirates.

==See also==
* 
* 

==Gallery==
==References==

==External links==
* Desert Varnish
* Rock Varnish (desert varnish): An Internet Primer for Rock Art Research by Ronald I. Dorn, Professor of Geography Arizona State University
* DESERT VARNISH (rock varnish) 
* New Way Suggested to Search for Life on Mars — Space.com
* Researcher: Mars rock varnish hints of life July 2, 2001 By Richard Stenger CNN 
* Rock Varnish As A Habitat For Extant Life On Mars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q351043" start="0" end="14" title="Desert varnish" label="Desert varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q351043" start="18" end="30" title="Desert varnish" label="rock varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="85" end="89" title="Rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330709" start="102" end="106" title="arid" label="arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="128" end="135" title="varnish" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="157" end="167" title="micrometre" label="micrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="187" end="196" title="nanometer" label="nanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q351043" start="213" end="222" title="Desert varnish" label="Rock rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q351043" start="227" end="240" title="Desert varnish" label="desert patina"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="427" end="440" title="precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q201916" start="456" end="469" title="ventifact" label="wind abrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="521" end="525" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="537" end="543" title="oxidation" label="oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="547" end="551" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="556" end="565" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783121" start="629" end="643" title="organic matter" label="organic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q135741" start="811" end="827" title="shadow biosphere" label="shadow biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="1673" end="1679" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q41097" start="1696" end="1699" title="dew" label="dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="1837" end="1846" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="2118" end="2125" title="microbe" label="microbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q585902" start="2128" end="2137" title="mixotroph" label="mixotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783121" start="2181" end="2198" title="Organic matter" label="organic nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="2220" end="2222" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="2517" end="2529" title="arid climate" label="arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="2684" end="2699" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="2716" end="2726" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2951" end="2960" title="Limestone" label="Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="3149" end="3155" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="3162" end="3171" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="3177" end="3190" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="3191" end="3196" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q60755664" start="3382" end="3390" title="Iron Age in the United Arab Emirates" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858096" start="3424" end="3434" title="Wadi Saham" label="Wadi Saham"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="3442" end="3462" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46793" wikidata="Q242111" url="?curid=46793" title="Death Valley National Park">
<text>Death Valley National Park is a national park of the United States that straddles the California–Nevada border, east of the Sierra Nevada. The park boundaries include Death Valley, the northern section of Panamint Valley, the southern section of Eureka Valley and most of Saline Valley.

The park occupies an interface zone between the arid Great Basin and Mojave deserts, protecting the northwest corner of the Mojave Desert and its diverse environment of salt-flats, sand dunes, badlands, valleys, canyons and mountains.

Death Valley is the largest national park in the contiguous United States, as well as the hottest, driest and lowest of all the national parks in the United States. It contains Badwater Basin, the second-lowest point in the Western Hemisphere and lowest in North America at below sea level. More than 93% of the park is a designated wilderness area.

The park is home to many species of plants and animals which have adapted to the harsh desert environment including creosote bush, Joshua tree, bighorn sheep, coyote, and the endangered Death Valley pupfish, a survivor from much wetter times. UNESCO included Death Valley as the principal feature of its Mojave and Colorado Deserts Biosphere Reserve in 1984.

A series of Native American groups inhabited the area from as early as 7000 BC, most recently the Timbisha around 1000 AD who migrated between winter camps in the valleys and summer grounds in the mountains. A group of European-Americans, lost in the valley in 1849 while looking for a shortcut to the gold fields of California, gave this valley its grim name, even though only one of their group died there.

Several short-lived boom towns sprang up during the late 19th and early 20th centuries to mine gold and silver. The only long-term profitable ore to be mined was borax, which was transported out of the valley with twenty-mule teams. The valley later became the subject of books, radio programs, television series, and movies. Tourism expanded in the 1920s when resorts were built around Stovepipe Wells and Furnace Creek. Death Valley National Monument was declared in 1933 and the park was substantially expanded and became a national park in 1994.

The natural environment of the area has been shaped largely by its geology. The valley is actually a graben with the oldest rocks being extensively metamorphosed and at least 1.7 billion years old. Ancient, warm, shallow seas deposited marine sediments until rifting opened the Pacific Ocean. Additional sedimentation occurred until a subduction zone formed off the coast. The subduction uplifted the region out of the sea and created a line of volcanoes. Later the crust started to pull apart, creating the current Basin and Range landform. Valleys filled with sediment and, during the wet times of glacial periods, with lakes, such as Lake Manly.

Death Valley is the fifth-largest American national park and the largest in the contiguous United States. It is also larger than the states of Rhode Island and Delaware combined, and nearly as large as Puerto Rico. In 2013, Death Valley National Park was designated as a dark sky park by the International Dark-Sky Association.

==Geographic setting==
There are two major valleys in the park, Death Valley and Panamint Valley. Both of these valleys were formed within the last few million years and both are bounded by north–south-trending mountain ranges. These and adjacent valleys follow the general trend of Basin and Range topography with one modification: there are parallel strike-slip faults that perpendicularly bound the central extent of Death Valley. The result of this shearing action is additional extension in the central part of Death Valley which causes a slight widening and more subsidence there.

Uplift of surrounding mountain ranges and subsidence of the valley floor are both occurring. The uplift on the Black Mountains is so fast that the alluvial fans (fan-shaped deposits at the mouth of canyons) there are small and steep compared to the huge alluvial fans coming off the Panamint Range. Fast uplift of a mountain range in an arid environment often does not allow its canyons enough time to cut a classic V-shape all the way down to the stream bed. Instead, a V-shape ends at a slot canyon halfway down, forming a &#x27;wine glass canyon.&#x27; Sediment is deposited on a small and steep alluvial fan.

At below sea level at its lowest point, Badwater Basin on Death Valley&#x27;s floor is the second-lowest depression in the Western Hemisphere (behind Laguna del Carbón in Argentina), while Mount Whitney, only to the west, rises to and is the tallest mountain in the contiguous United States. This topographic relief is the greatest elevation gradient in the contiguous United States and is the terminus point of the Great Basin&#x27;s southwestern drainage. Although the extreme lack of water in the Great Basin makes this distinction of little current practical use, it does mean that in wetter times the lake that once filled Death Valley (Lake Manly) was the last stop for water flowing in the region, meaning the water there was saturated in dissolved materials. Thus, the salt pans in Death Valley are among the largest in the world and are rich in minerals, such as borax and various salts and hydrates. The largest salt pan in the park extends from the Ashford Mill Site to the Salt Creek Hills, covering some of the valley floor. The best known playa in the park is the Racetrack, known for its moving rocks.

==Climate==

According to the Köppen climate classification system, Death Valley National Park has a hot desert climate (&quot;BWh&quot;). The plant hardiness zone at Badwater Basin is 9b with an average annual extreme minimum temperature of .

Death Valley is the hottest and driest place in North America due to its lack of surface water and low relief. It is so frequently the hottest spot in the United States that many tabulations of the highest daily temperatures in the country omit Death Valley as a matter of course.

On the afternoon of July 10, 1913, the United States Weather Bureau recorded a high temperature of at Greenland Ranch (now Furnace Creek) in Death Valley. This temperature stands as the highest ambient air temperature ever recorded at the surface of the Earth. (A report of a temperature of recorded in Libya in 1922 was later determined to be inaccurate.) Daily summer temperatures of or greater are common, as well as below freezing nightly temperatures in the winter. July is the hottest month, with an average high of and an average low of . December is the coldest month, with an average high of and an average low of . The record low is . There are an average of 197.3 days annually with highs of or higher and 146.9 days annually with highs of or higher. Freezing temperatures of or lower occur on an average of 8.6 days annually.

Several of the larger Death Valley springs derive their water from a regional aquifer, which extends as far east as southern Nevada and Utah. Much of the water in this aquifer has been there for many thousands of years, since the Pleistocene ice ages, when the climate was cooler and wetter. Today&#x27;s drier climate does not provide enough precipitation to recharge the aquifer at the rate at which water is being withdrawn.
The highest range within the park is the Panamint Range, with Telescope Peak being its highest point at . The Death Valley region is a transitional zone in the northernmost part of the Mojave Desert and consists of five mountain ranges removed from the Pacific Ocean. Three of these are significant barriers: the Sierra Nevada, the Argus Range, and the Panamint Range. Air masses tend to lose moisture as they are forced up over mountain ranges, in what climatologists call a rainshadow effect.

The exaggerated rain shadow effect for the Death Valley area makes it North America&#x27;s driest spot, receiving about of rainfall annually at Badwater, and some years fail to register any measurable rainfall. Annual average precipitation varies from overall below sea level to over in the higher mountains that surround the valley. When rain does arrive it often does so in intense storms that cause flash floods which remodel the landscape and sometimes create very shallow ephemeral lakes.
The hot, dry climate makes it difficult for soil to form. Mass wasting, the down-slope movement of loose rock, is therefore the dominant erosive force in mountainous areas, resulting in &quot;skeletonized&quot; ranges (mountains with very little soil on them). Sand dunes in the park, while famous, are not nearly as widespread as their fame or the dryness of the area may suggest. The Mesquite Flat dune field is the most easily accessible from the paved road just east of Stovepipe Wells in the north-central part of the valley and is primarily made of quartz sand. Another dune field is just to the north but is instead mostly composed of travertine sand. The highest dunes in the park, and some of the highest in North America, are located in the Eureka Valley about to the north of Stovepipe Wells, while the Panamint Valley dunes and the Saline Valley dunes are located west and northwest of the town, respectively. The Ibex dune field is near the seldom-visited Ibex Hill in the southernmost part of the park, just south of the Saratoga Springs marshland. All the latter four dune fields are accessible only via unpaved roads. Prevailing winds in the winter come from the north, and prevailing winds in the summer come from the south. Thus, the overall position of the dune fields remains more or less fixed.

There are rare exceptions to the dry nature of the area. In 2005, an unusually wet winter created a &#x27;lake&#x27; in the Badwater Basin and led to the greatest wildflower season in the park&#x27;s history. In October 2015, a &quot;1000 year flood event&quot; with over three inches of rain caused major damage in Death Valley National Park. A similar widespread storm in August 2022 damaged pavement and deposited debris on nearly every road, trapping 1,000 residents and visitors overnight.

==Human history==

===Early inhabitants and transient populations===
Four Native American cultures are known to have lived in the area during the last 10,000 years. The first known group, the Nevares Spring People, were hunters and gatherers who arrived in the area perhaps 9,000 years ago (7000 BC) when there were still small lakes in Death Valley and neighboring Panamint Valley. A much milder climate persisted at that time, and large game animals were still plentiful. By 5,000 years ago (3000 BC) the Mesquite Flat People displaced the Nevares Spring People. Around 2,000 years ago the Saratoga Spring People moved into the area, which by then was probably already a hot, dry desert. This culture was more advanced at hunting and gathering and was skillful at handcrafts. They also left mysterious stone patterns in the valley.

One thousand years ago, the nomadic Timbisha (formerly called Shoshone and also known as Panamint or Koso) moved into the area and hunted game and gathered mesquite beans along with pinyon pine nuts. Because of the wide altitude differential between the valley bottom and the mountain ridges, especially on the west, the Timbisha practiced a vertical migration pattern. Their winter camps were located near water sources in the valley bottoms. As the spring and summer progressed and the weather warmed, grasses and other plant food sources ripened at progressively higher altitudes. November found them at the very top of the mountain ridges where they harvested pine nuts before moving back to the valley bottom for winter.

The California Gold Rush brought the first people of European descent known to visit the immediate area. In December 1849 two groups of California Gold Country-bound travelers with perhaps 100 wagons total stumbled into Death Valley after getting lost on what they thought was a shortcut off the Old Spanish Trail. Called the Bennett-Arcane Party, they were unable to find a pass out of the valley for weeks; they were able to find fresh water at various springs in the area, but were forced to eat several of their oxen to survive. They used the wood of their wagons to cook the meat and make jerky. The place where they did this is today referred to as &quot;Burnt Wagons Camp&quot; and is located near Stovepipe Wells.

After abandoning their wagons, they eventually were able to hike out of the valley. Just after leaving the valley, one of the women in the group turned and said, &quot;Goodbye Death Valley,&quot; giving the valley its name. Included in the party was William Lewis Manly whose autobiographical book &quot;Death Valley in &#x27;49&quot; detailed this trek and popularized the area (geologists later named the prehistoric lake that once filled the valley after him).

===Boom and bust===

The ores that are most famously associated with the area were also the easiest to collect and the most profitable: evaporite deposits such as salts, borate, and talc. Borax was found by Rosie and Aaron Winters near The Ranch at Death Valley (then called Greenland) in 1881. Later that same year, the Eagle Borax Works became Death Valley&#x27;s first commercial borax operation. William Tell Coleman built the Harmony Borax Works plant and began to process ore in late 1883 or early 1884, continuing until 1888. This mining and smelting company produced borax to make soap and for industrial uses. The end product was shipped out of the valley to the Mojave railhead in 10-ton-capacity wagons pulled by &quot;twenty-mule teams&quot; that were actually teams of 18 mules and two horses each.
The teams averaged an hour and required about 30 days to complete a round trip. The trade name &quot;20-Mule Team Borax&quot; was established by Francis Marion Smith&#x27;s Pacific Coast Borax Company after Smith acquired Coleman&#x27;s borax holdings in 1890. A memorable advertising campaign used the wagon&#x27;s image to promote the Boraxo brand of granular hand soap and the Death Valley Days radio and television programs. In 1914, the Death Valley Railroad was built to serve mining operations on the east side of the valley. Mining continued after the collapse of Coleman&#x27;s empire, and by the late 1920s the area was the world&#x27;s number one source of borax. Some four to six million years old, the Furnace Creek Formation is the primary source of borate minerals gathered from Death Valley&#x27;s playas.

Other visitors stayed to prospect for and mine deposits of copper, gold, lead, and silver. These sporadic mining ventures were hampered by their remote location and the harsh desert environment. In December 1903, two men from Ballarat were prospecting for silver. One was an out-of-work Irish miner named Jack Keane and the other was a one-eyed Basque butcher named Domingo Etcharren. Quite by accident, Keane discovered an immense ledge of free-milling gold by the duo&#x27;s work site and named the claim the Keane Wonder Mine. This started a minor and short-lived gold rush into the area. The Keane Wonder Mine, along with mines at Rhyolite, Skidoo and Harrisburg, were the only ones to extract enough metal ore to make them worthwhile. Outright shams such as Leadfield also occurred, but most ventures quickly ended after a short series of prospecting mines failed to yield evidence of significant ore (these mines now dot the entire area and are a significant hazard to anyone who enters them). The boom towns which sprang up around these mines flourished during the first decade of the 1900s, but soon declined after the Panic of 1907.

===Early tourism===
The first documented tourist facilities in Death Valley were a set of tent houses built in the 1920s where Stovepipe Wells is now located. People flocked to resorts built around natural springs thought to have curative and restorative properties. In 1927, Pacific Coast Borax turned the crew quarters of its Furnace Creek Ranch into a resort, creating the Furnace Creek Inn and resort. The spring at Furnace Creek was harnessed to develop the resort, and as the water was diverted, the surrounding marshes and wetlands started to shrink.
Soon the valley was a popular winter destination. Other facilities started off as private getaways but were later opened to the public. Most notable among these was Death Valley Ranch, better known as Scotty&#x27;s Castle. This large ranch home built in the Spanish Revival style became a hotel in the late 1930s and, largely because of the fame of Death Valley Scotty, a tourist attraction. Death Valley Scotty, whose real name was Walter Scott, was a gold miner who pretended to be the owner of &quot;his castle&quot;, which he claimed to have built with profits from his gold mine. Neither claim was true, but the real owner, Chicago millionaire Albert Mussey Johnson, encouraged the myth. When asked by reporters what his connection was to Walter Scott&#x27;s castle, Johnson replied that he was Mr. Scott&#x27;s banker.

===Protection and later history===
President Herbert Hoover proclaimed a national monument in and around Death Valley on February 11, 1933, setting aside almost of southeastern California and small parts of Nevada.
The Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) developed infrastructure in Death Valley National Monument during the Great Depression and on into the early 1940s. The CCC built barracks, graded of roads, installed water and telephone lines, and a total of 76 buildings. Trails in the Panamint Range were built to points of scenic interest, and an adobe village, laundry and trading post were constructed for the Timbisha Shoshone Tribe. Five campgrounds, restrooms, an airplane landing field and picnic facilities were also built.

The creation of the monument resulted in a temporary closing of the lands to prospecting and mining. However, Death Valley was quickly reopened to mining by Congressional action in June 1933. As improvements in mining technology allowed lower grades of ore to be processed, and new heavy equipment allowed greater amounts of rock to be moved, mining in Death Valley changed. Gone were the days of the &quot;single-blanket, jackass prospector&quot; long associated with the romantic west. Open pit and strip mines scarred the landscape as international mining corporations bought claims in highly visible areas of the national monument. The public outcry that ensued led to greater protection for all national park and monument areas in the United States. In 1976, Congress passed the Mining in the Parks Act, which closed Death Valley National Monument to the filing of new mining claims, banned open-pit mining and required the National Park Service to examine the validity of tens of thousands of pre-1976 mining claims. Mining was allowed to resume on a limited basis in 1980 with stricter environmental standards. The last mine in the park, Billie Mine, closed in 2005.

In 1952 President Harry Truman added the Devils Hole to Death Valley National Monument; it is the only habitat of the Devils Hole pupfish.

Death Valley National Monument was designated a biosphere reserve in 1984. On October 31, 1994, the monument was expanded by and re-designated as a national park, via congressional passage of the California Desert Protection Act (Public Law 103–433). Consequently, the elevated status for Death Valley made it the largest national park in the contiguous United States. On March 12, 2019, the John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act added to the park.

Many of the larger cities and towns within the boundary of the regional groundwater flow system that the park and its plants and animals rely upon are experiencing some of the fastest growth rates of any place in the United States. Notable examples within a radius of Death Valley National Park include Las Vegas and Pahrump, Nevada. In the case of Las Vegas, the local Chamber of Commerce estimates that 6,000 people are moving to the city every month. Between 1985 and 1995, the population of the Las Vegas Valley increased from 550,700 to 1,138,800.

In 1977, parts of Death Valley were used by director George Lucas as a filming location for &quot;Star Wars&quot;, providing the setting for the fictional planet Tatooine.
==Geologic history==


The park has a diverse and complex geologic history. Since its formation, the area that comprises the park has experienced at least four major periods of extensive volcanism, three or four periods of major sedimentation, and several intervals of major tectonic deformation where the crust has been reshaped. Two periods of glaciation (a series of ice ages) have also had effects on the area, although no glaciers ever existed in the ranges now in the park.

===Basement and Pahrump Group===
Little is known about the history of the oldest exposed rocks in the area due to extensive metamorphism (alteration of rock by heat and pressure). Radiometric dating gives an age of 1,700 million years for the metamorphism during the Proterozoic. About 1,400 million years ago a mass of granite now in the Panamint Range intruded this complex. Uplift later exposed these rocks to nearly 500 million years of erosion.

The Proterozoic sedimentary formations of the Pahrump Group were deposited on these basement rocks. This occurred following uplift and erosion of any earlier sediments from the Proterozoic basement rocks. The Pahrump is composed of arkose conglomerate (quartz clasts in a concrete-like matrix) and mudstone in its lower part, followed by dolomite from carbonate banks topped by algal mats as stromatolites, and finished with basin-filling sediment derived from the above, including possible glacial till from the hypothesized Snowball Earth glaciation. The very youngest rocks in the Pahrump Group are basaltic lava flows.

===Rifting and deposition===

A rift opened and subsequently flooded the region as part of the breakup of the supercontinent Rodinia in the Neoproterozoic (by about 755 million years ago) and the creation of the Pacific Ocean. A shoreline similar to the present Atlantic Ocean margin of the United States lay to the east. An algal mat-covered carbonate bank was deposited, forming the Noonday Dolomite. Subsidence of the region occurred as the continental crust thinned and the newly formed Pacific widened, forming the Ibex Formation. An angular unconformity (an uneven gap in the geologic record) followed.

A true ocean basin developed to the west, breaking all the earlier formations along a steep front. A wedge of clastic sediment then began to accumulate at the base of the two underwater precipices, starting the formation of opposing continental shelves. Three formations developed from sediment that accumulated on the wedge. The region&#x27;s first known fossils of complex life are found in the resulting formations. Notable among these are the Ediacara fauna and trilobites, the evolution of the latter being part of the Cambrian Explosion of life.

The sandy mudflats gave way about 550 million years ago to a carbonate platform (similar to the one around the present-day Bahamas), which lasted for the next 300 million years of Paleozoic time (refer to the middle of the timescale image). Death Valley&#x27;s position was then within ten or twenty degrees of the Paleozoic equator. Thick beds of carbonate-rich sediments were periodically interrupted by periods of emergence. Although details of geography varied during this immense interval of time, a north-northeastern coastline trend generally ran from Arizona up through Utah. The resulting eight formations and one group are thick and underlay much of the Cottonwood, Funeral, Grapevine, and Panamint ranges.

===Compression and uplift===

In the early-to-mid- Mesozoic the western edge of the North American continent was pushed against the oceanic plate under the Pacific Ocean, creating a subduction zone. A subduction zone is a type of contact between different crustal plates where heavier crust slides below lighter crust. Erupting volcanoes and uplifting mountains were created as a result, and the coastline was pushed to the west. The Sierran Arc started to form to the northwest from heat and pressure generated from subduction, and compressive forces caused thrust faults to develop.

A long period of uplift and erosion was concurrent with and followed the above events, creating a major unconformity, which is a large gap in the geologic record. Sediments worn off the Death Valley region were carried both east and west by wind and water. No Jurassic- to Eocene-aged sedimentary formations exist in the area, except for some possibly Jurassic-age volcanic rocks (see the top of the timescale image).

===Stretching and lakes===

Basin and Range-associated stretching of large parts of crust below southwestern United States and northwestern Mexico started around 16 million years ago and the region is still spreading. This stretching began to affect the Death and Panamint valleys area by 3 million years ago. Before this, rocks now in the Panamint Range were on top of rocks that would become the Black Mountains and the Cottonwood Mountains. Lateral and vertical transport of these blocks was accomplished by movement on normal faults. Right-lateral movement along strike-slip faults that run parallel to and at the base of the ranges also helped to develop the area. Torsional forces, probably associated with northwesterly movement of the Pacific plate along the San Andreas Fault (west of the region), is responsible for the lateral movement.

Igneous activity associated with this stretching occurred from 12 million to 4 million years ago. Sedimentation is concentrated in valleys (basins) from material eroded from adjacent ranges. The amount of sediment deposited has roughly kept up with this subsidence, resulting in the retention of more or less the same valley floor elevation over time.

Pleistocene ice ages started 2 million years ago, and melt from alpine glaciers on the nearby Sierra Nevada Mountains fed a series of lakes that filled Death and Panamint valleys and surrounding basins (see the top of the timescale image). The lake that filled Death Valley was the last of a chain of lakes fed by the Amargosa and Mojave Rivers, and possibly also the Owens River. The large lake that covered much of Death Valley&#x27;s floor, which geologists call Lake Manly, started to dry up 10,500 years ago. Salt pans and playas were created as ice age glaciers retreated, thus drastically reducing the lakes&#x27; water source. Only faint shorelines are left.

==Biology==

Habitat varies from salt pan at below sea level to the sub-alpine conditions found on the summit of Telescope Peak, which rises to . Vegetation zones include creosote bush, desert holly, and mesquite at the lower elevations and sage up through shadscale, blackbrush, Joshua tree, pinyon-juniper, to limber pine and bristlecone pine woodlands. The salt pan is devoid of vegetation, and the rest of the valley floor and lower slopes have sparse cover, although where water is available, an abundance of vegetation is usually present.
These zones and the adjacent desert support a variety of wildlife species, including 51 species of native mammals, 307 species of birds, 36 species of reptiles, 3 species of amphibians, and 2 species of native fish.

Small mammals are more numerous than large mammals, such as bighorn sheep, coyotes, bobcats, kit foxes, cougars, and mule deer. Mule deer are present in the pinyon/juniper associations of the Grapevine, Cottonwood, and Panamint ranges. Bighorn sheep are a rare species of mountain-dwelling sheep that exist in isolated bands in the Sierra and in Death Valley. These are highly adaptable animals and can eat almost any plant. They have no known predators, but humans and burros compete for habitat.
The ancestors of the Death Valley pupfish swam to the area from the Colorado River via a long-since dried-up system of rivers and lakes (see Lake Manly). They now live in two separate populations: one in Salt Creek and another in Cottonball Marsh. Death Valley is one of the hottest and driest places in North America, yet it is home to over 1,000 species of plants; 23 of which, including the very rare rock lady (&quot;Holmgrenanthe&quot;), are not found anywhere else.

Adaptation to the dry environment is key. For example, creosote bush and mesquite have tap-root systems that can extend down in order to take advantage of a year-round supply of ground water. The diversity of Death Valley&#x27;s plant communities results partly from the region&#x27;s location in a transition zone between the Mojave Desert, the Great Basin Desert and the Sonoran Desert. This location, combined with the great relief found within the park, supports vegetation typical of three biotic life zones: the lower Sonoran, the Canadian, and the arctic/alpine in portions of the Panamint Range. Based on the Munz and Keck (1968) classifications, seven plant communities can be categorized within these life zones, each characterized by dominant vegetation and representative of three vegetation types: scrub, desert woodland, and coniferous forest. Microhabitats further subdivide some communities into zones, especially on the valley floor.

Unlike more typical locations across the Mojave Desert, many of the water-dependent Death Valley habitats possess a diversity of plant and animal species that are not found anywhere else in the world. The existence of these species is due largely to a unique geologic history and the process of evolution that has progressed in habitats that have been isolated from one another since the Pleistocene epoch.

==Activities==

Sightseeing is available by personal automobile, four-wheel drive, bicycle, mountain bike (on established roadways only), and hiking. Riding through the park on motorcycle is also a popular pastime. State Route 190, the Badwater Road, the Scotty&#x27;s Castle Road, and paved roads to Dante&#x27;s View and Wildrose provide access to the major scenic viewpoints and historic points of interest. More than of unpaved and four-wheel-drive roads provide access to wilderness hiking, camping, and historical sites. All vehicles must be licensed and street legal. Unlike many other national parks in the U.S. there are no formal entrance stations, and instead entry fees can be paid at the visitor centers, ranger stations, or various fee machines around the park. There are hiking trails of varying lengths and difficulties, but most backcountry areas are accessible only by cross-country hiking. There are thousands of hiking possibilities. The normal season for visiting the park is from October 15 to May 15, avoiding summer extremes in temperature. Costumed living history tours of the historic Death Valley Scotty&#x27;s Castle were conducted for a fee, but were suspended in October 2015 due to extensive flood damage to the buildings and grounds. It remains closed to the public.
There are nine designated campgrounds within the park, and overnight backcountry camping permits are available at the Visitor Center. Xanterra Parks &amp; Resorts owns and operates a private resort, the Oasis at Death Valley, which comprises two separate and distinct hotels: the Inn at Death Valley is a four-star historic hotel, and the Ranch at Death Valley is a three-star ranch-style property reminiscent of the mining and prospecting days. Panamint Springs Resort is in the western part of the park. Death Valley Lodging Company operates the Stovepipe Wells Resort under a concession permit. There are a few motels near entrances to the park, in Shoshone, Death Valley Junction, Beatty, and Pahrump.

Furnace Creek Visitor Center is located on CA-190. A 22-minute introductory slide program is shown every 30 minutes. During the winter season—November through April—rangers offer interpretive tours and a wide variety of walks, talks, and slide presentations about Death Valley cultural and natural history. The visitor center has displays dealing with the park&#x27;s geology, climate, wildlife and natural history. There are also specific sections dealing with the human history and pioneer experience. The maintains a bookstore specifically geared to the natural and cultural history of the park.

The northeast corner of Saline Valley has several developed hot spring pools. The pools can be accessed by driving on the unpaved Saline Valley Road for several hours, or by flying a personal aircraft to the Chicken Strip—an uncharted airstrip a short walk from the springs.

Death Valley National Park is a popular location for stargazing as it has one of the darkest night skies in the United States. Despite its remote location, air quality and night visibility are threatened by civilization. In particular, light pollution is introduced by nearby Las Vegas. The darkest skies are, in general, located in the northwest of the park. The northwestern area of the park, including sites such as Ubehebe Crater, is a Bortle class 1 or &quot;excellent dark sky&quot; site. The Andromeda Galaxy and the Triangulum Galaxy are visible to the unaided eye under these conditions, and the Milky Way casts shadows; optical phenomena such as zodiacal light or &quot;false dawn&quot; and gegenschein are also visible to the unaided eye under these conditions. Most southern regions of the park are Bortle class 2 or &quot;average dark sky&quot; sites.
==See also==
* Henry Wade Exit Route California Historic Landmark
* List of national parks of the United States
* List of nationally protected areas of the United States
* National parks in California
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Death Valley National Park

==Notes==
==References==

===Explanatory notes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* (adapted public domain text)
* Rothman, Hal K., and Char Miller. &quot;Death Valley National Park: A History&quot; (University of Nevada Press; 2013) 216 pages; an environmental and human history
* (adapted public domain text)
* 

==External links==

*Death Valley National Park by the National Park Service
*1920s images of Death Valley and Surrounding Locales from the Death Valley Region Photographs Digital Collection: Utah State University
*Death Valley National Park by the Death Valley Conservancy
* (Archived version)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q242111" start="0" end="26" title="Death Valley National Park" label="Death Valley National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="32" end="66" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="national park of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="86" end="96" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="97" end="103" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="124" end="137" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="167" end="179" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q643844" start="205" end="220" title="Panamint Valley" label="Panamint Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411275" start="246" end="259" title="Eureka Valley (Inyo County)" label="Eureka Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404709" start="272" end="285" title="Saline Valley, California" label="Saline Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q273446" start="341" end="352" title="Great Basin Desert" label="Great Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="357" end="363" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="457" end="466" title="Salt pan (geology)" label="salt-flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="474" end="478" title="dune" label="dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q272921" start="481" end="489" title="badlands" label="badlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="573" end="597" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q799720" start="701" end="715" title="Badwater Basin" label="Badwater Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="781" end="794" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q587409" start="857" end="872" title="U.S. Wilderness Area" label="wilderness area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="962" end="968" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q965954" start="991" end="1004" title="Larrea tridentata" label="creosote bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378081" start="1006" end="1017" title="Yucca brevifolia" label="Joshua tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="1019" end="1032" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="1034" end="1040" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247243" start="1061" end="1081" title="Death Valley pupfish" label="Death Valley pupfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1118" end="1124" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895015" start="1179" end="1224" title="Mojave and Colorado Deserts Biosphere Reserve" label="Mojave and Colorado Deserts Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1247" end="1262" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q501445" start="1333" end="1341" title="Timbisha" label="Timbisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="1537" end="1562" title="California Gold Rush" label="gold fields of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q474164" start="1665" end="1674" title="boomtown" label="boom town"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="1787" end="1790" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319" start="1807" end="1812" title="borax" label="borax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587513" start="1859" end="1875" title="twenty-mule team" label="twenty-mule team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630982" start="2032" end="2047" title="Stovepipe Wells, California" label="Stovepipe Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q967966" start="2052" end="2065" title="Furnace Creek, California" label="Furnace Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="2297" end="2303" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="2320" end="2324" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="2344" end="2357" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphosed"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="2455" end="2459" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2474" end="2487" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="2531" end="2541" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="2584" end="2592" title="Orogeny" label="uplifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="2641" end="2648" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="2662" end="2667" title="crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q810178" start="2712" end="2727" title="Basin and Range Province" label="Basin and Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="2796" end="2810" title="glacial period" label="glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800991" start="2833" end="2843" title="Lake Manly" label="Lake Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="2880" end="2902" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="American national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="2926" end="2950" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="2989" end="3001" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="3006" end="3014" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="3048" end="3059" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457162" start="3117" end="3130" title="dark-sky preserve" label="dark sky park"/>
<link wikidata="Q826992" start="3138" end="3172" title="International Dark-Sky Association" label="International Dark-Sky Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="3239" end="3251" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q643844" start="3256" end="3271" title="Panamint Valley" label="Panamint Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="3386" end="3400" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474249" start="3458" end="3484" title="Basin and range topography" label="Basin and Range topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="3527" end="3544" title="strike-slip fault" label="strike-slip fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q465088" start="3910" end="3922" title="alluvial fan" label="alluvial fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502403" start="4046" end="4060" title="Panamint Range" label="Panamint Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744266" start="4252" end="4263" title="slot canyon" label="slot canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="4386" end="4395" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780252" start="4527" end="4544" title="Laguna del Carbón" label="Laguna del Carbón"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="4548" end="4557" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q235539" start="4566" end="4579" title="Mount Whitney" label="Mount Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="4643" end="4667" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="4735" end="4759" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q966943" start="4793" end="4804" title="Great Basin" label="Great Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800991" start="5019" end="5029" title="Lake Manly" label="Lake Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="5154" end="5162" title="salt pan (geology)" label="salt pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319" start="5249" end="5254" title="borax" label="borax"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="5277" end="5284" title="hydrate" label="hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624987" start="5337" end="5354" title="Ashford Mill (California)" label="Ashford Mill Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497768" start="5430" end="5435" title="Dry lake" label="playa"/>
<link wikidata="Q327590" start="5455" end="5464" title="Racetrack Playa" label="Racetrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5525" end="5554" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="5638" end="5658" title="plant hardiness zone" label="plant hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="6061" end="6089" title="National Weather Service" label="United States Weather Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q967966" start="6124" end="6139" title="Furnace Creek, California" label="Greenland Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q967966" start="6145" end="6158" title="Furnace Creek, California" label="Furnace Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="6939" end="6946" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="6986" end="6992" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="6997" end="7001" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="7091" end="7111" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="Pleistocene ice ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="7122" end="7129" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q916811" start="7351" end="7365" title="Telescope Peak" label="Telescope Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="7474" end="7487" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="7602" end="7615" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778096" start="7621" end="7632" title="Argus Range" label="Argus Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="7765" end="7782" title="rainshadow effect" label="rainshadow effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="7801" end="7812" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="7855" end="7868" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q860333" start="8187" end="8198" title="flash flood" label="flash flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567542" start="8337" end="8349" title="Mass wasting" label="Mass wasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="8540" end="8549" title="Dune" label="Sand dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="8834" end="8840" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q187156" start="8921" end="8931" title="travertine" label="travertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411275" start="9030" end="9043" title="Eureka Valley Sand Dunes" label="Eureka Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q643844" start="9093" end="9108" title="Panamint Valley" label="Panamint Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404709" start="9123" end="9136" title="Saline Valley, California" label="Saline Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="10166" end="10181" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10284" end="10305" title="Nevares Spring People" label="Nevares Spring People"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="10312" end="10333" title="hunters and gatherers" label="hunters and gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10599" end="10619" title="Mesquite Flat People" label="Mesquite Flat People"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10684" end="10706" title="Saratoga Spring People" label="Saratoga Spring People"/>
<link wikidata="Q501445" start="10963" end="10971" title="Timbisha" label="Timbisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315767" start="11083" end="11091" title="mesquite" label="mesquite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476258" start="11109" end="11120" title="pinyon pine" label="pinyon pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="11658" end="11678" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091321" start="11790" end="11813" title="California Gold Country" label="California Gold Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467414" start="11950" end="11967" title="Old Spanish Trail (trade route)" label="Old Spanish Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247231" start="11980" end="12000" title="Death Valley &amp;#x27;49ers" label="Bennett-Arcane Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020072" start="12627" end="12646" title="William L. Manly" label="William Lewis Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020072" start="12681" end="12705" title="Death Valley in &amp;#x27;49" label="Death Valley in &amp;#x27;49"/>
<link wikidata="Q421726" start="13012" end="13018" title="borate" label="borate"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="13024" end="13028" title="talc" label="talc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509612" start="13078" end="13103" title="Oasis at Death Valley" label="The Ranch at Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325030" start="13163" end="13180" title="Eagle Borax Works" label="Eagle Borax Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568993" start="13242" end="13262" title="William Tell Coleman" label="William Tell Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q129335" start="13273" end="13292" title="Harmony Borax Works" label="Harmony Borax Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q34396" start="13431" end="13435" title="soap" label="soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943133" start="13514" end="13520" title="Mojave, California" label="Mojave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587513" start="13572" end="13588" title="twenty-mule team" label="twenty-mule team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630595" start="13749" end="13779" title="Twenty-Mule-Team Borax" label="&amp;quot;20-Mule Team Borax&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481850" start="13799" end="13819" title="Francis Marion Smith" label="Francis Marion Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122358" start="13827" end="13854" title="Pacific Coast Borax Company" label="Pacific Coast Borax Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630595" start="13991" end="13997" title="Boraxo" label="Boraxo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230894" start="14034" end="14051" title="Death Valley Days" label="Death Valley Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247237" start="14096" end="14117" title="Death Valley Railroad" label="Death Valley Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="14536" end="14542" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="14544" end="14548" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="14550" end="14554" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="14560" end="14566" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382161" start="14988" end="15005" title="Keane Wonder Mine" label="Keane Wonder Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="15044" end="15053" title="gold rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889901" start="15112" end="15120" title="Rhyolite, Nevada" label="Rhyolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535090" start="15122" end="15128" title="Skidoo, California" label="Skidoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665189" start="15133" end="15143" title="Harrisburg, Inyo County, California" label="Harrisburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q643197" start="15240" end="15249" title="Leadfield, California" label="Leadfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q844449" start="15604" end="15617" title="Panic of 1907" label="Panic of 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509612" start="15996" end="16013" title="Oasis at Death Valley" label="Furnace Creek Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="16138" end="16143" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="16150" end="16157" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107309" start="16379" end="16399" title="Scotty&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Scotty&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645460" start="16436" end="16451" title="Spanish Revival" label="Spanish Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964732" start="16527" end="16546" title="Death Valley Scotty" label="Death Valley Scotty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="16807" end="16814" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710882" start="16827" end="16848" title="Albert Mussey Johnson" label="Albert Mussey Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="17049" end="17063" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="17077" end="17094" title="U.S. National Monument" label="national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="17223" end="17250" title="Civilian Conservation Corps" label="Civilian Conservation Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="17327" end="17343" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="17557" end="17562" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q501445" start="17622" end="17645" title="Timbisha" label="Timbisha Shoshone Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="17899" end="17912" title="Congress of the United States" label="Congressional"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104297" start="18230" end="18238" title="Open-pit mine" label="Open pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q756944" start="18243" end="18253" title="strip mine" label="strip mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="18671" end="18692" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q629140" start="18958" end="18969" title="Devils Hole" label="Devils Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q301137" start="19035" end="19054" title="Devils Hole pupfish" label="Devils Hole pupfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="19105" end="19122" title="biosphere reserve" label="biosphere reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="19205" end="19218" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933972" start="19253" end="19285" title="California Desert Protection Act" label="California Desert Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="19400" end="19424" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q62496521" start="19449" end="19514" title="John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act" label="John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="19607" end="19618" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="19838" end="19847" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q985486" start="19852" end="19867" title="Pahrump, Nevada" label="Pahrump, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="20142" end="20154" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598253" start="20160" end="20202" title="List of Star Wars filming locations" label="filming location for &amp;quot;Star Wars&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q723764" start="20251" end="20259" title="Tatooine" label="Tatooine"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="20448" end="20457" title="volcanism" label="volcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q635485" start="20490" end="20503" title="sedimentation" label="sedimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="20536" end="20544" title="plate tectonics" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="20607" end="20617" title="glaciation" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="20688" end="20695" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="20831" end="20835" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="20866" end="20878" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="20922" end="20940" title="Radiometric dating" label="Radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q104162" start="21009" end="21020" title="Proterozoic" label="Proterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="21062" end="21069" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q736917" start="21221" end="21231" title="formation (geology)" label="formations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21239" end="21252" title="Geology of the Death Valley area#Pahrump Group" label="Pahrump Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q191704" start="21432" end="21444" title="conglomerate (geology)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="21491" end="21499" title="mudstone" label="mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134814" start="21531" end="21539" title="Dolomite (rock)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q777913" start="21545" end="21554" title="Carbonate rock" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723936" start="21571" end="21580" title="algal mat" label="algal mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q176739" start="21585" end="21597" title="stromatolite" label="stromatolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="21684" end="21696" title="glacial till" label="glacial till"/>
<link wikidata="Q214689" start="21719" end="21733" title="Snowball Earth" label="Snowball Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="21795" end="21801" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="21849" end="21853" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q185161" start="21942" end="21949" title="Rodinia" label="Rodinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191935" start="21957" end="21971" title="Neoproterozoic" label="Neoproterozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="22029" end="22042" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="22079" end="22093" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723936" start="22142" end="22151" title="algal mat" label="algal mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q858571" start="22261" end="22278" title="continental crust" label="continental crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q876798" start="22364" end="22376" title="unconformity" label="unconformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069932" start="22434" end="22445" title="ocean basin" label="ocean basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="22660" end="22679" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelves"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="22783" end="22789" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q188654" start="22874" end="22888" title="Ediacaran" label="Ediacara fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="22893" end="22902" title="trilobite" label="trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q32919" start="22951" end="22969" title="Cambrian Explosion" label="Cambrian Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="23103" end="23109" title="Bahama" label="Bahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="23160" end="23169" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23203" end="23218" title=":image:Geologic events in Death Valley.png" label="timescale image"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="23305" end="23312" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="23539" end="23546" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="23558" end="23562" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="23749" end="23757" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="23880" end="23890" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7511711" start="24132" end="24143" title="Sierran Arc" label="Sierran Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q496325" start="24257" end="24269" title="thrust fault" label="thrust fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="24557" end="24563" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="24649" end="24662" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24684" end="24699" title=":image:Geologic events in Death Valley.png" label="timescale image"/>
<link wikidata="Q810178" start="24731" end="24746" title="Basin and Range Province" label="Basin and Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="25233" end="25238" title="fault (geology)" label="fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="25446" end="25459" title="Pacific plate" label="Pacific plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="25470" end="25487" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="25905" end="25916" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="25976" end="25983" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q60543988" start="26067" end="26083" title="Lake Panamint" label="Panamint valleys"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26127" end="26142" title=":image:Geologic events in Death Valley.png" label="timescale image"/>
<link wikidata="Q455063" start="26223" end="26231" title="Amargosa River" label="Amargosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535751" start="26236" end="26248" title="Mojave River" label="Mojave River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319307" start="26273" end="26284" title="Owens River" label="Owens River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800991" start="26371" end="26381" title="Lake Manly" label="Lake Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="26419" end="26428" title="Salt pan (geology)" label="Salt pans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497768" start="26433" end="26439" title="Dry lake" label="playas"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="26586" end="26593" title="Habitat (ecology)" label="Habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="26606" end="26614" title="Salt pan (geology)" label="salt pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q965954" start="26744" end="26757" title="creosote bush" label="creosote bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882554" start="26759" end="26771" title="salt bush" label="desert holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315767" start="26777" end="26785" title="mesquite" label="mesquite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399162" start="26814" end="26818" title="Sagebrush" label="sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716742" start="26830" end="26839" title="shadscale" label="shadscale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716790" start="26841" end="26851" title="blackbrush" label="blackbrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378081" start="26853" end="26864" title="Yucca brevifolia" label="Joshua tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476258" start="26866" end="26872" title="Piñon pine" label="pinyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="26873" end="26880" title="juniper" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q594993" start="26885" end="26896" title="limber pine" label="limber pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116374" start="26901" end="26917" title="Great Basin bristlecone pine" label="bristlecone pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="27184" end="27191" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="27224" end="27230" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="27248" end="27252" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="27269" end="27276" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="27292" end="27300" title="amphibia" label="amphibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="27328" end="27332" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="27395" end="27408" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="27410" end="27416" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q131907" start="27419" end="27425" title="bobcat" label="bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q745751" start="27428" end="27435" title="kit fox" label="kit fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="27439" end="27445" title="cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="27452" end="27461" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="27805" end="27810" title="donkey" label="burro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247243" start="27854" end="27874" title="Death Valley pupfish" label="Death Valley pupfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="27901" end="27915" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800991" start="27974" end="27984" title="Lake Manly" label="Lake Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="28192" end="28197" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10297908" start="28254" end="28267" title="Holmgrenanthe" label="Holmgrenanthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="28397" end="28401" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="28484" end="28496" title="ground water" label="ground water"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="28633" end="28646" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q273446" start="28652" end="28670" title="Great Basin Desert" label="Great Basin Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q189429" start="28679" end="28693" title="Sonoran Desert" label="Sonoran Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q126285699" start="28808" end="28817" title="life zone" label="life zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="29553" end="29562" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="29646" end="29657" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="29731" end="29747" title="four-wheel drive" label="four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q223705" start="29758" end="29771" title="mountain bicycle" label="mountain bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="29808" end="29814" title="hiking" label="hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q493358" start="29881" end="29896" title="California State Route 190" label="State Route 190"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144172" start="29967" end="29984" title="Dante&amp;#x27;s View" label="Dante&amp;#x27;s View"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="30259" end="30285" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="national parks in the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q3107309" start="30790" end="30810" title="Scotty&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Scotty&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13882936" start="31099" end="31127" title="Xanterra Parks &amp;amp; Resorts" label="Xanterra Parks &amp;amp; Resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477834" start="31411" end="31434" title="Panamint Springs, California" label="Panamint Springs Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630982" start="31513" end="31535" title="Stovepipe Wells, California" label="Stovepipe Wells Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522847" start="31617" end="31625" title="Shoshone, California" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020233" start="31627" end="31648" title="Death Valley Junction" label="Death Valley Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q813330" start="31650" end="31656" title="Beatty, Nevada" label="Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q985486" start="31662" end="31669" title="Pahrump, Nevada" label="Pahrump"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404709" start="32296" end="32309" title="Saline Valley, California" label="Saline Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q177380" start="32332" end="32342" title="hot spring" label="hot spring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32402" end="32420" title="Saline Valley, California#Saline Valley Road" label="Saline Valley Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="32455" end="32472" title="General aviation" label="personal aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016707" start="32480" end="32493" title="Chicken Strip" label="Chicken Strip"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32507" end="32515" title="Aerodrome#Airstrip" label="airstrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="32601" end="32611" title="stargazing" label="stargazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180644" start="32784" end="32799" title="light pollution" label="light pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="32824" end="32833" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876460" start="32967" end="32981" title="Ubehebe Crater" label="Ubehebe Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722595" start="32988" end="33002" title="Bortle scale" label="Bortle class 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="33047" end="33063" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13724" start="33072" end="33089" title="Triangulum Galaxy" label="Triangulum Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766298" start="33428" end="33449" title="Henry Wade Exit Route" label="Henry Wade Exit Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408678" start="33481" end="33524" title="List of national parks of the United States" label="List of national parks of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q65148973" start="33527" end="33582" title="List of nationally protected areas of the United States" label="List of nationally protected areas of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435308" start="33585" end="33613" title="National parks in California" label="National parks in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976376" start="33616" end="33691" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Death Valley National Park" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Death Valley National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="34072" end="34093" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46795" wikidata="Q335585" url="?curid=46795" title="Mono Lake">
<text>Mono Lake ( ) is a saline soda lake in Mono County, California, formed at least 760,000 years ago as a terminal lake in an endorheic basin. The lack of an outlet causes high levels of salts to accumulate in the lake which make its water alkaline.

The desert lake has an unusually productive ecosystem based on brine shrimp, which thrive in its waters, and provides critical habitat for two million annual migratory birds that feed on the shrimp and alkali flies (&quot;Ephydra hians&quot;). Historically, the native Kutzadika&#x27;a people ate the alkali flies&#x27; pupae, which live in the shallow waters around the edge of the lake.

When the city of Los Angeles diverted water from the freshwater streams flowing into the lake, it lowered the lake level, which imperiled the migratory birds. The Mono Lake Committee formed in response and won a legal battle that forced Los Angeles to partially replenish the lake level.

==Geology==
Mono Lake occupies part of the Mono Basin, an endorheic basin that has no outlet to the ocean. Dissolved salts in the runoff thus remain in the lake and raise the water&#x27;s pH levels and salt concentration. The tributaries of Mono Lake include Lee Vining Creek, Rush Creek and Mill Creek which flows through Lundy Canyon.

The basin was formed by geological forces over the last five million years: basin and range crustal stretching and associated volcanism and faulting at the base of the Sierra Nevada.
From 4.5 to 2.6 million years ago, large volumes of basalt were extruded around what is now Cowtrack Mountain (east and south of Mono Basin); eventually covering and reaching a maximum thickness of . Later volcanism in the area occurred 3.8 million to 250,000 years ago. This activity was northwest of Mono Basin and included the formation of Aurora Crater, Beauty Peak, Cedar Hill (later an island in the highest stands of Mono Lake), and Mount Hicks.

Lake Russell was the prehistoric predecessor to Mono Lake, during the Pleistocene. Its shoreline reached the modern-day elevation of , about higher than the present-day lake. As of 1.6 million years ago, Lake Russell discharged to the northeast, into the Walker River drainage. After the Long Valley Caldera eruption 760,000 years ago, Lake Russell discharged into Adobe Lake to the southeast, then into the Owens River, and eventually into Lake Manly in Death Valley. Prominent shore lines of Lake Russell, called strandlines by geologists, can be seen west of Mono Lake.

The area around Mono Lake is currently geologically active. Volcanic activity is related to the Mono–Inyo Craters: the most recent eruption occurred 350 years ago, resulting in the formation of Paoha Island. Panum Crater (on the south shore of the lake) is an example of a combined rhyolite dome and cinder cone.

==Tufa towers==
Many columns of limestone rise above the surface of Mono Lake. These limestone towers consist primarily of calcium carbonate minerals such as calcite (CaCO3). This type of limestone rock is referred to as tufa, which is a term used for limestone that forms in low to moderate temperatures.

===Tufa tower formation===
Mono Lake is a highly alkaline lake, or soda lake. Alkalinity is a measure of how many bases are in a solution, and how well the solution can neutralize acids. Carbonate (CO32-) and bicarbonate (HCO3−) are both bases. Hence, Mono Lake has a very high content of dissolved inorganic carbon. Through supply of calcium ions (Ca2+), the water will precipitate carbonate-minerals such as calcite (CaCO3). Subsurface waters enter the bottom of Mono Lake through small springs. High concentrations of dissolved calcium ions in these subsurface waters cause huge amounts of calcite to precipitate around the spring orifices.

The tufa originally formed at the bottom of the lake. It took many decades or even centuries to form the well-recognized tufa towers. When lake levels fell, the tufa towers came to rise above the water surface and stand as the pillars seen today (see Mono lake#Lake Level History for more information).

===Tufa morphology===

Description of the Mono Lake tufa dates back to the 1880s, when Edward S. Dana and Israel C. Russell made the first systematic descriptions of the Mono Lake tufa. The tufa occurs as &quot;modern&quot; tufa towers. There are tufa sections from old shorelines, when the lake levels were higher. These pioneering works in tufa morphology are referred to by researchers and were confirmed by James R. Dunn in 1953. The tufa types can roughly be divided into three main categories based on morphology:

*Lithoid tufa - massive and porous with a rock-like appearance
*Dendritic tufa - branching structures that look similar to small shrubs
*Thinolitic tufa - large well-formed crystals of several centimeters

Through time, many hypotheses were developed regarding the formation of the large thinolite crystals (also referred to as glendonite) in thinolitic tufa. It was relatively clear that the thinolites represented a calcite pseudomorph after some unknown original crystal. The original crystal was only determined when the mineral ikaite was discovered in 1963. Ikaite, or hexahydrated CaCO3, is metastable and only crystallizes at near-freezing temperatures. It is also believed that calcite crystallization inhibitors such as phosphate, magnesium, and organic carbon may aid in the stabilization of ikaite. When heated, ikaite breaks down and becomes replaced by smaller crystals of calcite. In the Ikka Fjord of Greenland, ikaite was also observed to grow in columns similar to the tufa towers of Mono Lake. This has led scientists to believe that thinolitic tufa is an indicator of past climates in Mono Lake because they reflect very cold temperatures.

===Tufa chemistry===
Russell (1883) studied the chemical composition of the different tufa types in Lake Lahontan, a large Pleistocene system of multiple lakes in California, Nevada, and Oregon. Not surprisingly, it was found that the tufas consisted primarily of CaO and CO2. However, they also contain minor constituents of MgO (~2 wt%), Fe/Al-oxides (.25-1.29 wt%), and PO5 (0.3 wt%).

==Climate==
==Limnology==

The limnology of the lake shows it contains approximately 280 million tons of dissolved salts, with the salinity varying depending upon the amount of water in the lake at any given time. Before 1941, average salinity was approximately 50 grams per liter (g/L) (compared to a value of 31.5 g/L for the world&#x27;s oceans). In January 1982, when the lake reached its lowest level of , the salinity had nearly doubled to 99 g/L. In 2002, it was measured at 78 g/L and is expected to stabilize at an average 69 g/L as the lake replenishes over the next 20 years.

An unintended consequence of ending the water diversions was the onset of a period of &quot;meromixis&quot; in Mono Lake. In the time prior to this, Mono Lake was typically &quot;monomictic&quot;; which means that at least once each year the deeper waters and the shallower waters of the lake mixed thoroughly, thus bringing oxygen and other nutrients to the deep waters. In meromictic lakes, the deeper waters do not undergo this mixing; the deeper layers are more saline than the water near the surface, and are typically nearly devoid of oxygen. As a result, becoming meromictic greatly changes a lake&#x27;s ecology.

Mono Lake has experienced meromictic periods in the past; this most recent episode of meromixis, brought on by the end of the water diversions, commenced in 1994 and had ended by 2004.

===Lake-level history===
An important characteristic of Mono Lake is that it is a closed lake, meaning it has no outflow. Water can only escape the lake if it evaporates or is lost to groundwater. This may cause closed lakes to become very saline. The reconstruction of historical Mono Lake levels through carbon and oxygen isotopes have also revealed a correlation with well-documented changes in climate.

In the recent past, Earth experienced periods of increased glaciation known as ice ages. This geological period of ice ages is known as the Pleistocene, which lasted until ~11 ka. Lake levels in Mono Lake can reveal how the climate fluctuated. For example, during the cold climate of the Pleistocene the lake level was higher because there was less evaporation and more precipitation. Following the Pleistocene, the lake level was generally lower due to increased evaporation and decreased precipitation associated with a warmer climate.

The lake level has fluctuated during the Holocene, since the end of the ice ages. The Holocene high point is at elevation , reached in approximately 1820 BCE. The low point before modern diversions is at elevation , reached in 143 CE. The lowest modern level due to diversions is at , reached in 1980.

==Ecology==
===Aquatic life===

The hypersalinity and high alkalinity (pH=10 or equivalent to 4 milligrams of NaOH per liter of water) of the lake means that no fish are native to the lake. An attempt by the California Department of Fish and Game to stock the lake failed.

The whole food chain of the lake is based on the high population of single-celled planktonic algae present in the photic zone of the lake. These algae reproduce rapidly during winter and early spring after winter runoff brings nutrients to the surface layer of water. By March the lake is &quot;as green as pea soup&quot; with photosynthesizing algae.

The lake is famous for the Mono Lake brine shrimp, &quot;Artemia monica&quot;, a tiny species of brine shrimp, no bigger than a thumbnail, that are endemic to the lake. During the warmer summer months, an estimated 4–6 trillion brine shrimp inhabit the lake. Brine shrimp have no food value for humans, but are a staple for birds of the region. The brine shrimp feed on microscopic algae.

Alkali flies, &quot;Ephydra hians,&quot; live along the shores of the lake and walk underwater, encased in small air bubbles, for grazing and to lay eggs. These flies are an important source of food for migratory and nesting birds.

Eight nematode species were found living in the littoral sediment:

* &quot;Auanema&quot; spec., which is outstanding for its extreme arsenic resistance (survives concentrations 500 times higher than humans), having 3 sexes, and being viviparous.
* &quot;Pellioditis&quot; spec.
* &quot;Mononchoides americanus&quot;
* &quot;Diplogaster rivalis&quot;
* species of the family Mermithidae
* &quot;Prismatolaimus dolichurus&quot;
* 2 species of the order Monhysterida

===Birds===

Mono Lake is a vital resting and eating stop for migratory shorebirds and has been recognized as a site of international importance by the Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve Network.
Nearly 2,000,000 waterbirds, including 35 species of shorebirds, use Mono Lake to rest and eat for at least part of the year. Some shorebirds that depend on the resources of Mono Lake include American avocets, killdeer, and sandpipers. One to two million eared grebes and phalaropes use Mono Lake during their long migrations.

Late every summer tens of thousands of Wilson&#x27;s phalaropes and red-necked phalaropes arrive from their nesting grounds, and feed until they continue their migration to South America or the tropical oceans respectively.

In addition to migratory birds, a few species spend several months to nest at Mono Lake. Mono Lake has the second largest nesting population of California gulls, &quot;Larus californicus&quot;, second only to the Great Salt Lake in Utah. Since abandoning the landbridged Negit Island in the late 1970s, California gulls have moved to some nearby islets and have established new, if less protected, nesting sites. Cornell University and Point Blue Conservation Science have continued the study of nesting populations on Mono Lake that was begun 35 years ago. Snowy plovers also arrive at Mono Lake each spring to nest along the northern and eastern shores.

==History==
===Native Americans===

The indigenous people of Mono Lake are from a band of the Northern Paiute, called the Kutzadika&#x27;a. They speak the Northern Paiute language. The Kutzadika&#x27;a traditionally forage alkali fly pupae, called kutsavi in their language.

The term &quot;Mono&quot; is derived from &quot;Monachi&quot;, a Yokuts term for the tribes that live on both the east and west side of the Sierra Nevada.

During early contact, the first known Mono Lake Paiute chief was Captain John.

The Mono tribe has two bands: Eastern and Western. The Eastern Mono joined the Western Mono bands&#x27; villages annually at Hetch Hetchy Valley, Yosemite Valley, and along the Merced River to gather acorns, different plant species, and to trade. The Western Mono and Eastern mono traditionally lived in the south-central Sierra Nevada foothills, including Historical Yosemite Valley.

Present day Mono Reservations are currently located in Big Pine, Bishop, and several in Madera County and Fresno County, California.

===Conservation efforts ===
The city of Los Angeles diverted water from the Owens River into the Los Angeles Aqueduct in 1913. In 1941, the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power extended the Los Angeles Aqueduct system farther northward into the Mono Basin with the completion of the Mono Craters Tunnel between the Grant Lake Reservoir on Rush Creek and the Upper Owens River. So much water was diverted that evaporation soon exceeded inflow and the surface level of Mono Lake fell rapidly. By 1982 the lake was reduced to , 69 percent of its 1941 surface area. By 1990, the lake had dropped 45 vertical feet and had lost half its volume relative to the 1941 pre-diversion water level. As a result, alkaline sands and formerly submerged tufa towers became exposed, the water salinity doubled, and Negit Island became a peninsula, exposing the nests of California gulls to predators (such as coyotes), and forcing the gull colony to abandon this site.

In 1974, ecologist David Gaines and his student David Winkler studied the Mono Lake ecosystem and became instrumental in alerting the public of the effects of the lower water level with Winkler&#x27;s 1976 ecological inventory of the Mono Basin. The National Science Foundation funded the first comprehensive ecological study of Mono Lake, conducted by Gaines and undergraduate students. In June 1977, the Davis Institute of Ecology of the University of California published a report, &quot;An Ecological Study of Mono Lake, California,&quot; which alerted California to the ecological dangers posed by the redirection of water away from the lake for municipal uses.

Gaines formed the Mono Lake Committee in 1978. He and Sally Judy, a UC Davis student, led the committee and pursued an informational tour of California. They joined with the Audubon Society to fight a now famous court battle, the National Audubon Society v. Superior Court, to protect Mono Lake through state public trust laws. While these efforts have resulted in positive change, the surface level is still below historical levels, and exposed shorelines are a source of significant alkaline dust during periods of high winds.

Owens Lake, the once-navigable terminus of the Owens River which had sustained a healthy ecosystem, is now a dry lake bed during dry years due to water diversion beginning in the 1920s. Mono Lake was spared this fate when the California State Water Resources Control Board (after over a decade of litigation) issued an order (SWRCB Decision 1631) to protect Mono Lake and its tributary streams on September 28, 1994. SWRCB Board Vice-chair Marc Del Piero was the sole Hearing Officer (see D-1631). In 1941 the surface level was at above sea level. As of October 2022, Mono Lake was at above sea level. The lake level of above sea level is the goal, designed to ensure that the lake would be able to reach and sustain a minimum surface level that is generally agreed to be the minimum for keeping the ecosystem healthy. It has been more difficult during years of drought in the American West.

==In popular culture==
===Artwork===
In 1968, the artist Robert Smithson made &quot;Mono Lake Non-Site (Cinders near Black Point)&quot; using pumice collected while visiting Mono on July 27, 1968, with his wife Nancy Holt and Michael Heizer (both prominent visual artists). In 2004, Nancy Holt made a short film entitled &quot;Mono Lake&quot; using Super 8 footage and photographs of this trip. An audio recording by Smithson and Heizer, two songs by Waylon Jennings, and Michel Legrand&#x27;s &quot;Le Jeu&quot;, the main theme of Jacques Demy&#x27;s film &quot;Bay of Angels&quot; (1963), were used for the soundtrack.

&quot;The Diver&quot;, a photo taken by Aubrey Powell of Hipgnosis for Pink Floyd&#x27;s album &quot;Wish You Were Here&quot; (1975), features what appears to be a man diving into a lake, creating no ripples. The photo was taken at Mono Lake, and the tufa towers are a prominent part of the landscape. The effect was actually created when the diver performed a handstand underwater until the ripples dissipated.

===In print===
Mark Twain&#x27;s &quot;Roughing It&quot;, published in 1872, provides an informative early description of Mono Lake in its natural condition in the 1860s. Twain found the lake to be lying &quot;in a lifeless, treeless, hideous desert... the loneliest place on earth.&quot;

===In film===
A scene featuring a volcano in the film &quot;Fair Wind to Java&quot; (1953) was shot at Mono Lake.

Most of the film &quot;High Plains Drifter&quot; (1973) by Clint Eastwood was shot on the southern shores of Mono Lake in the 1970s. An entire town was built here for the film, and later removed when shooting was complete.

===In music===
The music video for glam metal band Cinderella&#x27;s 1988 power ballad &quot;Don&#x27;t Know What You Got (&#x27;Till It&#x27;s Gone)&quot; was filmed by the lake.

==See also==

* Bodie, a nearby ghost town
* List of lakes in California
* Mono Lake Tufa State Reserve
* Mono Basin National Scenic Area
* GFAJ-1, an organism from Mono Lake that has been at the center of a scientific controversy over hypothetical arsenic in DNA.
* List of drying lakes
* Whoa Nellie Deli, located in Lee Vining, California, overlooking Mono Lake
* Monolake, a Berlin-based electronic music project named after the lake

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Jayko, A.S., et al. (2013). &quot;Methods and Spatial Extent of Geophysical Investigations, Mono Lake, California, 2009 to 2011&quot;. Reston, Va.: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.

==External links==

*Mono Lake Area Visitor Information
*Mono Lake Tufa State Nature Reserve
*Mono Lake Committee website
*Mono Lake Visitor Guide
*Landsat image of Mono Lake
*Roadside Geology and Mining History of the Owens Valley and Mono Basin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335585" start="0" end="9" title="Mono Lake" label="Mono Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q188025" start="19" end="25" title="Salt lake" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349558" start="26" end="35" title="soda lake" label="soda lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q156366" start="39" end="62" title="Mono County, California" label="Mono County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="123" end="138" title="endorheic basin" label="endorheic basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912558" start="169" end="189" title="Hypersaline lake" label="high levels of salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q432016" start="237" end="245" title="alkalinity" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="292" end="301" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134772" start="311" end="323" title="brine shrimp" label="brine shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055715" start="470" end="483" title="Ephydra hians" label="Ephydra hians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441362" start="517" end="533" title="Kucadikadi" label="Kutzadika&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="568" end="573" title="pupae" label="pupae"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="655" end="666" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="780" end="789" title="Bird migration" label="migratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080189" start="801" end="820" title="Mono Lake Committee" label="Mono Lake Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887484" start="970" end="980" title="Mono Basin" label="Mono Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="985" end="1000" title="endorheic basin" label="endorheic basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="1115" end="1117" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1153" end="1177" title="List of rivers of California#Mono Lake" label="tributaries of Mono Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515434" start="1186" end="1202" title="Lee Vining Creek" label="Lee Vining Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380692" start="1204" end="1214" title="Rush Creek (Mono County, California)" label="Rush Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858242" start="1219" end="1229" title="Mill Creek (Mono Lake)" label="Mill Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474249" start="1341" end="1356" title="basin and range" label="basin and range"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="1391" end="1400" title="volcanism" label="volcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="1433" end="1446" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="1500" end="1506" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612441" start="1902" end="1914" title="Lake Russell (prehistoric)" label="Lake Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="1972" end="1983" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q143338" start="2190" end="2209" title="Long Valley Caldera" label="Long Valley Caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800991" start="2343" end="2353" title="Lake Manly" label="Lake Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="2357" end="2369" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622444" start="2417" end="2427" title="strandline" label="strandline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760696" start="2572" end="2589" title="Mono–Inyo Craters" label="Mono–Inyo Craters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132073" start="2670" end="2682" title="Paoha Island" label="Paoha Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131968" start="2684" end="2696" title="Panum Crater" label="Panum Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q190727" start="2758" end="2766" title="rhyolite" label="rhyolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q534282" start="2767" end="2771" title="Lava dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806785" start="2776" end="2787" title="cinder cone" label="cinder cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2822" end="2831" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="2913" end="2920" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="2921" end="2930" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="2948" end="2955" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193685" start="3011" end="3015" title="tufa" label="tufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11349558" start="3164" end="3173" title="soda lake" label="soda lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q432016" start="3175" end="3185" title="Alkalinity" label="Alkalinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="3211" end="3216" title="Base (chemistry)" label="bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="3226" end="3234" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="3277" end="3281" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="3284" end="3293" title="Carbonate" label="Carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q409202" start="3306" end="3317" title="bicarbonate" label="bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q97704244" start="3386" end="3412" title="Total inorganic carbon" label="dissolved inorganic carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="3432" end="3439" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="3480" end="3498" title="Calcium carbonate" label="carbonate-minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="3507" end="3514" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3993" end="4021" title="Mono lake#Lake Level History" label="Mono lake#Lake Level History"/>
<link wikidata="Q446620" start="4133" end="4147" title="Edward Salisbury Dana" label="Edward S. Dana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084218" start="4152" end="4169" title="Israel Russell" label="Israel C. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252057" start="4855" end="4864" title="thinolite" label="thinolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252057" start="4895" end="4905" title="glendonite" label="glendonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456639" start="4993" end="5004" title="pseudomorph" label="pseudomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="5033" end="5040" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252057" start="5100" end="5106" title="ikaite" label="ikaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="5165" end="5175" title="Metastability" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="5297" end="5306" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="5308" end="5317" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q900291" start="5323" end="5337" title="organic carbon" label="organic carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="5484" end="5493" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191069" start="5655" end="5668" title="Paleoclimatology" label="past climates"/>
<link wikidata="Q585214" start="5828" end="5841" title="Lake Lahontan" label="Lake Lahontan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="5851" end="5862" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="5992" end="5995" title="Calcium oxide" label="CaO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="6000" end="6003" title="Carbon dioxide" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q214769" start="6054" end="6057" title="Magnesium oxide" label="MgO"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="6068" end="6080" title="Iron oxide" label="Fe/Al-oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q279645" start="6101" end="6104" title="Phosphorus oxide" label="PO5"/>
<link wikidata="Q165838" start="6148" end="6157" title="limnology" label="limnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="6248" end="6256" title="salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165822" start="6791" end="6812" title="Meromictic" label="&amp;quot;meromixis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862338" start="6884" end="6894" title="Monomictic lake" label="monomictic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096321" start="7595" end="7606" title="Open and closed lakes" label="closed lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="7672" end="7682" title="Evaporation" label="evaporates"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="7697" end="7708" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="7753" end="7759" title="Salinity" label="saline"/>
<link wikidata="Q471790" start="7819" end="7825" title="Isotopes of carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q344117" start="7830" end="7836" title="D18O" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="7900" end="7918" title="Climate change" label="changes in climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="7980" end="7990" title="Glacial period" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="8000" end="8007" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="8061" end="8072" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q36507" start="8097" end="8099" title="Millennium" label="ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="8270" end="8281" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="8291" end="8304" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="8385" end="8396" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="8411" end="8424" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="8501" end="8509" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="8873" end="8877" title="sodium hydroxide" label="NaOH"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020421" start="8971" end="9009" title="California Department of Fish and Game" label="California Department of Fish and Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="9119" end="9127" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="9130" end="9135" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q579649" start="9151" end="9162" title="photic zone" label="photic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560564" start="9447" end="9461" title="Artemia monica" label="Artemia monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q134772" start="9487" end="9499" title="brine shrimp" label="brine shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="9538" end="9545" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055715" start="9800" end="9813" title="Ephydra hians" label="Ephydra hians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="10019" end="10027" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q69220148" start="10083" end="10108" title="Auanema" label="&amp;quot;Auanema&amp;quot; spec."/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="10147" end="10154" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="10248" end="10258" title="Viviparity" label="viviparous"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10262" end="10291" title="Pellioditis" label="&amp;quot;Pellioditis&amp;quot; spec."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10300" end="10323" title="Mononchoides americanus" label="Mononchoides americanus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10338" end="10357" title="Diplogaster rivalis" label="Diplogaster rivalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q150697" start="10388" end="10399" title="Mermithidae" label="Mermithidae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10408" end="10433" title="Prismatolaimus dolichurus" label="Prismatolaimus dolichurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719223" start="10465" end="10477" title="Monhysterida" label="Monhysterida"/>
<link wikidata="Q26226431" start="10551" end="10561" title="wader" label="shorebirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456763" start="10631" end="10675" title="Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve Network" label="Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303681" start="10694" end="10703" title="waterbird" label="waterbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="10719" end="10726" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q469992" start="10869" end="10884" title="American avocet" label="American avocet"/>
<link wikidata="Q755737" start="10887" end="10895" title="killdeer" label="killdeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26626" start="10901" end="10910" title="sandpiper" label="sandpiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q185183" start="10932" end="10944" title="black-necked grebe" label="eared grebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q253776" start="10949" end="10958" title="phalarope" label="phalarope"/>
<link wikidata="Q45696" start="11044" end="11067" title="Wilson&amp;#x27;s phalarope" label="Wilson&amp;#x27;s phalarope"/>
<link wikidata="Q206840" start="11073" end="11093" title="red-necked phalarope" label="red-necked phalarope"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="11178" end="11191" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q953999" start="11374" end="11389" title="California gull" label="California gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q178741" start="11443" end="11458" title="Great Salt Lake" label="Great Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="11643" end="11661" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120255" start="11666" end="11697" title="Point Blue Conservation Science" label="Point Blue Conservation Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263624" start="11788" end="11800" title="Snowy plover" label="Snowy plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="11927" end="11944" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q12642162" start="11981" end="11996" title="Northern Paiute" label="Northern Paiute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441362" start="12009" end="12025" title="Kutzadika&amp;#x27;a" label="Kutzadika&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360656" start="12042" end="12066" title="Northern Paiute language" label="Northern Paiute language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12384" end="12396" title="Captain John (Paiute)" label="Captain John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983801" start="12403" end="12413" title="Mono tribe" label="Mono tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616130" start="12524" end="12543" title="Hetch Hetchy Valley" label="Hetch Hetchy Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996389" start="12545" end="12560" title="Yosemite Valley" label="Yosemite Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470035" start="12576" end="12588" title="Merced River" label="Merced River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3914781" start="12599" end="12604" title="acorn" label="acorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724610" start="12756" end="12782" title="History of the Yosemite area" label="Historical Yosemite Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12797" end="12814" title="Mono tribe#Tribal groups" label="Mono Reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532244" start="12840" end="12848" title="Big Pine, California" label="Big Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q852658" start="12850" end="12856" title="Bishop, California" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q109661" start="12873" end="12886" title="Madera County" label="Madera County"/>
<link wikidata="Q271915" start="12891" end="12916" title="Fresno County, California" label="Fresno County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="12959" end="12970" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319307" start="12995" end="13006" title="Owens River" label="Owens River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859225" start="13016" end="13036" title="Los Angeles Aqueduct" label="Los Angeles Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259704" start="13059" end="13100" title="Los Angeles Department of Water and Power" label="Los Angeles Department of Water and Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887484" start="13169" end="13179" title="Mono Basin" label="Mono Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="13333" end="13344" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="13623" end="13631" title="alkaline" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q193685" start="13661" end="13665" title="tufa" label="tufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683467" start="13721" end="13733" title="Negit Island" label="Negit Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="13743" end="13752" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q953999" start="13776" end="13791" title="California gull" label="California gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="13815" end="13821" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q30016854" start="13895" end="13907" title="David Gaines (environmentalist)" label="David Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="14126" end="14153" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="14316" end="14340" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080189" start="14562" end="14581" title="Mono Lake Committee" label="Mono Lake Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646000" start="14718" end="14733" title="Audubon Society" label="Audubon Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970831" start="14774" end="14816" title="National Audubon Society v. Superior Court" label="National Audubon Society v. Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="15029" end="15037" title="alkaline" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780699" start="15074" end="15084" title="Owens Lake" label="Owens Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319307" start="15121" end="15132" title="Owens River" label="Owens River"/>
<link wikidata="Q328341" start="16024" end="16039" title="Robert Smithson" label="Robert Smithson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335580" start="16178" end="16188" title="Nancy Holt" label="Nancy Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q558432" start="16193" end="16207" title="Michael Heizer" label="Michael Heizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q251287" start="16418" end="16433" title="Waylon Jennings" label="Waylon Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q313281" start="16439" end="16453" title="Michel Legrand" label="Michel Legrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q312258" start="16499" end="16511" title="Jacques Demy" label="Jacques Demy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217981" start="16530" end="16543" title="Bay of Angels" label="Bay of Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819178" start="16629" end="16642" title="Aubrey Powell (designer)" label="Aubrey Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q846392" start="16646" end="16655" title="Hipgnosis" label="Hipgnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="16660" end="16670" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q200872" start="16690" end="16708" title="Wish You Were Here (Pink Floyd album)" label="Wish You Were Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554010" start="16950" end="16959" title="handstand" label="handstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="17017" end="17027" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576767" start="17041" end="17052" title="Roughing It" label="Roughing It"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535887" start="17352" end="17369" title="Fair Wind to Java" label="Fair Wind to Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q906705" start="17430" end="17449" title="High Plains Drifter" label="High Plains Drifter"/>
<link wikidata="Q384023" start="17682" end="17692" title="Cinderella (band)" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291697" start="17724" end="17780" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Know What You Got (Till It&amp;#x27;s Gone)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Know What You Got (&amp;#x27;Till It&amp;#x27;s Gone)"/>
<link wikidata="Q832945" start="17828" end="17833" title="Bodie, California" label="Bodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="17844" end="17854" title="ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215871" start="17857" end="17884" title="List of lakes in California" label="List of lakes in California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115082" start="17887" end="17915" title="Mono Lake Tufa State Reserve" label="Mono Lake Tufa State Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901264" start="17918" end="17949" title="Mono Basin National Scenic Area" label="Mono Basin National Scenic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q212837" start="17952" end="17958" title="GFAJ-1" label="GFAJ-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635236" start="18061" end="18075" title="arsenic biochemistry" label="arsenic in DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16295075" start="18079" end="18099" title="List of drying lakes" label="List of drying lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997481" start="18102" end="18118" title="Whoa Nellie Deli" label="Whoa Nellie Deli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062203" start="18131" end="18153" title="Lee Vining, California" label="Lee Vining, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752431" start="18179" end="18187" title="Monolake" label="Monolake"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="18433" end="18464" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="U.S. Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="18466" end="18488" title="United States Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46797" wikidata="Q118388" url="?curid=46797" title="Death Valley">
<text>Death Valley is a desert valley in Eastern California, in the northern Mojave Desert, bordering the Great Basin Desert. It is thought to be the hottest place on Earth during summer.

Death Valley&#x27;s Badwater Basin is the point of lowest elevation in North America, at below sea level. It is east-southeast of Mount Whitney – the highest point in the contiguous United States, with an elevation of 14,505 feet (4,421 m). On the afternoon of July10, 1913, the United States Weather Bureau recorded a high temperature of 134 °F (56.7 °C) at Furnace Creek in Death Valley, which stands as the highest ambient air temperature ever recorded on the surface of the Earth. This reading, however, and several others taken in that period are disputed by some modern experts.

Lying mostly in Inyo County, California, near the border of California and Nevada, in the Great Basin, east of the Sierra Nevada mountains, Death Valley constitutes much of Death Valley National Park and is the principal feature of the Mojave and Colorado Deserts Biosphere Reserve. It runs from north to south between the Amargosa Range on the east and the Panamint Range on the west. The Grapevine Mountains and the Owlshead Mountains form its northern and southern boundaries, respectively. It has an area of about . The highest point in Death Valley National Park is Telescope Peak, in the Panamint Range, which has an elevation of .

A group of European-American pioneers got lost here in the winter of 1849–1850, while looking for a shortcut to the gold fields of California, giving Death Valley its grim name. Although only one of the group members died here, they all assumed that the valley would be their grave. Death Valley is home to the Timbisha tribe of Native Americans, formerly known as the Panamint Shoshone, who have inhabited the valley for at least the past millennium.

==Geology==


Death Valley is a graben—a downdropped block of land between two mountain ranges. It lies at the southern end of a geological trough, Walker Lane, which runs north to Oregon. The valley is bisected by a right lateral strike slip fault system, comprising the Death Valley Fault and the Furnace Creek Fault. The eastern end of the left lateral Garlock Fault intersects the Death Valley Fault. Furnace Creek and the Amargosa River flow through part of the valley and eventually disappear into the sands of the valley floor.

Death Valley also contains salt pans. According to current geological consensus, at various times during the middle of the Pleistocene era, which ended roughly 10,000–12,000 years ago, an inland lake, Lake Manly, formed in Death Valley. The lake was nearly long and deep. The end-basin in a chain of lakes that began with Mono Lake, in the north, and continued through basins down the Owens River Valley, through Searles and China Lakes and the Panamint Valley, to the immediate west.

As the area turned to desert, the water evaporated, leaving an abundance of evaporitic salts, such as common sodium salts and borax, which were later exploited during the modern history of the region, primarily 1883 to 1907.

==Climate==
Death Valley has a subtropical, hot desert climate (Köppen: &quot;BWh&quot;), with long, extremely hot summers; short, warm winters; and little rainfall.

The valley is extremely dry because it lies in the rain shadow of four major mountain ranges (including the Sierra Nevada and Panamint Range). Moisture moving inland from the Pacific Ocean must pass eastward over the mountains to reach Death Valley; as air masses are forced upward by each range, they cool and moisture condenses, to fall as rain or snow on the western slopes. When the air masses reach Death Valley, most of the moisture in the air has already been lost and thus there is little left to fall as precipitation.

The extreme heat of Death Valley is attributable to a confluence of geographic and topographic factors. Scientists have identified a number of key contributors:

* Solar heating: The valley&#x27;s surface (consisting of soil, rocks, sand, etc.) undergoes intense solar heating because the air is clear and dry, and the land is dark and sparsely vegetated. This is especially noticeable in mid-summer, when the sun is nearly directly overhead.
* Trapping of warm air: Warm air naturally rises and cools; in Death Valley this air is subject to continual reheating as it is trapped by high, steep valley walls and recycled back to the valley floor. Warm air also is trapped by the valley&#x27;s north–south orientation, which runs perpendicular to prevailing west-to-east winds.
* Migration of warm air from other areas (advection): Warm desert regions adjacent to Death Valley, especially to the south and east, often heat air before it arrives in Death Valley.
* Warm mountain winds: As winds are forced up and over mountains (e.g. the numerous ranges west of Death Valley), the winds can be warmed in several ways. The resulting dry, warm winds are known as foehn winds. Their warmth can in part be caused by the release of latent heat, which occurs when water vapor condenses into clouds. The extremely low elevation below sea level compresses the air which heats it further.

Severe heat and dryness contribute to perpetual drought-like conditions in Death Valley and prevent much cloud formation from passing through the confines of the valley, where precipitation is often in the form of a virga.

The depth and shape of Death Valley strongly influence its climate. The valley is a long, narrow basin that descends below sea level and is walled by high, steep mountain ranges. The clear, dry air and sparse plant cover allow sunlight to heat the desert surface. Summer nights provide little relief: overnight lows may dip just into the range. Moving masses of super-heated air blow through the valley, creating extremely high ambient temperatures.
The hottest air temperature ever recorded in Death Valley was , on July 10, 1913, at Greenland Ranch (now Furnace Creek), which, as of 2022, is the highest atmospheric temperature ever recorded on the Earth&#x27;s surface. (A report of a temperature of in Libya in 1922 was later determined to be inaccurate.) During the heat wave that peaked with that record, five consecutive days reached or higher. Some modern meteorologists now dispute the accuracy of the 1913 temperature measurement. On June 30, 2013, a verified temperature of was recorded and is tied with Mitribah, Kuwait, for the hottest reliably measured air temperature ever recorded on Earth. A temperature of was recorded at the Furnace Creek weather station on August 16, 2020, but has not yet been officially verified. The valley again recorded that temperature on July 9, 2021; however, that temperature has not yet been officially verified either. The valley&#x27;s lowest temperature, recorded at Greenland Ranch (now Furnace Creek) on January 2, 1913, was .

The highest surface temperature ever recorded in Death Valley was , on July 15, 1972, at Furnace Creek, which is the highest ground surface temperature ever recorded on earth, as well as the only recorded surface temperature of above .

The greatest number of consecutive days with a maximum temperature of at least was 154, in the summer of 2001. The summer of 1996 had 40 days over , and 105 days over . The summer of 1917 had 52 days when the temperature reached or above, 43 of them consecutive.

The highest overnight or low temperature recorded in Death Valley is , recorded on July 5, 1918. However, this value is disputed; a record high low of on July 12, 2012, is considered reliable. This is one of the highest values ever recorded. Also on July 12, 2012, the mean 24-hour temperature recorded at Death Valley was , which makes it the world&#x27;s warmest 24-hour temperature on record. July 2024 was the hottest month ever recorded in Death Valley, with a mean daily average temperature over the month of .

Four major mountain ranges lie between Death Valley and the ocean, each one adding to an increasingly drier rain shadow effect, and in 1929, 1953, and 1989, no rain was recorded for the whole year. The period from 1931 to 1934 was the driest stretch on record, with only of rain over a 40-month period.
The average annual precipitation in Death Valley is , while the Greenland Ranch station averaged . The wettest month on record is January 1995, when fell on Death Valley. The wettest period on record was mid-2004 to mid-2005, in which nearly of rain fell in total, leading to ephemeral lakes in the valley and the region and tremendous wildflower blooms. Snow with accumulation has only been recorded in January 1922, while scattered flakes have been recorded on other occasions.


===Flooding===

In 2005, Death Valley received four times its average annual rainfall of . As it has done before for hundreds of years, the lowest spot in the valley filled with a wide, shallow lake, but the extreme heat and aridity immediately began evaporating the ephemeral lake.

The pair of images (seen at right) from NASA&#x27;s Landsat 5 satellite documents the short history of Death Valley&#x27;s Lake Badwater: formed in February 2005 (top) and evaporated by February 2007 (bottom). In 2005, a big pool of greenish water stretched most of the way across the valley floor. By May 2005, the valley floor had resumed its more familiar role as Badwater Basin, salt-coated salt flats. In time, this freshly dissolved and recrystallized salt will darken.

The western margin of Death Valley is traced by alluvial fans. During flash floods, rainfall from the steep mountains to the west pours through narrow canyons, picking up everything from fine clay to large rocks. When these torrents reach the mouths of the canyons, they widen and slow, branching out into distributary channels. The paler the fans, the younger they are.

==Ecology==
In spite of the overwhelming heat and sparse rainfall, Death Valley exhibits considerable biodiversity. Flowers, watered by snowmelt, carpet the desert floor each spring, continuing into June. Bighorn sheep, red-tailed hawks, and wild donkeys may be seen. Death Valley has over 600 springs and ponds. Salt Creek, a mile-long shallow depression in the center of the valley, supports Death Valley Pupfish. These isolated pupfish populations are remnants of the wetter Pleistocene climate.

Darwin Falls, on the western edge of Death Valley Monument, falls into a large pond surrounded by willows and cottonwood trees. Over 80 species of birds have been recorded around the pond.

Efflorescence, also known as salt flowers, is a rare occurrence in Death Valley that occurs when rain soaks into the soil and dissolves salt beneath the surface causing the ground to appear as if there is a light dusting of snow.

==History==
Death Valley is home to the Timbisha tribe of Native Americans, formerly known as the Panamint Shoshone, who have inhabited the valley for at least the past millennium. The Timbisha name for the valley, &quot;tümpisa&quot;, means &quot;rock paint&quot; and refers to the red ocher paint that can be made from a type of clay found in the valley. Some families still live in the valley at Furnace Creek. Another village was in Grapevine Canyon near the present site of Scotty&#x27;s Castle. It was called &quot;maahunu&quot; in the Timbisha language, whose meaning is uncertain, although it is known that &quot;hunu&quot; means &#x27;canyon&#x27;.

The valley received its English name in 1849 during the California Gold Rush. It was called Death Valley by prospectors and others who sought to cross the valley on their way to the gold fields, after 13 pioneers perished from one early expedition of wagon trains. During the 1850s, gold and silver were extracted in the valley. In the 1880s, borax was discovered and extracted by mule-drawn wagons.

Death Valley National Monument was proclaimed on February 11, 1933, by President Herbert Hoover, placing the area under federal protection. In 1994, the monument was redesignated as Death Valley National Park, as well as being substantially expanded to include Saline and Eureka Valleys.

==Notable attractions and locations==


* Badwater Basin
* China Ranch
* Dante&#x27;s View
* Darwin Falls
* Devils Hole
* Father Crowley Viewpoint
* Furnace Creek
* Harmony Borax Works
* Hells Gate
* Myers Ranch
* Oasis at Death Valley
* Russell Camp
* New Ryan
* Upper and Lower Noonday Camp
* Racetrack Playa, a large dry lakebed within the Valley
* Sailing stones, famous moving stones of Death Valley
* Scotty&#x27;s Castle
* Shoreline Butte
* Stovepipe Wells
* Tecopa
* Tecopa Hot Springs
* West Side Borax Camp
* Wilson Ranch
* Wildrose Ranger Station
* Zabriskie Point
==In popular culture==
===Films===
A number of movies have been filmed in Death Valley, including:

* &quot;Chimmie Fadden Out West&quot; (1915)
* &quot;The Dawn of Understanding&quot; (1918)
* &quot;Greed&quot; (1924)
* &quot;The Air Mail&quot; (1925)
* &quot;The Brute&quot; (1927)
* &quot;The Chinese Parrot&quot; (1927)
* &quot;Fair Warning&quot; (1931)
* &quot;The Border Patrolman&quot; (1936)
* &quot;Danger Valley&quot; (1937)
* &quot;20 Mule Team&quot; (1940)
* &quot;The Bride Came C.O.D.&quot; (1941)
* &quot;Castle in the Desert&quot; (1942)
* &quot;Accomplice&quot; (1946)
* &quot;Death Valley&quot; (1946)
* &quot;3 Godfathers&quot; (1948)
* &quot;Yellow Sky&quot; (1948)
* &quot;Death Valley Gunfighter&quot; (1949)
* &quot;The Walking Hills&quot; (1949)
* &quot;Surrender&quot; (1950)
* &quot;The Gunfighter&quot; (1950)
* &quot;Cattle Drive&quot; (1951)
* &quot;Westward the Women&quot; (1951)
* &quot;City of Bad Men&quot; (1953)
* &quot;Escape from Fort Bravo&quot; (1953)
* &quot;Tumbleweed&quot; (1953)
* &quot;War Paint&quot; (1953)
* &quot;The Law and Jake Wade&quot; (1958)
* &quot;One-Eyed Jacks&quot; (1961)
* &quot;The Reward&quot; (1965)
* &quot;The Professionals&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Zabriskie Point&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Star Wars&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot; (1981)
* &quot;Death Valley&quot; (1982)
* &quot;Cherry 2000&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Phantasm IV: Oblivion&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Six-String Samurai&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Gerry&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Daft Punk&#x27;s Electroma&quot; (2006)
* &quot;The Legend of God&#x27;s Gun&quot; (2007)
* &quot;&quot; (2014)
* &quot;Ancient Caves&quot; (2020)
===Music===
*&quot;Death Valley Suite&quot; (1949), a symphonic suite by Ferde Grofé, inspired by the history and geography of Death Valley
*&quot;Death Valley&quot; (2013), a song from the studio album &quot;Save Rock and Roll&quot; by Fall Out Boy, is named after Death Valley, as well as containing lyrics inspired by this location
*&quot;Death Valley &#x27;69&quot; (1984), a song by Sonic Youth and Lydia Lunch, is about the valley, and the video features imagery of it.
*&quot;Death Valley Nights&quot; (1977), a song from the studio album &quot;Spectres&quot; by Blue Öyster Cult, takes place in the valley, using the extreme climate to mirror a dramatic love/hate relationship.
*&quot;Canyon Moon&quot; (2014), a song by Andrew McMahon in the Wilderness, contains lyrics about driving through Death Valley.
*&quot;Death Valley High&quot; (2024), a song by Orville Peck and Beck, a song about Death Valley.

===Television===
*&quot;Death Valley Days&quot; (1930–1945 radio series; 1952–1970 TV series), an American radio and television anthology series that presented true stories of the American Old West, a number of which featured the Death Valley area.
* Retired wrestler and WWE Hall of Famer, The Undertaker is billed from Death Valley, apart from when he was the American Badass from 2000 to 2003.
* The FX horror anthology series &quot;American Horror Story&quot; has a tenth season titled &quot;American Horror Story: Double Feature,&quot; which is split into two parts. While the first part, Red Tide, takes place by the sea, the second part of the season, Death Valley, focuses on a group of teens uncovering a conspiracy involving Dwight D. Eisenhower and strange occurrences in a desert partially inspired by Death Valley involving aliens and UFOs.

== See also ==

*List of weather records
*Henry Wade Exit Route

==Notes==
== References ==
==External links==

* Official Death Valley National Park website—National Park Service
* Historical photographs of Death Valley (1926), The Bancroft Library
* UNESCO Biosphere Preserve: Mojave and Colorado Deserts
* Strange moving rocks of the valley 
* Death Valley Area Interactive Map
* Surficial Geologic Map of the Death Valley Junction 30′ × 60′ Quadrangle, California and Nevada United States Geological Survey
* Death Valley Weather
* Death Valley Nonprofit Support Organization
* Death Valley on &quot;National Geographic&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="0" end="12" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189073" start="35" end="53" title="Eastern California" label="Eastern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="71" end="84" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q273446" start="100" end="118" title="Great Basin Desert" label="Great Basin Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580887" start="144" end="166" title="Highest temperature recorded on Earth" label="hottest place on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q799720" start="203" end="217" title="Badwater Basin" label="Badwater Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q235539" start="313" end="326" title="Mount Whitney" label="Mount Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="354" end="378" title="contiguous United States" label="contiguous United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="462" end="490" title="National Weather Service" label="United States Weather Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q967966" start="542" end="555" title="Furnace Creek, California" label="Furnace Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580887" start="593" end="638" title="Highest temperature recorded on Earth" label="highest ambient air temperature ever recorded"/>
<link wikidata="Q109670" start="785" end="808" title="Inyo County, California" label="Inyo County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="829" end="839" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="844" end="850" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q966943" start="859" end="870" title="Great Basin" label="Great Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="884" end="897" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q242111" start="942" end="968" title="Death Valley National Park" label="Death Valley National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895015" start="1005" end="1050" title="Mojave and Colorado Deserts Biosphere Reserve" label="Mojave and Colorado Deserts Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178900" start="1092" end="1106" title="Amargosa Range" label="Amargosa Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502403" start="1127" end="1141" title="Panamint Range" label="Panamint Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q13635458" start="1159" end="1178" title="Grapevine Mountains" label="Grapevine Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114907" start="1187" end="1205" title="Owlshead Mountains" label="Owlshead Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q916811" start="1340" end="1354" title="Telescope Peak" label="Telescope Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="1437" end="1445" title="American pioneer" label="pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q501445" start="1719" end="1727" title="Timbisha" label="Timbisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502403" start="1777" end="1794" title="Panamint Mountains" label="Panamint Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192810" start="1893" end="1899" title="graben" label="graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068705" start="2001" end="2007" title="trough (geology)" label="trough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962285" start="2009" end="2020" title="Walker Lane" label="Walker Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="2092" end="2109" title="strike slip fault" label="strike slip fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247234" start="2133" end="2151" title="Death Valley Fault" label="Death Valley Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509613" start="2160" end="2179" title="Furnace Creek Fault" label="Furnace Creek Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738356" start="2217" end="2230" title="Garlock Fault" label="Garlock Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q455063" start="2288" end="2302" title="Amargosa River" label="Amargosa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="2424" end="2433" title="salt pan (geology)" label="salt pans"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="2520" end="2531" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800991" start="2598" end="2608" title="Lake Manly" label="Lake Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q335585" start="2719" end="2728" title="Mono Lake" label="Mono Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042674" start="2782" end="2800" title="Owens River Valley" label="Owens River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319" start="3009" end="3014" title="borax" label="borax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="3140" end="3151" title="subtropical" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="3153" end="3171" title="hot desert climate" label="hot desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3173" end="3179" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="3327" end="3338" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="3384" end="3397" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502403" start="3402" end="3416" title="Panamint Range" label="Panamint Range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4068" end="4081" title="Solar irradiance#Irradiance on Earth&amp;#x27;s surface" label="solar heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q12343832" start="4550" end="4579" title="Westerlies" label="prevailing west-to-east winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q379788" start="4623" end="4632" title="advection" label="advection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314" start="4963" end="4973" title="foehn wind" label="foehn wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q215631" start="5399" end="5404" title="virga" label="virga"/>
<link wikidata="Q967966" start="5942" end="5957" title="Furnace Creek, California" label="Greenland Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q967966" start="5963" end="5976" title="Furnace Creek, California" label="Furnace Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882358" start="6422" end="6430" title="Mitribah" label="Mitribah"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="6432" end="6438" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q967966" start="6976" end="6989" title="Furnace Creek, California" label="Furnace Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="8014" end="8025" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="8485" end="8499" title="ephemeral lake" label="ephemeral lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="8958" end="8972" title="ephemeral lake" label="ephemeral lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502357" start="9027" end="9036" title="Landsat 5" label="Landsat 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q799720" start="9098" end="9111" title="Lake Badwater" label="Lake Badwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q799720" start="9342" end="9356" title="Badwater Basin" label="Badwater Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="9370" end="9380" title="Salt pan (geology)" label="salt flats"/>
<link wikidata="Q465088" start="9500" end="9512" title="alluvial fan" label="alluvial fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q860333" start="9522" end="9533" title="flash flood" label="flash flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="10029" end="10042" title="Bighorn sheep" label="Bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q457471" start="10044" end="10060" title="red-tailed hawks" label="red-tailed hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="10071" end="10078" title="donkeys" label="donkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247243" start="10218" end="10238" title="Death Valley Pupfish" label="Death Valley Pupfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225968" start="10324" end="10336" title="Darwin Falls" label="Darwin Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q778128" start="10514" end="10527" title="Efflorescence" label="Efflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="10738" end="10742" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q501445" start="10785" end="10793" title="Timbisha" label="Timbisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="10803" end="10819" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="11028" end="11037" title="red ocher" label="red ocher"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="11076" end="11080" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107309" start="11224" end="11244" title="Scotty&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Scotty&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33926" start="11287" end="11304" title="Timbisha language" label="Timbisha language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="11460" end="11480" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319" start="11747" end="11752" title="borax" label="borax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587513" start="11785" end="11802" title="Twenty-mule team" label="mule-drawn wagons"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="11886" end="11900" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q242111" start="11987" end="12013" title="Death Valley National Park" label="Death Valley National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q799720" start="12136" end="12150" title="Badwater Basin" label="Badwater Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144172" start="12167" end="12184" title="Dante&amp;#x27;s View" label="Dante&amp;#x27;s View"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225968" start="12187" end="12199" title="Darwin Falls" label="Darwin Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q629140" start="12202" end="12213" title="Devils Hole" label="Devils Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q967966" start="12243" end="12256" title="Furnace Creek, California" label="Furnace Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q129335" start="12259" end="12278" title="Harmony Borax Works" label="Harmony Borax Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q126687722" start="12281" end="12291" title="Hells Gate (California)" label="Hells Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509612" start="12308" end="12329" title="Oasis at Death Valley" label="Oasis at Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383800" start="12347" end="12355" title="Ryan, California" label="New Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683500" start="12358" end="12386" title="Noonday Camp, California" label="Upper and Lower Noonday Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q327590" start="12389" end="12404" title="Racetrack Playa" label="Racetrack Playa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546315" start="12446" end="12459" title="Sailing stone" label="Sailing stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107309" start="12501" end="12521" title="Scotty&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Scotty&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630982" start="12542" end="12557" title="Stovepipe Wells, California" label="Stovepipe Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090811" start="12560" end="12566" title="Tecopa, California" label="Tecopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q139066" start="12654" end="12669" title="Zabriskie Point" label="Zabriskie Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q508813" start="12778" end="12801" title="Chimmie Fadden Out West" label="Chimmie Fadden Out West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729133" start="12823" end="12848" title="The Dawn of Understanding" label="The Dawn of Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q690583" start="12870" end="12875" title="Greed (1924 film)" label="Greed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055806" start="12897" end="12909" title="The Air Mail" label="The Air Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q30601973" start="12931" end="12940" title="The Brute (1927 film)" label="The Brute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722568" start="12962" end="12980" title="The Chinese Parrot (film)" label="The Chinese Parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064515" start="13002" end="13014" title="Fair Warning (1931 film)" label="Fair Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719398" start="13036" end="13056" title="The Border Patrolman" label="The Border Patrolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216023" start="13078" end="13091" title="Danger Valley" label="Danger Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225175" start="13113" end="13125" title="20 Mule Team" label="20 Mule Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211727" start="13147" end="13168" title="The Bride Came C.O.D." label="The Bride Came C.O.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q5050354" start="13190" end="13210" title="Castle in the Desert" label="Castle in the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672702" start="13232" end="13242" title="Accomplice (film)" label="Accomplice"/>
<link wikidata="Q48975263" start="13264" end="13276" title="Death Valley (1946 film)" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q528296" start="13298" end="13310" title="3 Godfathers (1948 film)" label="3 Godfathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614242" start="13332" end="13342" title="Yellow Sky" label="Yellow Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q15701109" start="13364" end="13387" title="Death Valley Gunfighter" label="Death Valley Gunfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773287" start="13409" end="13426" title="The Walking Hills" label="The Walking Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q15614484" start="13448" end="13457" title="Surrender (1950 film)" label="Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196628" start="13479" end="13493" title="The Gunfighter" label="The Gunfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054096" start="13515" end="13527" title="Cattle Drive" label="Cattle Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260366" start="13549" end="13567" title="Westward the Women" label="Westward the Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123571" start="13589" end="13604" title="City of Bad Men" label="City of Bad Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492000" start="13626" end="13648" title="Escape from Fort Bravo" label="Escape from Fort Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252977" start="13670" end="13680" title="Tumbleweed (film)" label="Tumbleweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968507" start="13702" end="13711" title="War Paint (1953 film)" label="War Paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196656" start="13733" end="13754" title="The Law and Jake Wade" label="The Law and Jake Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q174513" start="13776" end="13790" title="One-Eyed Jacks" label="One-Eyed Jacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16652691" start="13812" end="13822" title="The Reward (1965 film)" label="The Reward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218318" start="13844" end="13861" title="The Professionals (1966 film)" label="The Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q139078" start="13883" end="13898" title="Zabriskie Point (film)" label="Zabriskie Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q17738" start="13920" end="13929" title="Star Wars (film)" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="13951" end="13974" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247232" start="13996" end="14008" title="Death Valley (1982 film)" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070350" start="14030" end="14041" title="Cherry 2000" label="Cherry 2000"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14063" end="14084" title="Phantasm IV: Oblivion" label="Phantasm IV: Oblivion"/>
<link wikidata="Q665192" start="14106" end="14124" title="Six-String Samurai" label="Six-String Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514846" start="14146" end="14151" title="Gerry (2002 film)" label="Gerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157149" start="14173" end="14199" title="Daft Punk&amp;#x27;s Electroma" label="Daft Punk&amp;#x27;s Electroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746719" start="14221" end="14249" title="The Legend of God&amp;#x27;s Gun" label="The Legend of God&amp;#x27;s Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247238" start="14339" end="14357" title="Death Valley Suite" label="Death Valley Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q375958" start="14393" end="14404" title="Ferde Grofé" label="Ferde Grofé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428054" start="14529" end="14547" title="Save Rock and Roll" label="Save Rock and Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q485811" start="14557" end="14569" title="Fall Out Boy" label="Fall Out Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656245" start="14662" end="14683" title="Death Valley &amp;#x27;69" label="Death Valley &amp;#x27;69"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="14708" end="14719" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q261990" start="14724" end="14735" title="Lydia Lunch" label="Lydia Lunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708126" start="14872" end="14880" title="Spectres (album)" label="Spectres"/>
<link wikidata="Q331016" start="14890" end="14906" title="Blue Öyster Cult" label="Blue Öyster Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q506288" start="15049" end="15081" title="Andrew McMahon in the Wilderness" label="Andrew McMahon in the Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q64729746" start="15184" end="15196" title="Orville Peck" label="Orville Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q11901" start="15201" end="15205" title="Beck" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230894" start="15259" end="15276" title="Death Valley Days" label="Death Valley Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="15415" end="15432" title="American frontier" label="American Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q44304" start="15526" end="15540" title="The Undertaker" label="The Undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q53922" start="15671" end="15692" title="American Horror Story" label="American Horror Story"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15731" end="15768" title="American Horror Story: Double Feature" label="American Horror Story: Double Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="15970" end="15990" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q492018" start="16107" end="16130" title="List of weather records" label="List of weather records"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766298" start="16132" end="16153" title="Henry Wade Exit Route" label="Henry Wade Exit Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="16248" end="16269" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854158" start="16319" end="16339" title="The Bancroft Library" label="The Bancroft Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="16569" end="16600" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="16694" end="16713" title="National Geographic (magazine)" label="National Geographic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46799" wikidata="Q6673330" url="?curid=46799" title="Long Valley">
<text>Long Valley may refer to:

*Long Valley (Antarctica) 
*Long Valley Caldera in California
*Long Valley, California, former name of Greenwood, El Dorado County, California
*Long Valley, Hong Kong 
*Long Valley, New Jersey
*Long Valley, South Dakota
*Long Valley, Hampshire, England
*Long Valley (Lake County, California)
*Long Valley (Nevada)
*Long Valley (Kane County, Utah), stretching along US-89 from Long Valley Junction (SR-14) south to Mt. Carmel Junction (SR-9)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7974815" start="28" end="52" title="Long Valley (Antarctica)" label="Long Valley (Antarctica)"/>
<link wikidata="Q143338" start="55" end="74" title="Long Valley Caldera" label="Long Valley Caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604934" start="130" end="169" title="Greenwood, El Dorado County, California" label="Greenwood, El Dorado County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673339" start="171" end="193" title="Long Valley, Hong Kong" label="Long Valley, Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084765" start="196" end="219" title="Long Valley, New Jersey" label="Long Valley, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673336" start="221" end="246" title="Long Valley, South Dakota" label="Long Valley, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="248" end="270" title="Long Valley, Hampshire" label="Long Valley, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="281" end="318" title="Long Valley (Lake County, California)" label="Long Valley (Lake County, California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705204" start="320" end="340" title="Long Valley (Nevada)" label="Long Valley (Nevada)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061367" start="342" end="373" title="Long Valley (Kane County, Utah)" label="Long Valley (Kane County, Utah)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46802" wikidata="Q206816" url="?curid=46802" title="Simple continued fraction">
<text>A simple or regular continued fraction is a continued fraction with numerators all equal one, and denominators built from a sequence formula_1 of integer numbers. The sequence can be finite or infinite, resulting in a finite (or terminated) continued fraction like
:formula_2
or an infinite continued fraction like
:formula_3

Typically, such a continued fraction is obtained through an iterative process of representing a number as the sum of its integer part and the reciprocal of another number, then writing this other number as the sum of its integer part and another reciprocal, and so on. In the &quot;finite&quot; case, the iteration/recursion is stopped after finitely many steps by using an integer in lieu of another continued fraction. In contrast, an &quot;infinite&quot; continued fraction is an infinite expression. In either case, all integers in the sequence, other than the first, must be positive. The integers formula_4 are called the coefficients or terms of the continued fraction.

Simple continued fractions have a number of remarkable properties related to the Euclidean algorithm for integers or real numbers. Every rational number has two closely related expressions as a finite continued fraction, whose coefficients can be determined by applying the Euclidean algorithm to formula_5. The numerical value of an infinite continued fraction is irrational; it is defined from its infinite sequence of integers as the limit of a sequence of values for finite continued fractions. Each finite continued fraction of the sequence is obtained by using a finite prefix of the infinite continued fraction&#x27;s defining sequence of integers. Moreover, every irrational number formula_6 is the value of a &quot;unique&quot; infinite regular continued fraction, whose coefficients can be found using the non-terminating version of the Euclidean algorithm applied to the incommensurable values formula_6 and 1. This way of expressing real numbers (rational and irrational) is called their &quot;continued fraction representation&quot;.

==Motivation and notation==
Consider, for example, the rational number , which is around 4.4624. As a first approximation, start with 4, which is the integer part; . The fractional part is the reciprocal of which is about 2.1628. Use the integer part, 2, as an approximation for the reciprocal to obtain a second approximation of ;
the remaining fractional part, , is the reciprocal of , and is around 6.1429. Use 6 as an approximation for this to obtain as an approximation for and , about 4.4615, as the third approximation. Further, . Finally, the fractional part, , is the reciprocal of 7, so its approximation in this scheme, 7, is exact () and produces the exact expression formula_8 for .

That expression is called the continued fraction representation of . This can be represented by the abbreviated notation = [4; 2, 6, 7]. (It is customary to replace only the &quot;first&quot; comma by a semicolon to indicate that the preceding number is the whole part.) Some older textbooks use all commas in the -tuple, for example, [4, 2, 6, 7].

If the starting number is rational, then this process exactly parallels the Euclidean algorithm applied to the numerator and denominator of the number. In particular, it must terminate and produce a finite continued fraction representation of the number. The sequence of integers that occur in this representation is the sequence of successive quotients computed by the Euclidean algorithm. If the starting number is irrational, then the process continues indefinitely. This produces a sequence of approximations, all of which are rational numbers, and these converge to the starting number as a limit. This is the (infinite) continued fraction representation of the number. Examples of continued fraction representations of irrational numbers are:
* . The pattern repeats indefinitely with a period of 6.
* . The pattern repeats indefinitely with a period of 3 except that 2 is added to one of the terms in each cycle.
* . No pattern has ever been found in this representation.
* . The golden ratio, the irrational number that is the &quot;most difficult&quot; to approximate rationally .
* . The Euler–Mascheroni constant, which is expected but not known to be irrational, and whose continued fraction has no apparent pattern.

Continued fractions are, in some ways, more &quot;mathematically natural&quot; representations of a real number than other representations such as decimal representations, and they have several desirable properties:
* The continued fraction representation for a real number is finite if and only if it is a rational number. In contrast, the decimal representation of a rational number may be finite, for example , or infinite with a repeating cycle, for example 
* Every rational number has an essentially unique simple continued fraction representation. Each rational can be represented in exactly two ways, since . Usually the first, shorter one is chosen as the canonical representation.
* The simple continued fraction representation of an irrational number is unique. (However, additional representations are possible when using &quot;generalized&quot; continued fractions; see below.)
* The real numbers whose continued fraction eventually repeats are precisely the quadratic irrationals. For example, the repeating continued fraction is the golden ratio, and the repeating continued fraction is the square root of 2. In contrast, the decimal representations of quadratic irrationals are apparently random. The square roots of all (positive) integers that are not perfect squares are quadratic irrationals, and hence are unique periodic continued fractions.
* The successive approximations generated in finding the continued fraction representation of a number, that is, by truncating the continued fraction representation, are in a certain sense (described below) the &quot;best possible&quot;.

== Formulation ==
A continued fraction in canonical form is an expression of the form

:formula_9

where &quot;ai&quot; are integer numbers, called the &quot;coefficients&quot; or &quot;terms&quot; of the continued fraction.

When the expression contains finitely many terms, it is called a &quot;finite&quot; continued fraction.
When the expression contains infinitely many terms, it is called an &quot;infinite&quot; continued fraction.
When the terms eventually repeat from some point onwards, the continued fraction is called &quot;periodic&quot;.

Thus, all of the following illustrate valid finite simple continued fractions:
For simple continued fractions of the form

: formula_10

the formula_11 term can be calculated using the following recursive formula:

: formula_12

where formula_13 and formula_14

from which it can be understood that the formula_11 sequence stops if formula_16.

===Notations===

Consider a continued fraction expressed as

:formula_17

Because such a continued fraction expression may take a significant amount of vertical space, a number of methods have been tried to shrink it.

Gottfried Leibniz sometimes used the notation
:formula_18

Thus to incorporate a new term into a rational approximation, only the two previous convergents are necessary. The initial &quot;convergents&quot; (required for the first two terms) are 0⁄1 and 1⁄0. For example, here are the convergents for [0;1,5,2,2].

When using the Babylonian method to generate successive approximations to the square root of an integer, if one starts with the lowest integer as first approximant, the rationals generated all appear in the list of convergents for the continued fraction. Specifically, the approximants will appear on the convergents list in positions 0, 1, 3, 7, 15, ... , , ... For example, the continued fraction expansion for formula_19 is . Comparing the convergents with the approximants derived from the Babylonian method:

:
:

===Properties===
The Baire space is a topological space on infinite sequences of natural numbers. The infinite continued fraction provides a homeomorphism from the Baire space to the space of irrational real numbers (with the subspace topology inherited from the usual topology on the reals). The infinite continued fraction also provides a map between the quadratic irrationals and the dyadic rationals, and from other irrationals to the set of infinite strings of binary numbers (i.e. the Cantor set); this map is called the Minkowski question-mark function. The mapping has interesting self-similar fractal properties; these are given by the modular group, which is the subgroup of Möbius transformations having integer values in the transform. Roughly speaking, continued fraction convergents can be taken to be Möbius transformations acting on the (hyperbolic) upper half-plane; this is what leads to the fractal self-symmetry.

The limit probability distribution of the coefficients in the continued fraction expansion of a random variable uniformly distributed in (0, 1) is the Gauss–Kuzmin distribution.

===Some useful theorems===
If formula_20 formula_21 formula_22 formula_23 is an infinite sequence of positive integers, define the sequences formula_24 and formula_25 recursively:
Theorem 1. For any positive real number formula_26

:formula_27
Theorem 2. The convergents of formula_28 formula_21 formula_22 formula_31 are given by

:formula_32
or in matrix form,formula_33

Theorem 3. If the formula_34th convergent to a continued fraction is formula_35 then
:formula_36
or equivalently
:formula_37
Corollary 1: Each convergent is in its lowest terms (for if formula_24 and formula_25 had a nontrivial common divisor it would divide formula_40 which is impossible).

Corollary 2: The difference between successive convergents is a fraction whose numerator is unity:

:formula_41

Corollary 3: The continued fraction is equivalent to a series of alternating terms:

:formula_42

Corollary 4: The matrix
:formula_43
has determinant formula_44, and thus belongs to the group of
formula_45 unimodular matrices formula_46

Corollary 5: The matrixformula_47
has determinant formula_48, or equivalently,formula_49meaning that the odd terms monotonically decrease, while the even terms monotonically increase.

Corollary 6: The denominator sequence formula_50 satisfies the recurrence relation formula_51, and grows at least as fast as the Fibonacci sequence, which itself grows like formula_52 where formula_53 is the golden ratio.

Theorem 4. Each (formula_54th) convergent is nearer to a subsequent (formula_34th) convergent than any preceding (formula_56th) convergent is. In symbols, if the formula_34th convergent is taken to be formula_58 then
:formula_59
for all formula_60 

Corollary 1: The even convergents (before the formula_34th) continually increase, but are always less than formula_62

Corollary 2: The odd convergents (before the formula_34th) continually decrease, but are always greater than formula_62

Theorem 5.

:formula_65
Corollary 1: A convergent is nearer to the limit of the continued fraction than any fraction whose denominator is less than that of the convergent.

Corollary 2: A convergent obtained by terminating the continued fraction just before a large term is a close approximation to the limit of the continued fraction.Theorem 6: Consider the set of all open intervals with end-points formula_66. Denote it as formula_67. Any open subset of formula_68 is a disjoint union of sets from formula_67.Corollary: The infinite continued fraction provides a homeomorphism from the Baire space to formula_68.

==Semiconvergents==

If

:formula_71

are consecutive convergents, then any fractions of the form

: formula_72

where formula_73 is an integer such that formula_74, are called &quot;semiconvergents&quot;, &quot;secondary convergents&quot;, or &quot;intermediate fractions&quot;. The formula_75-st semiconvergent equals the mediant of the formula_73-th one and the convergent formula_77. Sometimes the term is taken to mean that being a semiconvergent excludes the possibility of being a convergent (i.e., formula_78), rather than that a convergent is a kind of semiconvergent.

It follows that semiconvergents represent a monotonic sequence of fractions between the convergents formula_79 (corresponding to formula_80) and formula_81 (corresponding to formula_82). The consecutive semiconvergents formula_83 and formula_84 satisfy the property formula_85.

If a rational approximation formula_86 to a real number formula_87 is such that the value formula_88 is smaller than that of any approximation with a smaller denominator, then formula_86 is a semiconvergent of the continued fraction expansion of formula_87. The converse is not true, however.

==Best rational approximations==
One can choose to define a &quot;best rational approximation&quot; to a real number as a rational number , , that is closer to than any approximation with a smaller or equal denominator. The simple continued fraction for can be used to generate &quot;all&quot; of the best rational approximations for by applying these three rules:

# Truncate the continued fraction, and reduce its last term by a chosen amount (possibly zero).
# The reduced term cannot have less than half its original value.
# If the final term is even, half its value is admissible only if the corresponding semiconvergent is better than the previous convergent. (See below.)

For example, 0.84375 has continued fraction [0;1,5,2,2]. Here are all of its best rational approximations.


The strictly monotonic increase in the denominators as additional terms are included permits an algorithm to impose a limit, either on size of denominator or closeness of approximation.

The &quot;half rule&quot; mentioned above requires that when is even, the halved term /2 is admissible if and only if . This is equivalent to:

The convergents to are &quot;best approximations&quot; in a much stronger sense than the one defined above. Namely, / is a convergent for if and only if has the smallest value among the analogous expressions for all rational approximations / with ; that is, we have so long as . (Note also that as .)

=== Best rational within an interval ===
A rational that falls within the interval , for , can be found with the continued fractions for and . When both and are irrational and
:
where and have identical continued fraction expansions up through , a rational that falls within the interval is given by the finite continued fraction,
This rational will be best in the sense that no other rational in will have a smaller numerator or a smaller denominator.

If is rational, it will have &quot;two&quot; continued fraction representations that are &quot;finite&quot;, and , and similarly a rational  will have two representations, and . The coefficients beyond the last in any of these representations should be interpreted as ; and the best rational will be one of , , , or .

For example, the decimal representation 3.1416 could be rounded from any number in the interval . The continued fraction representations of 3.14155 and 3.14165 are
:
and the best rational between these two is
Thus, is the best rational number corresponding to the rounded decimal number 3.1416, in the sense that no other rational number that would be rounded to 3.1416 will have a smaller numerator or a smaller denominator.

=== Interval for a convergent ===
A rational number, which can be expressed as finite continued fraction in two ways,
will be one of the convergents for the continued fraction expansion of a number, if and only if the number is strictly between (see this proof)
: and
The numbers and are formed by incrementing the last coefficient in the two representations for . It is the case that when is even, and when is odd.

For example, the number has the continued fraction representations
: = [3; 7, 15, 1] = [3; 7, 16]
and thus is a convergent of any number strictly between

=== Legendre&#x27;s theorem on continued fractions ===

In his &quot;Essai sur la théorie des nombres&quot; (1798), Adrien-Marie Legendre derives a necessary and sufficient condition for a rational number to be a convergent of the continued fraction of a given real number. A consequence of this criterion, often called Legendre&#x27;s theorem within the study of continued fractions, is as follows:

Theorem. If &quot;α&quot; is a real number and &quot;p&quot;, &quot;q&quot; are positive integers such that formula_91, then &quot;p&quot;/&quot;q&quot; is a convergent of the continued fraction of &quot;α&quot;.

Proof. We follow the proof given in &quot;An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers&quot; by G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright.

Suppose &quot;α&quot;, &quot;p&quot;, &quot;q&quot; are such that formula_91, and assume that &quot;α&quot; &gt; &quot;p&quot;/&quot;q&quot;. Then we may write formula_93, where 0 &lt; &quot;θ&quot; &lt; 1/2. We write &quot;p&quot;/&quot;q&quot; as a finite continued fraction [&quot;a&quot;0; &quot;a&quot;1, ..., &quot;an&quot;], where due to the fact that each rational number has two distinct representations as finite continued fractions differing in length by one (namely, one where &quot;an&quot; = 1 and one where &quot;an&quot; ≠ 1), we may choose &quot;n&quot; to be even. (In the case where &quot;α&quot; &lt; &quot;p&quot;/&quot;q&quot;, we would choose &quot;n&quot; to be odd.)

Let &quot;p&quot;0/&quot;q&quot;0, ..., &quot;pn&quot;/&quot;qn&quot; = &quot;p&quot;/&quot;q&quot; be the convergents of this continued fraction expansion. Set formula_94, so that formula_95 and thus,formula_96where we have used the fact that &quot;pn&quot;−1 &quot;qn&quot; - &quot;pn&quot; &quot;qn&quot;−1 = (-1)&quot;n&quot; and that &quot;n&quot; is even.

Now, this equation implies that &quot;α&quot; = [&quot;a&quot;0; &quot;a&quot;1, ..., &quot;an&quot;, &quot;ω&quot;]. Since the fact that 0 &lt; &quot;θ&quot; &lt; 1/2 implies that &quot;ω&quot; &gt; 1, we conclude that the continued fraction expansion of &quot;α&quot; must be [&quot;a&quot;0; &quot;a&quot;1, ..., &quot;an&quot;, &quot;b&quot;0, &quot;b&quot;1, ...], where [&quot;b&quot;0; &quot;b&quot;1, ...] is the continued fraction expansion of &quot;ω&quot;, and therefore that &quot;pn&quot;/&quot;qn&quot; = &quot;p&quot;/&quot;q&quot; is a convergent of the continued fraction of &quot;α&quot;.
This theorem forms the basis for Wiener&#x27;s attack, a polynomial-time exploit of the RSA cryptographic protocol that can occur for an injudicious choice of public and private keys (specifically, this attack succeeds if the prime factors of the public key &quot;n&quot; = &quot;pq&quot; satisfy &quot;p&quot; &lt; &quot;q&quot; &lt; 2&quot;p&quot; and the private key &quot;d&quot; is less than (1/3)&quot;n&quot;1/4).

==Comparison==
Consider and . If is the smallest index for which is unequal to then if and otherwise.

If there is no such , but one expansion is shorter than the other, say and with for , then if is even and if is odd.

==Continued fraction expansion of and its convergents==
To calculate the convergents of  we may set , define and , and , . Continuing like this, one can determine the infinite continued fraction of as
:[3;7,15,1,292,1,1...] .
The fourth convergent of is [3;7,15,1] = = 3.14159292035..., sometimes called Milü, which is fairly close to the true value of .

Let us suppose that the quotients found are, as above, [3;7,15,1]. The following is a rule by which we can write down at once the convergent fractions which result from these quotients without developing the continued fraction.

The first quotient, supposed divided by unity, will give the first fraction, which will be too small, namely, . Then, multiplying the numerator and denominator of this fraction by the second quotient and adding unity to the numerator, we shall have the second fraction, , which will be too large. Multiplying in like manner the numerator and denominator of this fraction by the third quotient, and adding to the numerator the numerator of the preceding fraction, and to the denominator the denominator of the preceding fraction, we shall have the third fraction, which will be too small. Thus, the third quotient being 15, we have for our numerator , and for our denominator, . The third convergent, therefore, is . We proceed in the same manner for the fourth convergent. The fourth quotient being 1, we say 333 times 1 is 333, and this plus 22, the numerator of the fraction preceding, is 355; similarly, 106 times 1 is 106, and this plus 7 is 113.
In this manner, by employing the four quotients [3;7,15,1], we obtain the four fractions:

To sum up, the pattern is
These convergents are alternately smaller and larger than the true value of , and approach nearer and nearer to . The difference between a given convergent and is less than the reciprocal of the product of the denominators of that convergent and the next convergent. For example, the fraction is greater than , but − is less than  =  (in fact, − is just more than = ).

The demonstration of the foregoing properties is deduced from the fact that if we seek the difference between one of the convergent fractions and the next adjacent to it we shall obtain a fraction of which the numerator is always unity and the denominator the product of the two denominators. Thus the difference between and is , in excess; between and , , in deficit; between and , , in excess; and so on. The result being, that by employing this series of differences we can express in another and very simple manner the fractions with which we are here concerned, by means of a second series of fractions of which the numerators are all unity and the denominators successively be the product of every two adjacent denominators. Instead of the fractions written above, we have thus the series:

The first term, as we see, is the first fraction; the first and second together give the second fraction, ; the first, the second and the third give the third fraction , and so on with the rest; the result being that the series entire is equivalent to the original value.

==Non-simple continued fraction==
A non-simple continued fraction is an expression of the form

:formula_97

where the &quot;a&quot;&quot;n&quot; (&quot;n&quot; &gt; 0) are the partial numerators, the &quot;b&quot;&quot;n&quot; are the partial denominators, and the leading term &quot;b&quot;0 is called the &quot;integer&quot; part of the continued fraction.

To illustrate the use of non-simple continued fractions, consider the following example. The sequence of partial denominators of the simple continued fraction of does not show any obvious pattern:

:formula_98

or

:formula_99

However, several non-simple continued fractions for have a perfectly regular structure, such as:

:formula_100

:formula_101

:formula_102

The first two of these are special cases of the arctangent function with = 4 arctan (1) and the fourth and fifth one can be derived using the Wallis product.

:formula_103

The continued fraction of formula_104 above consisting of cubes uses the Nilakantha series and an exploit from Leonhard Euler.

==Other continued fraction expansions==

===Periodic continued fractions===

The numbers with periodic continued fraction expansion are precisely the irrational solutions of quadratic equations with rational coefficients; rational solutions have finite continued fraction expansions as previously stated. The simplest examples are the golden ratio φ = [1;1,1,1,1,1...] and = [1;2,2,2,2...], while = [3;1,2,1,6,1,2,1,6...] and = [6;2,12,2,12,2,12...]. All irrational square roots of integers have a special form for the period; a symmetrical string, like the empty string (for ) or 1,2,1 (for ), followed by the double of the leading integer.

===A property of the golden ratio φ===
Because the continued fraction expansion for φ doesn&#x27;t use any integers greater than 1, φ is one of the most &quot;difficult&quot; real numbers to approximate with rational numbers. Hurwitz&#x27;s theorem states that any irrational number can be approximated by infinitely many rational with

:formula_105

While virtually all real numbers will eventually have infinitely many convergents whose distance from is significantly smaller than this limit, the convergents for φ (i.e., the numbers , , , , etc.) consistently &quot;toe the boundary&quot;, keeping a distance of almost exactly formula_106 away from φ, thus never producing an approximation nearly as impressive as, for example,  for . It can also be shown that every real number of the form , where , , , and are integers such that , shares this property with the golden ratio φ; and that all other real numbers can be more closely approximated.

===Regular patterns in continued fractions===
While there is no discernible pattern in the simple continued fraction expansion of , there is one for , the base of the natural logarithm:

:formula_107

which is a special case of this general expression for positive integer :

:formula_108

Another, more complex pattern appears in this continued fraction expansion for positive odd :

:formula_109

with a special case for :

:formula_110

Other continued fractions of this sort are

:formula_111

where is a positive integer; also, for integer :

:formula_112

with a special case for :

:formula_113

If is the modified, or hyperbolic, Bessel function of the first kind, we may define a function on the rationals by

:formula_114

which is defined for all rational numbers, with and in lowest terms. Then for all nonnegative rationals, we have

:formula_115

with similar formulas for negative rationals; in particular we have

:formula_116

Many of the formulas can be proved using Gauss&#x27;s continued fraction.

===Typical continued fractions===
Most irrational numbers do not have any periodic or regular behavior in their continued fraction expansion. Nevertheless, for almost all numbers on the unit interval, they have the same limit behavior.

The arithmetic average diverges: formula_117, and so the coefficients grow arbitrarily large: formula_118. In particular, this implies that almost all numbers are well-approximable, in the sense thatformula_119Khinchin proved that the geometric mean of tends to a constant (known as Khinchin&#x27;s constant):formula_120Paul Lévy proved that the th root of the denominator of the th convergent converges to Lévy&#x27;s constant
formula_121Lochs&#x27; theorem states that the convergents converge exponentially at the rate offormula_122

==Applications==
===Pell&#x27;s equation===
Continued fractions play an essential role in the solution of Pell&#x27;s equation. For example, for positive integers and , and non-square , it is true that if , then is a convergent of the regular continued fraction for . The converse holds if the period of the regular continued fraction for is 1, and in general the period describes which convergents give solutions to Pell&#x27;s equation.

===Dynamical systems===
Continued fractions also play a role in the study of dynamical systems, where they tie together the Farey fractions which are seen in the Mandelbrot set with Minkowski&#x27;s question-mark function and the modular group Gamma.

The backwards shift operator for continued fractions is the map called the Gauss map, which lops off digits of a continued fraction expansion: . The transfer operator of this map is called the Gauss–Kuzmin–Wirsing operator. The distribution of the digits in continued fractions is given by the zero&#x27;th eigenvector of this operator, and is called the Gauss–Kuzmin distribution.

==History==
* 300 BCE &quot;Euclid&#x27;s Elements&quot; contains an algorithm for the greatest common divisor, whose modern version generates a continued fraction as the sequence of quotients of successive Euclidean divisions that occur in it.
* 499 The &quot;Aryabhatiya&quot; contains the solution of indeterminate equations using continued fractions
* 1572 Rafael Bombelli, &quot;L&#x27;Algebra Opera&quot; – method for the extraction of square roots which is related to continued fractions
* 1613 Pietro Cataldi, &quot;Trattato del modo brevissimo di trovar la radice quadra delli numeri&quot; – first notation for continued fractions
:Cataldi represented a continued fraction as formula_123 &amp; formula_124 &amp; formula_125 &amp; formula_126 with the dots indicating where the following fractions went.
* 1695 John Wallis, &quot;Opera Mathematica&quot; – introduction of the term &quot;continued fraction&quot;
* 1737 Leonhard Euler, &quot;De fractionibus continuis dissertatio&quot; – Provided the first then-comprehensive account of the properties of continued fractions, and included the first proof that the number e is irrational.
* 1748 Euler, &quot;Introductio in analysin infinitorum&quot;. Vol. I, Chapter 18 – proved the equivalence of a certain form of continued fraction and a generalized infinite series, proved that every rational number can be written as a finite continued fraction, and proved that the continued fraction of an irrational number is infinite.
* 1761 Johann Lambert – gave the first proof of the irrationality of  using a continued fraction for tan(x).
* 1768 Joseph-Louis Lagrange – provided the general solution to Pell&#x27;s equation using continued fractions similar to Bombelli&#x27;s
* 1770 Lagrange – proved that quadratic irrationals expand to periodic continued fractions.
* 1813 Carl Friedrich Gauss, &quot;Werke&quot;, Vol. 3, pp. 134–138 – derived a very general complex-valued continued fraction via a clever identity involving the hypergeometric function
* 1892 Henri Padé defined Padé approximant
* 1972 Bill Gosper – First exact algorithms for continued fraction arithmetic.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* Linas Vepstas Continued Fractions and Gaps (2004) reviews chaotic structures in continued fractions.
* Continued Fractions on the Stern-Brocot Tree at cut-the-knot
* The Antikythera Mechanism I: Gear ratios and continued fractions 
* Continued fraction calculator, WIMS.
* Continued Fraction Arithmetic Gosper&#x27;s first continued fractions paper, unpublished. Cached on the Internet Archive&#x27;s Wayback Machine
* Continued Fractions by Stephen Wolfram and Continued Fraction Approximations of the Tangent Function by Michael Trott, Wolfram Demonstrations Project.
* A view into &quot;fractional interpolation&quot; of a continued fraction } 
* Best rational approximation through continued fractions
* CONTINUED FRACTIONS by C. D. Olds</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q206816" start="2" end="8" title="Simple continued fraction" label="simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q206816" start="12" end="38" title="Simple continued fraction" label="regular continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115724" start="44" end="62" title="continued fraction" label="continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q206816" start="218" end="224" title="Simple continued fraction" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q206816" start="229" end="239" title="Simple continued fraction" label="terminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q206816" start="282" end="290" title="Simple continued fraction" label="infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q651022" start="387" end="396" title="iterative" label="iterative"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="448" end="460" title="integer part" label="integer part"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="469" end="479" title="multiplicative inverse" label="reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="642" end="651" title="recursion" label="recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029858" start="810" end="829" title="infinite expression (mathematics)" label="infinite expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193832" start="907" end="915" title="positive number" label="positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="955" end="966" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q230848" start="1086" end="1105" title="Euclidean algorithm" label="Euclidean algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1122" end="1133" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="1142" end="1157" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="1370" end="1380" title="irrational number" label="irrational"/>
<link wikidata="Q177239" start="1442" end="1447" title="limit (mathematics)" label="limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626534" start="1581" end="1587" title="Prefix (computer science)" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091134" start="1887" end="1902" title="Commensurability (mathematics)" label="incommensurable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="2108" end="2123" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058" start="2161" end="2174" title="approximation" label="approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215193" start="2203" end="2215" title="Floor and ceiling functions" label="integer part"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="2246" end="2256" title="Multiplicative inverse" label="reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q230848" start="3176" end="3195" title="Euclidean algorithm" label="Euclidean algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="3517" end="3527" title="Irrational number" label="irrational"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="4087" end="4099" title="golden ratio" label="golden ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q273023" start="4198" end="4223" title="Euler–Mascheroni constant" label="Euler–Mascheroni constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="4430" end="4441" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376876" start="4477" end="4499" title="decimal representation" label="decimal representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152398" start="4995" end="5019" title="canonical form" label="canonical representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006396" start="5302" end="5322" title="quadratic irrational" label="quadratic irrational"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="5378" end="5390" title="golden ratio" label="golden ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q389813" start="5436" end="5452" title="square root of 2" label="square root of 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q902708" start="5535" end="5541" title="normal number" label="random"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365842" start="6469" end="6477" title="periodic continued fraction" label="periodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="7050" end="7067" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7379" end="7396" title="Methods of computing square roots#Heron&amp;#x27;s method" label="Babylonian method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150815" start="7777" end="7787" title="square root of 3" label="formula_19"/>
<link wikidata="Q803936" start="7904" end="7915" title="Baire space (set theory)" label="Baire space"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="8024" end="8037" title="homeomorphism" label="homeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118078" start="8146" end="8160" title="Euclidean topology" label="usual topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006396" start="8240" end="8260" title="quadratic irrational" label="quadratic irrational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281400" start="8270" end="8285" title="dyadic rational" label="dyadic rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q273188" start="8374" end="8384" title="Cantor set" label="Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967149" start="8410" end="8442" title="Minkowski question-mark function" label="Minkowski question-mark function"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="8485" end="8492" title="fractal" label="fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834342" start="8528" end="8541" title="modular group" label="modular group"/>
<link wikidata="Q595742" start="8568" end="8589" title="Möbius transformation" label="Möbius transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258885" start="8749" end="8765" title="upper half-plane" label="upper half-plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258320" start="8968" end="8993" title="Gauss–Kuzmin distribution" label="Gauss–Kuzmin distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q178546" start="9914" end="9925" title="determinant" label="determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367055" start="9982" end="10001" title="unimodular matrix" label="unimodular matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q23835349" start="10328" end="10346" title="Fibonacci sequence" label="Fibonacci sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="10407" end="10419" title="golden ratio" label="golden ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965130" start="11853" end="11860" title="Mediant (mathematics)" label="mediant"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="12152" end="12170" title="monotonic sequence" label="monotonic sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227061" start="12392" end="12414" title="Diophantine approximation" label="rational approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191021" start="15992" end="16013" title="Adrien-Marie Legendre" label="Adrien-Marie Legendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750104" start="16533" end="16573" title="An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers" label="An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184337" start="16583" end="16594" title="G. H. Hardy" label="G. H. Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273543" start="16599" end="16611" title="E. M. Wright" label="E. M. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999118" start="18310" end="18330" title="Wiener&amp;#x27;s attack" label="Wiener&amp;#x27;s attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="18365" end="18391" title="RSA (cryptosystem)" label="RSA cryptographic protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="19008" end="19008" title="pi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3858176" start="19224" end="19228" title="Milü" label="Milü"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22790" end="22800" title="Inverse trigonometric functions#Variant: Continued fractions for arctangent" label="arctangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501324" start="22884" end="22898" title="Wallis product" label="Wallis product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006396" start="23193" end="23213" title="quadratic irrational" label="irrational solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q41299" start="23217" end="23235" title="quadratic equation" label="quadratic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="23378" end="23390" title="golden ratio" label="golden ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="23770" end="23771" title="golden ratio" label="φ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630588" start="23912" end="23934" title="Hurwitz&amp;#x27;s theorem (number theory)" label="Hurwitz&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858176" start="24417" end="24417" title="Milü" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="24422" end="24422" title="pi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q82435" start="24791" end="24820" title="e (mathematical constant)" label="base of the natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q219637" start="25274" end="25289" title="Bessel function" label="Bessel function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812487" start="25621" end="25652" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s continued fraction" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397701" start="25815" end="25825" title="almost all" label="almost all"/>
<link wikidata="Q723638" start="26102" end="26110" title="Aleksandr Khinchin" label="Khinchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185049" start="26127" end="26141" title="geometric mean" label="geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718188" start="26175" end="26199" title="Khinchin&amp;#x27;s constant" label="Khinchin&amp;#x27;s constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q441127" start="26212" end="26221" title="Paul Lévy (mathematician)" label="Paul Lévy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994920" start="26299" end="26319" title="Lévy&amp;#x27;s constant" label="Lévy&amp;#x27;s constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576235" start="26331" end="26350" title="Lochs&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Lochs&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q853067" start="26535" end="26555" title="Pell&amp;#x27;s equation" label="Pell&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="26946" end="26962" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396592" start="26993" end="27008" title="Farey sequence" label="Farey fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q257" start="27031" end="27045" title="Mandelbrot set" label="Mandelbrot set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967149" start="27051" end="27090" title="Minkowski&amp;#x27;s question-mark function" label="Minkowski&amp;#x27;s question-mark function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834342" start="27099" end="27112" title="modular group" label="modular group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278680" start="27135" end="27149" title="shift operator" label="shift operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354602" start="27196" end="27205" title="Gauss–Kuzmin–Wirsing operator" label="Gauss map"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354606" start="27270" end="27287" title="transfer operator" label="transfer operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354602" start="27314" end="27343" title="Gauss–Kuzmin–Wirsing operator" label="Gauss–Kuzmin–Wirsing operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="27428" end="27439" title="eigenvector" label="eigenvector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258320" start="27476" end="27501" title="Gauss–Kuzmin distribution" label="Gauss–Kuzmin distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q172891" start="27532" end="27554" title="Euclid&amp;#x27;s Elements" label="Euclid&amp;#x27;s Elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="27591" end="27614" title="greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q230848" start="27622" end="27636" title="Euclidean algorithm" label="modern version"/>
<link wikidata="Q181054" start="27711" end="27729" title="Euclidean division" label="Euclidean division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518429" start="27765" end="27776" title="Aryabhatiya" label="Aryabhatiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q358547" start="27865" end="27880" title="Rafael Bombelli" label="Rafael Bombelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q279892" start="28006" end="28020" title="Pietro Cataldi" label="Pietro Cataldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208359" start="28323" end="28334" title="John Wallis" label="John Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="28431" end="28445" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q82435" start="28632" end="28633" title="e (mathematical constant)" label="e"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28669" end="28704" title="List of important publications in mathematics#Introductio in analysin infinitorum" label="Introductio in analysin infinitorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="28814" end="28829" title="infinite series" label="infinite series"/>
<link wikidata="Q122999" start="28995" end="29009" title="Johann Lambert" label="Johann Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="29057" end="29057" title="Pi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="29089" end="29095" title="Trigonometric functions" label="tan(x)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="29104" end="29125" title="Joseph-Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph-Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006396" start="29265" end="29286" title="quadratic irrational number" label="quadratic irrationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365842" start="29297" end="29324" title="periodic continued fraction" label="periodic continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="29334" end="29354" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812487" start="29420" end="29453" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s continued fraction" label="complex-valued continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028472" start="29490" end="29513" title="hypergeometric function" label="hypergeometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q259270" start="29521" end="29531" title="Henri Padé" label="Henri Padé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452504" start="29540" end="29556" title="Padé approximant" label="Padé approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q862150" start="29564" end="29575" title="Bill Gosper" label="Bill Gosper"/>
<link wikidata="Q56811887" start="29906" end="29918" title="cut-the-knot" label="cut-the-knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="30132" end="30148" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30156" end="30171" title="Internet Archive#Wayback Machine" label="Wayback Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q310798" start="30197" end="30212" title="Stephen Wolfram" label="Stephen Wolfram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632017" start="30293" end="30323" title="Wolfram Demonstrations Project" label="Wolfram Demonstrations Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46811" wikidata="Q143338" url="?curid=46811" title="Long Valley Caldera">
<text>Long Valley Caldera is a depression in eastern California that is adjacent to Mammoth Mountain. The valley is one of the Earth&#x27;s largest calderas, measuring about long (east-west), wide (north-south), and up to deep.

Long Valley was formed 760,000 years ago when a very large eruption released hot ash that later cooled to form the Bishop tuff that is common to the area. The eruption emptied the magma chamber under the area to the point of collapse. The second phase of the eruption released pyroclastic flows that burned and buried thousands of square miles. Ash from this eruption blanketed much of the western part of what is now the United States.

==Geography==

The caldera is a giant bowl-shaped depression, approximately long, surrounded by mountains except to the southeast. The elevation of the bottom of the bowl ranges from , being higher in the west.

Near the center of the bowl, magmatic uplift has formed a resurgent dome. The southeastern slope from the caldera down towards Bishop, California, is filled with the Bishop Tuff, solidified ash that was ejected during the eruption that created the caldera. The Bishop tuff is thick in the caldera floor, and is cut by the Owens River Gorge, formed during the Pleistocene when the caldera filled with water and overtopped its rim.

The rim of the caldera is formed from pre-existing rock, rising about above the caldera floor. However, the eastern rim is lower, only about .

Mammoth Mountain is a lava dome complex west of the structural rim of the caldera, consisting of about 12 rhyodacite and dacite overlapping domes. These domes formed in a long series of eruptions from 110,000 to 57,000 years ago, building a volcano that reaches in elevation.

The Mono–Inyo Craters are a -long volcanic chain situated along a narrow, north–south-trending fissure system extending along the western rim of the caldera from Mammoth Mountain to the north shore of Mono Lake. The Mono-Inyo Craters erupted from 40,000 to 600 years ago, from a magma source separate from the Long Valley Caldera.

The caldera has an extensive hydrothermal system. Casa Diablo Hot Springs at the base of the resurgent dome hosts a geothermal power plant. Hot Creek cuts into part of the resurgent dome and passes through hot springs. The warm water of Hot Creek supports many trout, and is used at the Hot Creek Fish Hatchery. The creek was closed to swimming in 2006 after geothermal activity in the area increased. The area has a number of other hot springs, some of which are open to bathers.

==Geology==

===Caldera===

The tectonic causes of the Long Valley volcanism are still largely unexplained and are therefore a matter of much ongoing research. Long Valley is not above a hotspot, such as those which fuel Yellowstone Caldera or the volcanoes of Hawaii; nor is it the result of subduction such as that which produces the volcanism of the Cascades.

The known volcanic history of 
Long Valley Caldera area started a few million years ago when magma began to collect several miles below the surface. Volcanic activity became concentrated in the vicinity of the present site of Long Valley Caldera 3.1 to 2.5 million years ago with eruptions of rhyodacite followed by high-silica rhyolite from 2.1 to 0.8 million years ago. After some time, a cluster of mostly rhyolitic volcanoes formed in the area. All told, about were covered by lava.

All but one of these volcanoes, 1–2 million year old Glass Mountain (made of obsidian), were destroyed by the major (volcanic explosivity index (VEI) 7) eruption of the area 760,000 years ago, which released of material from vents just inside the margin of the caldera. (The 1980 Mount St. Helens eruption was a VEI-5 eruption releasing .) About half of this material was ejected in a series of pyroclastic flows of a very hot () mixture of noxious gas, pumice, and volcanic ash that covered the surrounding area hundreds of feet deep. One lobe of this material moved south into Owens Valley, past present-day Big Pine, California. Another lobe moved west over the crest of the Sierra Nevada and into the drainage of the San Joaquin River. The rest of the pyroclastic material, along with of other matter, was blown as far as into the air where winds distributed it as far away as eastern Nebraska and Kansas.

The eruption initially produced a caldera deep. However, much of the ejecta went straight up, fell down, and filled the initial caldera about two-thirds full.

=== Eruptions ===
Subsequent eruptions from the Long Valley magma chamber were confined within the caldera with extrusions of relatively hot (crystal-free) rhyolite 700,000 to 600,000 years ago as the caldera floor was uplifted to form the resurgent dome followed by extrusions of cooler, crystal-rich moat rhyolite at 200,000-year intervals (500,000, 300,000, and 100,000 years ago) in clockwise succession around the dome. The declining volcanic activity and increasingly crystalline lava extruded over the last 650,000 years, as well as other trends, suggest that the magma reservoir under the caldera has now largely crystallized and is unlikely to produce large-scale eruptions in the future.

The Long Valley volcano is unusual in that it has produced eruptions of both basaltic and silicic lava in the same geological place.

Water from the Owens River filled the caldera to a depth of as of 600,000 years ago. At that time, the lake surface was at an elevation near . The lake drained sometime in the last 100,000 years after it overtopped the southern rim of the caldera, eroded the sill, and created the Owens River Gorge. A human-made dam in the gorge has created Lake Crowley, a partial restoration of the original lake. Since the great eruption, many hot springs developed in the area, and the resurgent dome has uplifted.

During the last ice age, glaciers filled the canyons leading to Long Valley, but the valley floor was clear of ice. Excellent examples of terminal moraines can be seen at Long Valley. Laurel Creek, Convict Creek, and McGee Creek each have prominent moraines.

===Recent activity===
In May 1980, a strong earthquake swarm that included four Richter magnitude 6 earthquakes struck the southern margin of the Long Valley Caldera. It was associated with a dome-shaped uplift of the caldera floor. These events marked the onset of the latest period of caldera unrest that is ongoing. This ongoing unrest includes recurring earthquake swarms and continued dome-shaped uplift of the central section of the caldera accompanied by changes in thermal springs and gas emissions. After the quake, a secondary access road was created as a potential escape route for the town of Mammoth Lakes. Its name at first was proposed as the &quot;Mammoth Escape Route&quot; but was changed to the Mammoth Scenic Loop after Mammoth area businesses and land owners complained.

In 1982, the United States Geological Survey under the Volcano Hazards Program began an intensive effort to monitor and study geologic unrest in Long Valley Caldera. The goal is to provide residents and civil authorities with reliable information on the nature of the potential hazards posed by this unrest and timely warning of an impending volcanic eruption, should it develop. Most, perhaps all, volcanic eruptions are preceded and accompanied by geophysical and geochemical changes in the volcanic system. Common precursory indicators of volcanic activity include increased seismicity, ground deformation, and variations in the nature and rate of gas emissions.

===Hydrothermal system===
The Long Valley Caldera hosts an active hydrothermal system that includes hot springs, fumaroles (steam vents), and mineral deposits. Hot springs exist primarily in the eastern half of the caldera where land-surface elevations are relatively low; fumaroles exist primarily in the western half where elevations are higher. Mineral deposits from thermal activity are found on an uplifted area called the resurgent dome, at Little Hot Creek springs, Hot Creek Gorge, and other locations in the south and east moats of the caldera.

Hot springs discharge primarily in Hot Creek Gorge, along Little Hot Creek, and in the Alkali Lakes area. The largest springs are in Hot Creek Gorge where about per second of thermal water discharge and account for about 80% of the total thermal water discharge in the caldera. At the other extreme are springs at Hot Creek Fish Hatchery which contain a small component (2–5%) of thermal water that raises water temperatures about higher than background temperatures. Use of the warm spring water in the hatchery has increased fish production because trout growth rates are faster in the warm water than in ambient stream temperatures in Long Valley.

In hydrothermal systems the circulation of groundwater is driven by a combination of topography and heat sources. In Long Valley Caldera, the system is recharged primarily from snow-melt in the highlands around the western and southern rims of the caldera. The water from snow-melt and rainfall infiltrates to depths of a few kilometers (miles) where it is heated to at least by hot rock near geologically young intrusions. Upflow occurs in the west moat where the heated water with lower density rises along steeply inclined fractures to depths of . This hydrothermal fluid flows laterally, down the hydraulic gradient, from the west to the southeast around the resurgent dome and then eastward to discharge points along Hot Creek and around Crowley Lake. Reservoir temperatures in the volcanic fill decline from near the Inyo Craters to near Crowley Lake due to a combination of heat loss and mixing with cold water.

Hot Creek has been a popular swimming hole for decades. Over a dozen people have died in Hot Creek since the late 1960s, but most of these deaths happened to people who ignored the numerous warning signs and attempted to use the hydrothermal pools as hot tubs (like the stream portion of the creek, these pools alternate in temperature but the eruptions in the pools are of super-heated water in already very hot water). Recent geothermal instability has led to its temporary closure for swimming. Officials are unsure of when (if ever) Hot Creek will officially reopen for swimming.

Hydrothermal activity has altered many rocks in the caldera, transforming them into travertine and clay. At the Huntley clay mine white chalky clay called kaolinite is mined; the kaolinite is exposed on the resurgent dome and appears as a brilliant white band.

==Tourism and hiking==

The largest tourist attraction in the caldera is the Mammoth Mountain Ski Area: the area offers skiing and snowboarding in the winter, and mountain biking in the summer. The Hot Creek tourist attraction was closed to swimming in 2006 due to increased geothermal activity.

Hiking and off-road vehicle driving is available throughout the caldera, and in the glacial valleys of the Sherwin Range, immediately to the south of the caldera. Hikers can hike to several lakes in these glacial valleys, including Valentine Lake, Convict Lake, Lake Dorothy, and Laurel Lakes. Crowley Lake, at the south end of the caldera, is noted for its fishing.

The nearest hotel accommodations to the caldera are in Mammoth Lakes, California. There are also campgrounds scattered throughout the caldera, and in the mountains near the edge of the caldera.

==Fatalities==

In April 2006, three members of the Mammoth Mountain Ski Area ski patrol died while on duty. All three died from suffocation by carbon dioxide when they fell into a fumarole on the slopes of the mountain while attempting to fence it off.

==See also==
*List of large volume volcanic eruptions in the Basin and Range Province
*Glass Mountain
*Map of Long Valley-Mono area
*Mono–Inyo Craters
*Mammoth Geothermal Complex - a geothermal power plant in the area
==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==

* USGS website for the Long Valley Caldera
* 2023 Caltech study</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q143338" start="0" end="19" title="Long Valley Caldera" label="Long Valley Caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q190429" start="25" end="35" title="Depression (geology)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189073" start="39" end="57" title="eastern California" label="eastern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q953984" start="78" end="94" title="Mammoth Mountain" label="Mammoth Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="142" end="149" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q747501" start="271" end="281" title="Ultra-Plinian" label="very large"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530679" start="338" end="349" title="Bishop tuff" label="Bishop tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q488634" start="403" end="416" title="magma chamber" label="magma chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="500" end="516" title="pyroclastic flow" label="pyroclastic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="613" end="625" title="Western United States" label="western part"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="645" end="658" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q42278" start="902" end="907" title="magma" label="magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555927" start="931" end="945" title="resurgent dome" label="resurgent dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q852658" start="1000" end="1018" title="Bishop, California" label="Bishop, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530679" start="1039" end="1050" title="Bishop Tuff" label="Bishop Tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319307" start="1195" end="1206" title="Owens River" label="Owens River"/>
<link wikidata="Q953984" start="1448" end="1464" title="Mammoth Mountain" label="Mammoth Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q534282" start="1470" end="1479" title="lava dome" label="lava dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q674414" start="1554" end="1564" title="rhyodacite" label="rhyodacite"/>
<link wikidata="Q466481" start="1569" end="1575" title="dacite" label="dacite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760696" start="1729" end="1746" title="Mono–Inyo Craters" label="Mono–Inyo Craters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036221" start="2086" end="2098" title="Hydrothermal circulation" label="hydrothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047812" start="2107" end="2130" title="Casa Diablo Hot Springs" label="Casa Diablo Hot Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q84698648" start="2173" end="2195" title="Mammoth Geothermal Complex" label="geothermal power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682363" start="2197" end="2206" title="Hot Creek (Mono County)" label="Hot Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q117266912" start="2416" end="2435" title="geothermal activity" label="geothermal activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q212989" start="2529" end="2536" title="bathers" label="bathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105131" start="2726" end="2733" title="hotspot (geology)" label="hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q650836" start="2760" end="2779" title="Yellowstone Caldera" label="Yellowstone Caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="2800" end="2806" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="2832" end="2842" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="2892" end="2900" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascades"/>
<link wikidata="Q674414" start="3196" end="3206" title="rhyodacite" label="rhyodacite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190727" start="3312" end="3321" title="rhyolite" label="rhyolitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108557" start="3444" end="3458" title="Glass Mountain (California)" label="Glass Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q53754" start="3468" end="3476" title="obsidian" label="obsidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="3508" end="3534" title="volcanic explosivity index" label="volcanic explosivity index"/>
<link wikidata="Q778218" start="3666" end="3696" title="1980 Mount St. Helens eruption" label="1980 Mount St. Helens eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="3786" end="3802" title="pyroclastic flow" label="pyroclastic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="3845" end="3851" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="3857" end="3869" title="volcanic ash" label="volcanic ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042674" start="3970" end="3982" title="Owens Valley" label="Owens Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532244" start="4001" end="4021" title="Big Pine, California" label="Big Pine, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="4069" end="4082" title="Sierra Nevada (U.S.)" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q751347" start="4112" end="4129" title="San Joaquin River" label="San Joaquin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="4280" end="4288" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="4293" end="4299" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5238" end="5246" title="Lava#Mafic lava" label="basaltic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5251" end="5258" title="Lava#Felsic lava" label="silicic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319307" start="5310" end="5321" title="Owens River" label="Owens River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114741" start="5576" end="5593" title="Owens River Gorge" label="Owens River Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843378" start="5637" end="5649" title="Lake Crowley" label="Lake Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q177380" start="5726" end="5736" title="hot spring" label="hot spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="5815" end="5822" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585022" start="5937" end="5953" title="terminal moraine" label="terminal moraine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5997" end="6010" title="Convict Creek" label="Convict Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007966" start="6016" end="6027" title="McGee Creek, California" label="McGee Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q38768" start="6139" end="6156" title="Richter magnitude" label="Richter magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="6865" end="6896" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562733" start="6907" end="6930" title="Volcano Hazards Program" label="Volcano Hazards Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q106808925" start="7442" end="7460" title="Deformation (volcanology)" label="ground deformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105880" start="7632" end="7640" title="fumarole" label="fumarole"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="7734" end="7741" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7966" end="7982" title="Little Hot Creek" label="Little Hot Creek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7992" end="8007" title="Hot Creek Gorge" label="Hot Creek Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="8051" end="8055" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8132" end="8148" title="Little Hot Creek" label="Little Hot Creek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8161" end="8173" title="Alkali Lakes" label="Alkali Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8388" end="8411" title="Hot Creek Fish Hatchery" label="Hot Creek Fish Hatchery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333552" start="8578" end="8586" title="hatchery" label="hatchery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="8625" end="8630" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="8769" end="8780" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="8811" end="8821" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="8826" end="8830" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="8903" end="8907" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843378" start="9469" end="9481" title="Crowley Lake" label="Crowley Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936429" start="9897" end="9904" title="hot tub" label="hot tub"/>
<link wikidata="Q187156" start="10315" end="10325" title="travertine" label="travertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="10330" end="10334" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10343" end="10360" title="Huntley clay mine" label="Huntley clay mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="10386" end="10395" title="kaolinite" label="kaolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285029" start="10570" end="10595" title="Mammoth Mountain Ski Area" label="Mammoth Mountain Ski Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="10613" end="10619" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178131" start="10624" end="10636" title="snowboarding" label="snowboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="10656" end="10671" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682363" start="10691" end="10700" title="Hot Creek (Mono County, California)" label="Hot Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014035" start="10790" end="10796" title="Hiking" label="Hiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q946596" start="10801" end="10817" title="off-road vehicle" label="off-road vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495472" start="10897" end="10910" title="Sherwin Range" label="Sherwin Range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11022" end="11036" title="Valentine Lake" label="Valentine Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129457" start="11038" end="11050" title="Convict Lake" label="Convict Lake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11052" end="11064" title="Lake Dorothy (California)" label="Lake Dorothy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11070" end="11082" title="Laurel Lakes" label="Laurel Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843378" start="11084" end="11096" title="Crowley Lake" label="Crowley Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q983604" start="11213" end="11238" title="Mammoth Lakes, California" label="Mammoth Lakes, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="11497" end="11511" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q105880" start="11534" end="11542" title="fumarole" label="fumarole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489191" start="11622" end="11693" title="List of large volume volcanic eruptions in the Basin and Range Province" label="List of large volume volcanic eruptions in the Basin and Range Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108557" start="11695" end="11709" title="Glass Mountain (California)" label="Glass Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11711" end="11739" title=":File:MonoCraters LongValley.gif" label="Map of Long Valley-Mono area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760696" start="11741" end="11758" title="Mono–Inyo Craters" label="Mono–Inyo Craters"/>
<link wikidata="Q84698648" start="11760" end="11786" title="Mammoth Geothermal Complex" label="Mammoth Geothermal Complex"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46817" wikidata="Q524" url="?curid=46817" title="Mount Vesuvius">
<text>Mount Vesuvius ( ) is a somma–stratovolcano located on the Gulf of Naples in Campania, Italy, about east of Naples and a short distance from the shore. It is one of several volcanoes forming the Campanian volcanic arc. Vesuvius consists of a large cone partially encircled by the steep rim of a summit caldera, resulting from the collapse of an earlier, much higher structure.

The eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD destroyed the Roman cities of Pompeii, Herculaneum, Oplontis, Stabiae and other settlements. The eruption ejected a cloud of stones, ash and volcanic gases to a height of , erupting molten rock and pulverized pumice at the rate of per second. More than 1,000 people are thought to have died in the eruption, though the exact toll is unknown. The only surviving witness account consists of two letters by Pliny the Younger to the historian Tacitus.

Vesuvius has erupted many times since. It is the only volcano on Europe&#x27;s mainland to have erupted in the last hundred years. It is regarded as one of the most dangerous volcanoes in the world because 3,000,000 people live near enough to be affected by an eruption, with at least 600,000 in the danger zone. This is the most densely populated volcanic region in the world. Eruptions tend to be violent and explosive; these are known as Plinian eruptions.

==Mythology==
Vesuvius has a long historic and literary tradition. It was considered a divinity of the Genius type at the time of the eruption of AD 79: it appears under the inscribed name Vesuvius as a serpent in the decorative frescos of many &quot;&quot;, or household shrines, surviving from Pompeii. An inscription from Capua to indicates that he was worshipped as a power of Jupiter; that is, &quot;Jupiter Vesuvius&quot;.

The Romans regarded Mount Vesuvius as being devoted to Hercules. The historian Diodorus Siculus relates a tradition that Hercules, in the performance of his labors, passed through the country of nearby Cumae on his way to Sicily and found there a place called &quot;the Phlegraean Plain&quot; (&quot;Φλεγραῖον πεδίον&quot;, &quot;fiery&quot;), &quot;from the mountain which of old spouted forth a huge fire [...] the mountain is called Vesuvius.&quot; It was inhabited by giant bandits, &quot;the sons of the Earth. With the gods&#x27; assistance, he pacified the region and continued. The facts behind the tradition, if any, remain unknown, as does whether was named after it. An epigram by the poet Martial in 88 AD suggests that both Venus, patroness of Pompeii, and Hercules were worshipped in the region devastated by the eruption of 79.

==Etymology==
&#x27; was a name of the volcano in frequent use by the authors of the late Roman Republic and the early Roman Empire. Its collateral forms were &#x27;, &#x27;, &#x27; and &#x27;. Writers in ancient Greek used or . Many scholars since then have offered an etymology. Given that peoples of varying ethnicity and language occupied Campania during the Roman Iron Age, the etymology depends to a large degree on the presumption of what language was spoken there at the time. Naples was settled by Greeks, as the name &#x27;, &quot;New City&quot;, testifies. The Oscans, an Italic people, lived in the countryside. The Latins also competed for the occupation of Campania. Etruscan settlements were in the vicinity. Other peoples of unknown provenance are said to have been there at some time by various ancient authors.

Some theories about its origin are:
* From Greek = &quot;not&quot; prefixed to a root from or related to the Greek word = &quot;I quench&quot;, in the sense of &quot;unquenchable&quot;.
* From Greek = &quot;I hurl&quot; and &quot;violence&quot;, &quot;hurling violence&quot;, *vesbia, taking advantage of the collateral form.
* From an Indo-European root, *eus- &lt; *ewes- &lt; , &quot;shine&quot;, &quot;burn&quot;, sense &quot;the one who lightens&quot;, through Latin or 
* From an Indo-European root *wes = &quot;hearth&quot; (compare e.g. Vesta)

==Topography==

Vesuvius is a &quot;humpbacked&quot; peak, consisting of a large cone (&quot;Gran Cono&quot;) partially encircled by the steep rim of a summit caldera caused by the collapse of an earlier (and originally much higher) structure called Mount Somma. The Gran Cono was produced during the A.D. 79 eruption. For this reason, the volcano is also called Somma-Vesuvius or Somma-Vesuvio.

The caldera started forming during an eruption around 17,000–18,000 years ago and was enlarged by later paroxysmal eruptions, ending in the one of AD 79. This structure has given its name to the term &quot;somma volcano&quot;, which describes any volcano with a summit caldera surrounding a newer cone.

The cliffs forming the northern ridge of Monte Somma&#x27;s caldera rim reach a maximum height of at Punta Nasone. The summit of the main cone of Vesuvius is above sea level and more than above the long valley of Atrio di Cavallo (the northern floor of Monte Somma&#x27;s caldera).

The volcano&#x27;s slopes are scarred by lava flows, while the rest are heavily vegetated, with scrub and forests at higher altitudes and vineyards lower down.

==Formation==

Vesuvius is a stratovolcano and was formed as a result of the collision of two tectonic plates, the African and the Eurasian. The former was subducted at a convergent boundary beneath the latter, deeper into the earth. As the water-saturated sediments of the African oceanic plate were pushed to hotter depths inside the planet, the water boiled off and lowered the melting point of the upper mantle enough to partially melt the rocks. Because magma is less dense than the solid rock around it, it was pushed upward. Finding a weak spot at the Earth&#x27;s surface, it broke through, thus forming the volcano.

The volcano is one of several forming the Campanian volcanic arc. Others include Campi Flegrei, a large caldera a few kilometers to the north-west, and Ischia, a volcanic island to the west, and several undersea volcanoes to the south. The arc forms the southern end of a larger chain of volcanoes produced by the subduction process described above, which extends northwest along the length of Italy as far as Monte Amiata in Southern Tuscany. Vesuvius is the only one to have erupted in recent history, although some of the others have erupted within the last few hundred years. Many are either extinct or have not erupted for tens of thousands of years.

==Eruptions==

Mount Vesuvius has erupted many times. Numerous others preceded the eruption in AD 79 in prehistory, including at least three significantly larger; an example is the Avellino eruption around 1800 BC, which engulfed several Bronze Age settlements. Since AD 79, the volcano has also erupted repeatedly, in 172, 203, 222, possibly in 303, 379, 472, 512, 536, 685, 787, around 860, around 900, 968, 991, 999, 1006, 1037, 1049, around 1073, 1139, 1150, and there may have been eruptions in 1270, 1347, and 1500.
The volcano erupted again in 1631, six times in the 18th century (including 1779 and 1794), eight times in the 19th century (notably in 1872), and in 1906, 1929 and 1944. There have been no eruptions since 1944, and none of the eruptions after AD 79 were as large or destructive as the Pompeian one.

The eruptions vary greatly in severity but are characterized by explosive outbursts of the kind dubbed Plinian after Pliny the Younger, a Roman writer who published a detailed description of the AD 79 eruption, including his uncle&#x27;s death. On occasion, eruptions from Vesuvius have been so large that the whole of southern Europe has been blanketed by ash; in 472 and 1631, Vesuvian ash fell on Constantinople (Istanbul), over away. A few times since 1944, landslides in the crater have raised clouds of ash dust, raising false alarms of an eruption.
Since 1750, seven of the eruptions of Vesuvius have had durations of more than five years; only Mount Etna has had as many long-duration eruptions in the last 270 years. The two most recent eruptions of Vesuvius (1875–1906 and 1913–1944) each lasted more than 30 years.

Vesuvius is still regarded as an active volcano, although its current activity produces little more than sulfur-rich steam from vents at the bottom and walls of the crater.

Layers of lava, ash, scoria and pumice make up the volcanic peak. Their mineralogy is variable, but generally silica-undersaturated and rich in potassium, with phonolite produced in the more explosive eruptions (e.g. the eruption in 1631 displaying a complete stratigraphic and petrographic description: phonolite was firstly erupted, followed by a tephritic phonolite and finally a phonolitic tephrite).

===Volcanic explosivity index===
According to the Smithsonian Institution&#x27;s Global Volcanism Program, Vesuvius has had 54 confirmed eruptions during the Holocene Epoch (the last 11,700 years). A volcanic explosivity index (VEI) has been assigned to all but one of these eruptions.

===Before AD 79===
Scientific knowledge of the geologic history of Vesuvius comes from core samples taken from a plus borehole on the flanks of the volcano, extending into Mesozoic rock. Cores were dated by potassium–argon and argon–argon dating. The area has been subject to volcanic activity for at least 400,000 years; the lowest layer of eruption material from the Somma caldera lies on top of the 40,000-year‑old Campanian ignimbrite produced by the Campi Flegrei complex. The volcanic complex stands on a large, sedimentary plain.
* 25,000 years ago: Vesuvius started forming in the Codola Plinian eruption.
* Vesuvius was then built up by a series of lava flows, with some smaller explosive eruptions interspersed between them. By this time, the volcano was 2,000 meters (6,560 feet) tall, with the summit being 500 meters (1,640 feet) east of the current summit.
* About 19,000 years ago: the style of eruption changed to a sequence of large explosive and caldera-forming Plinian eruptions, of which the AD 79 one was the most recent. The calderas are aligned in a roughly east–west direction, and all contributed to forming present-day&#x27;s Somma caldera. The eruptions are named after the tephra deposits produced by them, which in turn are named after the place where the deposits were first identified:
* 18,300 years ago: the Basal Pumice (Pomici di Base) eruption, VEI 6, the original formation of the Somma caldera. The caldera&#x27;s formation was asymmetric towards the west. The eruption was followed by a period of much less violent, lava-producing eruptions.
* 16,000 years ago: the Green Pumice (Pomici Verdoline) eruption, VEI 5.
* Around 11,000 years ago: the Lagno Amendolare eruption, smaller than the Mercato eruption.
* 8,000 years ago: the Mercato eruption (Pomici di Mercato) – also known as Pomici Gemelle or Pomici Ottaviano, VEI 6.
* Around 5,000 years ago: two explosive eruptions smaller than the Avellino eruption.
* 3,800 years ago (19th century BC): the Avellino eruption (Pomici di Avellino), VEI 6; its vent was apparently west of the current crater and the eruption destroyed several Bronze Age settlements of the Apennine culture, including ancient Afragola. Several carbon dates on wood and bones offer a range of possible dates of about 500 years in the mid-2nd millennium BC. In May 2001, near Nola, Italian archaeologists using the technique of filling every cavity with plaster or substitute compound, recovered some remarkably well-preserved forms of perishable objects, such as fence rails, a bucket and especially in the vicinity, thousands of human footprints pointing into the Apennines to the north. The settlement had huts, pots and goats. The residents had hastily abandoned the village, leaving it to be buried under pumice and ash in much the same way that Pompeii and Herculaneum were later preserved. Pyroclastic surge deposits were distributed to the northwest of the vent, travelling as far as from it, and lie up to deep in the area now occupied by Naples.
* The volcano then entered a stage of more frequent, but less violent eruptions, until the most recent Plinian eruption, which destroyed Pompeii and Herculaneum. Evidence of these eruptions comes from badly preserved ashfall deposits that have been dubitatively assigned to either the Somma-Vesuvius complex, or the Phlegrean fields.
* The last of these may have been in 217 BC. There were earthquakes in Italy during that year and the sun was reported as being dimmed by gray haze or dry fog. Plutarch wrote of the sky being on fire near Naples, and Silius Italicus mentioned in his epic poem &quot;Punica&quot; that Vesuvius had thundered and produced flames worthy of Mount Etna in that year. However, both authors were writing around 250 years later. Greenland ice core samples of around that period show relatively high acidity, which is assumed to have been caused by atmospheric hydrogen sulfide.

* The volcano was then quiet (for 295 years, if the 217 BC date for the last previous eruption is true) and was described by Roman writers as having been covered with gardens and vineyards, except at the top, which was craggy. The volcano may have had only one summit at that time, judging by a wall painting, &quot;Bacchus and Vesuvius&quot;, found in a Pompeian house, the House of the Centenary (&quot;Casa del Centenario&quot;).
Several surviving works written over the 200 years preceding the AD 79 eruption describe the mountain as having had a volcanic nature, although Pliny the Elder did not depict the mountain in this way in his &quot;Natural History&quot;:
* The Greek historian Strabo () described the mountain in Book V, Chapter 4 of his &quot;Geographica&quot; as having a predominantly flat, barren summit covered with sooty, ash-coloured rocks, and suggested that it might once have had &quot;craters of fire&quot;. He also perceptively suggested that the fertility of the surrounding slopes may be due to volcanic activity, as at Mount Etna.
* In Book II of , the architect Vitruvius ( –?) reported that fires had once existed abundantly below the peak and that it had spouted fire onto the surrounding fields. He described Pompeiian pumice as having been burnt from another species of stone.
* Diodorus Siculus (), another Greek writer, wrote in Book IV of his &quot;Bibliotheca Historica&quot; that the Campanian plain was called fiery (&quot;Phlegrean&quot;) because of the peak, Vesuvius, which had spouted flames like Etna and showed signs of the fire that had burnt in ancient history.

===Eruption of AD 79===

In AD 79, Vesuvius erupted in one of the most catastrophic eruptions of all time. Historians have learned about the eruption from the eyewitness account of Pliny the Younger, a Roman administrator and poet. Several dates are given in the surviving copies of the letters. The latest evidence supports earlier findings and indicates that the eruption occurred after 17 October.

The volcano ejected a cloud of stones, ashes and volcanic gases to a height of , spewing molten rock and pulverized pumice at the rate of per second, ultimately releasing 100,000 times the thermal energy released by the Hiroshima-Nagasaki bombings. The cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum were destroyed by pyroclastic surges and the ruins buried under tens of metres of tephra.

====Precursors and foreshocks====
The AD 79 eruption was preceded by a powerful earthquake in 62, which caused widespread destruction around the Bay of Naples, and particularly to Pompeii. Some of the damage had still not been repaired when the volcano erupted. The deaths of 600 sheep from &quot;tainted air&quot; in the vicinity of Pompeii indicates that the earthquake of AD 62 may have been related to new activity by Vesuvius.

The Romans grew accustomed to minor earth tremors in the region; the writer Pliny the Younger even wrote that they &quot;were not particularly alarming because they are frequent in Campania&quot;. Small earthquakes started taking place four days before the eruption becoming more frequent over the next four days, but the warnings were not recognized.

====Scientific analysis====

Reconstructions of the eruption and its effects vary considerably in the details but have the same overall features. The eruption lasted two days. The morning of the first day was perceived as normal by the only eyewitness to leave a surviving document, Pliny the Younger. In the middle of the day, an explosion threw up a high-altitude column from which ash and pumice began to fall, blanketing the area. Rescues and escapes occurred during this time. At some time in the night or early the next day, pyroclastic surges in the close vicinity of the volcano began. Lights were seen on the peak, interpreted as fires. People as far away as Misenum fled for their lives. The flows were rapid-moving, dense and very hot, knocking down, wholly or partly, all structures in their path, incinerating or suffocating all population remaining there and altering the landscape, including the coastline. Additional light tremors accompanied these and a mild tsunami in the Bay of Naples. By late afternoon of the second day, the eruption was over, leaving only haze in the atmosphere through which the sun shone weakly.

The latest scientific studies of the ash produced by Vesuvius reveal a multi-phase eruption. The initial major explosion produced a column of ash and pumice ranging between high, which rained on Pompeii to the southeast but not on Herculaneum upwind. The chief energy supporting the column came from the escape of steam superheated by the magma, created from seawater seeping over time into the deep faults of the region, which interacted with magma.

Subsequently, the cloud collapsed as the gases expanded and lost their capability to support their solid contents, releasing it as a pyroclastic surge, which first reached Herculaneum but not Pompeii. Additional blasts reinstituted the column. The eruption alternated between Plinian and Peléan six times. Surges 3 and 4 are believed by the authors to have buried Pompeii. Surges are identified in the deposits by dune and cross-bedding formations, which are not produced by fallout.

Another study used the magnetic characteristics of over 200 samples of roof-tile and plaster fragments collected around Pompeii to estimate the equilibrium temperature of the pyroclastic flow. The magnetic study revealed that on the first day of the eruption a fall of white pumice containing clastic fragments of up to fell for several hours. It heated the roof tiles up to . This period would have been the last opportunity to escape.

The collapse of the Plinian columns on the second day caused pyroclastic density currents (PDCs) that devastated Herculaneum and Pompeii. The depositional temperature of these pyroclastic surges reached up to . Any population remaining in structural refuges could not have escaped, as gases of incinerating temperatures surrounded the city. The lowest temperatures were in rooms under collapsed roofs, at approximately .

====The two Plinys====
The only surviving eyewitness account of the event consists of two letters by Pliny the Younger to the historian Tacitus. Pliny the Younger describes, amongst other things, the last days in the life of his uncle, Pliny the Elder. Observing the first volcanic activity from Misenum across the Bay of Naples from the volcano, approximately , the elder Pliny launched a rescue fleet and went himself to the rescue of a personal friend. His nephew declined to join the party. One of the nephew&#x27;s letters relates what he could discover from witnesses of his uncle&#x27;s experiences. In a second letter, the younger Pliny details his own observations after the departure of his uncle.

The two men saw an extraordinarily dense cloud rising rapidly above the peak. This cloud and a request by a messenger for an evacuation by sea prompted the elder Pliny to order rescue operations in which he sailed away to participate. His nephew attempted to resume a normal life, but that night a tremor awoke him and his mother, prompting them to abandon the house for the courtyard. Further tremors near dawn caused the population to abandon the village and caused disastrous wave action in the Bay of Naples.

A massive black cloud with lightning obscured the early-morning light, a scene Pliny describes as sheet lightning. The cloud obscured Point Misenum near at hand and the island of Capraia (Capri) across the bay. Fearing for their lives, the population began to flee the shore along the road. An ash rain fell, causing Pliny to shake it off periodically to avoid being buried. Later that same day, the pumice and ash stopped falling, and the sun shone weakly through the cloud, encouraging Pliny and his mother to return to their home and wait for news of Pliny the Elder.

Pliny&#x27;s uncle, Pliny the Elder, was in command of the Roman fleet at Misenum and had meanwhile decided to investigate the phenomenon at close hand in a light vessel. As the ship was preparing to leave the area, a messenger came from his friend Rectina (wife of Tascius) living on the coast near the foot of the volcano, explaining that her party could only get away by sea and asking for rescue. Pliny ordered the immediate launching of the fleet galleys to the evacuation of the coast. He continued in his light ship to the rescue of Rectina&#x27;s party.

He set off across the bay but, in the shallows on the other side, encountered thick showers of hot cinders, lumps of pumice and pieces of rock. Advised by the helmsman to turn back, he stated, &quot;Fortune favors the brave&quot; and ordered him to continue to Stabiae (about 4.5 km from Pompeii).

Pliny the Elder and his party saw what they believed to be flames coming from several parts of the crater. After staying overnight, the party was driven from the building by an accumulation of material, presumably tephra, which threatened to block all egress. They woke Pliny, who had been napping and emitting loud snoring. They elected to take to the fields with pillows tied to their heads to protect them from the raining debris. They approached the beach again, but the wind prevented the ships from leaving. Pliny sat down on a sail that had been spread for him and could not rise, even with assistance, when his friends departed. Though Pliny the Elder died, his friends ultimately escaped by land.

In the first letter to Tacitus, Pliny the Younger suggested that his uncle&#x27;s death was due to the reaction of his weak lungs to a cloud of poisonous, sulphurous gas that wafted over the group. However, Stabiae was 16 km from the vent (roughly where the modern town of Castellammare di Stabia is situated), and his companions were unaffected by the volcanic gases. It is more likely that the corpulent Pliny died from another cause, such as a stroke or heart attack. His body was found with no apparent injuries the next day, after dispersal of the plume.

====Casualties====
Along with Pliny the Elder, the only other noble casualties of the eruption to be known by name were Agrippa (a son of the Herodian Jewish princess Drusilla and the procurator Antonius Felix) and his wife.

By 2003, around 1,044 casts made from impressions of bodies in the ash deposits had been recovered in and around Pompeii, with the scattered bones of another 100. The remains of about 332 bodies have been found at Herculaneum (300 in arched vaults discovered in 1980). What percentage these numbers are of the total dead or the percentage of the dead to the total number at risk remain unknown.

Thirty-eight percent of the 1,044 were found in the ash fall deposits, the majority inside buildings. These are thought to have been killed mainly by roof collapses, with the smaller number of victims found outside of buildings probably being killed by falling roof slates or by larger rocks thrown out by the volcano. The remaining 62% of remains found at Pompeii were in the pyroclastic surge deposits, and thus were probably killed by them – probably from a combination of suffocation from inhaling ashes and blast and debris thrown around. Examination of cloth, frescoes and skeletons shows that, in contrast to the victims found at Herculaneum, it is unlikely that high temperatures were a significant cause of the destruction at Pompeii. Herculaneum, much closer to the crater, was saved from tephra falls by the wind direction but was buried under of material deposited by pyroclastic surges. Likely, most of the known victims in this town were killed by the surges.

People in Herculaneum, caught on the former seashore by the first surge, died of thermal shock. The rest were concentrated in arched chambers at a density of as high as three persons per square metre. As only of the coast have been excavated, further casualties may be discovered.

===Later eruptions from the 3rd to the 19th centuries===
Since the eruption of AD 79, Vesuvius has erupted around three dozen times.
* It erupted again in 203, during the lifetime of the historian Cassius Dio.
* In 472, it ejected such a volume of ash that ashfalls were reported as far away as Constantinople (760 mi.; 1,220 km).
* The eruptions of 512 were so severe that those inhabiting the slopes of Vesuvius were granted exemption from taxes by Theodoric the Great, the Gothic king of Italy.
* Further eruptions were recorded in 787, 968, 991, 999, 1007 and 1036 with the first recorded lava flows.

The volcano became quiescent at the end of the 13th century, and in the following years, it again became covered with gardens and vineyards as old. Even the inside of the crater was moderately filled with shrubbery.
* Vesuvius entered a new phase in December 1631, when a major eruption buried many villages under lava flows, killing around 3,000 people. Torrents of lahar were also created, adding to the devastation. Activity thereafter became almost continuous, with relatively severe eruptions occurring in 1660, 1682, 1694, 1698, 1707, 1737, 1760, 1767, 1779, 1794, 1822, 1834, 1839, 1850, 1855, 1861, 1868, 1872, 1906, 1926, 1929, and 1944.

===Eruptions in the 20th century===
* The eruption of 5 April 1906 killed more than 100 people and ejected the most lava ever recorded from a Vesuvian eruption. Italian authorities were preparing to hold the 1908 Summer Olympics when Mount Vesuvius violently erupted, devastating the city of Naples and surrounding comunes. Funds were diverted to reconstructing Naples, and the Games were transferred to London.
* Vesuvius was active from 1913 through 1944, with lava filling the crater and occasional outflows of small amounts of lava.
* That eruptive period ended in the major eruption of March 1944, which destroyed the villages of San Sebastiano al Vesuvio, Massa di Somma, and Ottaviano, and part of San Giorgio a Cremano. From 13 to 18 March 1944, activity was confined within the rim. Finally, on 18 March 1944, lava overflowed the rim. Lava flows destroyed nearby villages from 19 March through 22 March. On 24 March, an explosive eruption created an ash plume and a small pyroclastic flow.

In March 1944, the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) 340th Bombardment Group was based at Pompeii Airfield near Terzigno, Italy, just a few kilometres from the eastern base of the volcano. The tephra and hot ash from multiple days of the eruption damaged the fabric control surfaces, the engines, the Plexiglas windscreens and the gun turrets of the 340th&#x27;s B-25 Mitchell medium bombers. Estimates ranged from 78 to 88 aircraft destroyed.
The eruption could be seen from Naples. Different perspectives and the damage caused to the local villages were recorded by USAAF photographers and other personnel based nearer to the volcano.

===Future===
Large Vesuvian eruptions which emit volcanic material in quantities of about , the most recent of which overwhelmed Pompeii and Herculaneum, have happened after periods of inactivity of a few thousand years. Sub-Plinian eruptions producing about , such as those of 472 and 1631, have been more frequent with a few hundred years between them. From the 1631 eruption until 1944, there was a comparatively small eruption every few years, emitting 0.001–0.01 km3 of magma. For Vesuvius, the amount of magma expelled in an eruption increases roughly linearly with the interval since the previous one, and at a rate of around for each year. This gives an approximate figure of for an eruption after 80 years of inactivity.

Magma sitting in an underground chamber for many years will start to see higher melting point constituents such as olivine crystallizing out. The effect is to increase the concentration of dissolved gases (mostly sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide) in the remaining liquid magma, making the subsequent eruption more violent. As gas-rich magma approaches the surface during an eruption, the huge drop in internal pressure caused by the reduction in weight of the overlying rock (which drops to zero at the surface) causes the gases to come out of solution, the volume of gas increasing explosively from nothing to perhaps many times that of the accompanying magma. Additionally, the removal of the higher melting point material will raise the concentration of felsic components such as silicates, potentially making the magma more viscous, adding to the explosive nature of the eruption.
The government emergency plan for an eruption therefore assumes that the worst case will be an eruption of similar size and type to the 1631 VEI 4 eruption. In this scenario, the volcano&#x27;s slopes, extending out to about from the vent, may be exposed to pyroclastic surges sweeping down them, whilst much of the surrounding area could suffer from tephra falls. Because of prevailing winds, towns and cities south and east of the volcano are most at risk from this. It is assumed that tephra accumulation exceeding —at which point people are at risk from collapsing roofs—may extend out as far as Avellino to the east or Salerno to the south-east. Near Naples, this tephra fall hazard is assumed to extend barely past the volcano&#x27;s slopes to the northwest. The specific areas affected by the ash cloud depend upon the circumstances surrounding the eruption.

The plan assumes between two weeks and 20 days notice of an eruption and foresees the emergency evacuation of 600,000 people, almost entirely comprising all those living in the &quot;zona rossa&quot; (&quot;red zone&quot;), i.e. at greatest risk from pyroclastic flows. The evacuation, by train, ferry, car, and bus, is planned to take about seven days, and the evacuees would mostly be sent to other parts of the country, rather than to safe areas in the local Campania region, and may have to stay away for several months. However, the dilemma that would face those implementing the plan is when to start this massive evacuation: If it starts too late, thousands could be killed, whereas if it is started too early, the indicators of an eruption may turn out to be a false alarm. In 1984, 40,000 people were evacuated from the Campi Flegrei area, another volcanic complex near Naples, but no eruption occurred.

Ongoing efforts are being made by the government at various levels (especially of Campania) to reduce the population living in the red zone, by demolishing illegally constructed buildings, establishing a national park around the whole volcano to prevent the future construction of buildings and by offering sufficient financial incentives to people for moving away. One of the underlying goals is to reduce the time needed to evacuate the area, over the following twenty to thirty years (i.e. by 2023–2033), to two or three days.

The volcano is closely monitored by the Osservatorio Vesuvio in Ercolano with extensive networks of seismic and gravimetric stations, a combination of a GPS-based geodetic array and satellite-based synthetic aperture radar to measure ground movement and by local surveys and chemical analyses of gases emitted from fumaroles. All of this is intended to track magma rising underneath the volcano.

The official INGV monitoring bulletin from the Vesuvius Observatory, as of July 2024, classifies Mount Vesuvius at a Green Alert Level. This indicates a state of low volcanic activity. The surveillance system has not detected any significant changes in Vesuvius&#x27; activity state. The low-energy earthquakes are attributable to gravitational subsidence activity of rocks inside the crater.

==National park==
The area around Vesuvius was officially declared a national park on 5 June 1995. The summit of Vesuvius is open to visitors, and there is a small network of paths around the volcano that are maintained by the park authorities on weekends. There is access by road to within of the summit (measured vertically), but after that, access is on foot only. There is a spiral walkway around the volcano from the road to the crater.

==Funicular==

Mount Vesuvius&#x27; first funicular – a type of vertical transport that uses two opposing, interconnected, rail-guided passenger cars always moving in concert – opened in 1880, subsequently destroyed by the March 1944 eruption.

&quot;Funiculì, Funiculà&quot;, a Neapolitan language song, was written to commemorate the opening of the first funicular on Mount Vesuvius.

==See also==

* Battle of Mount Vesuvius
* List of volcanic eruptions by death toll
* List of volcanoes in Italy
* List of stratovolcanoes

==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 


==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="0" end="14" title="Mount Vesuvius" label="Mount Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491559" start="24" end="29" title="Somma volcano" label="somma"/>
<link wikidata="Q169358" start="30" end="43" title="stratovolcano" label="stratovolcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q201385" start="59" end="73" title="Gulf of Naples" label="Gulf of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="77" end="85" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="87" end="92" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="108" end="114" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="173" end="180" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q249123" start="195" end="217" title="Campanian volcanic arc" label="Campanian volcanic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368970" start="248" end="252" title="volcanic cone" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="302" end="309" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411998" start="382" end="417" title="eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD" label="eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="432" end="437" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="448" end="455" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="457" end="468" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257335" start="470" end="478" title="Oplontis" label="Oplontis"/>
<link wikidata="Q547910" start="480" end="487" title="Stabiae" label="Stabiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="543" end="549" title="Volcanic rock" label="stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="551" end="554" title="Volcanic ash" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q552571" start="559" end="571" title="volcanic gas" label="volcanic gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692360" start="591" end="599" title="Volcanic eruption" label="erupting"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="600" end="611" title="Lava" label="molten rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="627" end="633" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="822" end="839" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="857" end="864" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q747501" start="1308" end="1315" title="Plinian" label="Plinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q654361" start="1431" end="1437" title="Genius (mythology)" label="Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="1557" end="1563" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="1624" end="1631" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q58477" start="1653" end="1658" title="Capua" label="Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="1709" end="1716" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="1813" end="1821" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="1837" end="1853" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q243456" start="1960" end="1965" title="Cumae" label="Cumae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1980" end="1986" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q755123" start="2052" end="2080" title="Phlegraean Fields" label="&amp;quot;Φλεγραῖον πεδίον&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193121" start="2439" end="2446" title="epigram" label="epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098" start="2459" end="2466" title="Martial" label="Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="2495" end="2500" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="2692" end="2706" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2721" end="2733" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42106" start="2739" end="2755" title="synonym" label="collateral forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="2872" end="2881" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="2945" end="2953" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606068" start="2965" end="2979" title="Roman Iron Age" label="Roman Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q487908" start="3174" end="3180" title="Oscans" label="Oscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131848" start="3185" end="3191" title="Italic languages" label="Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3230" end="3236" title="Latin language" label="Latins"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="3283" end="3291" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="3768" end="3781" title="Indo-European" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3898" end="3903" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="3918" end="3931" title="Indo-European" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="3950" end="3956" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178710" start="3977" end="3982" title="Vesta (mythology)" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368970" start="4066" end="4070" title="Volcanic cone" label="cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="4144" end="4151" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q729873" start="4235" end="4246" title="Mount Somma" label="Mount Somma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4486" end="4496" title="Types of volcanic eruptions#Eruption mechanisms" label="paroxysmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491559" start="4588" end="4601" title="somma volcano" label="somma volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="5107" end="5115" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="5224" end="5238" title="tectonic plate" label="tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203548" start="5245" end="5252" title="African plate" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="5261" end="5269" title="Eurasian plate" label="Eurasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="5286" end="5295" title="subducted" label="subducted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255282" start="5301" end="5320" title="convergent boundary" label="convergent boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009467" start="5532" end="5544" title="upper mantle" label="upper mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q249123" start="5798" end="5820" title="Campanian volcanic arc" label="Campanian volcanic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q755123" start="5837" end="5850" title="Campi Flegrei" label="Campi Flegrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q159954" start="5860" end="5867" title="caldera" label="caldera"/>
<link wikidata="Q189387" start="5908" end="5914" title="Ischia" label="Ischia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="6070" end="6080" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q470777" start="6166" end="6178" title="Monte Amiata" label="Monte Amiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="6191" end="6198" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828024" start="6594" end="6611" title="Avellino eruption" label="Avellino eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q747501" start="7339" end="7346" title="Plinian" label="Plinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="7353" end="7370" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="7636" end="7650" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="7652" end="7660" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q117721746" start="7698" end="7708" title="volcanic landslide" label="landslides"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="7888" end="7898" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="8247" end="8251" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="8253" end="8256" title="volcanic ash" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642389" start="8258" end="8264" title="scoria" label="scoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="8269" end="8275" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="8347" end="8353" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="8381" end="8390" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257550" start="8397" end="8406" title="phonolite" label="phonolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546822" start="8586" end="8605" title="tephritic phonolite" label="tephritic phonolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q777112" start="8631" end="8639" title="tephrite" label="tephrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="8693" end="8716" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108976" start="8724" end="8748" title="Global Volcanism Program" label="Global Volcanism Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="8801" end="8815" title="Holocene Epoch" label="Holocene Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="8843" end="8869" title="volcanic explosivity index" label="volcanic explosivity index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942237" start="9017" end="9028" title="core sample" label="core sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="9102" end="9110" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068405" start="9137" end="9152" title="K–Ar dating" label="potassium–argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789695" start="9157" end="9175" title="argon–argon dating" label="argon–argon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q28231691" start="9348" end="9368" title="Campanian ignimbrite" label="Campanian ignimbrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q755123" start="9385" end="9398" title="Campi Flegrei" label="Campi Flegrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q747501" start="9526" end="9542" title="Plinian eruption" label="Plinian eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q209245" start="10131" end="10137" title="tephra" label="tephra"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="10311" end="10314" title="VEI" label="VEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818046" start="10700" end="10716" title="Mercato eruption" label="Mercato eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="10789" end="10792" title="VEI" label="VEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828024" start="10923" end="10940" title="Avellino eruption" label="Avellino eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="11056" end="11066" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569017" start="11086" end="11102" title="Apennine culture" label="Apennine culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q71610" start="11122" end="11130" title="Afragola" label="Afragola"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="11140" end="11152" title="carbon dating" label="carbon dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q72288" start="11270" end="11274" title="Nola" label="Nola"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="11704" end="11710" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="11715" end="11718" title="Volcanic ash" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758272" start="11791" end="11808" title="Pyroclastic surge" label="Pyroclastic surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="11942" end="11948" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q747501" start="12053" end="12069" title="Plinian eruption" label="Plinian eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="12087" end="12094" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="12099" end="12110" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="12167" end="12174" title="ash fall" label="ashfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q755123" start="12266" end="12282" title="Phlegrean fields" label="Phlegrean fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="12444" end="12452" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q316123" start="12501" end="12516" title="Silius Italicus" label="Silius Italicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219433" start="12550" end="12556" title="Punica (poem)" label="Punica"/>
<link wikidata="Q258914" start="12715" end="12723" title="ice core" label="ice core"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="12836" end="12852" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="12980" end="12985" title="Roman literature" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q22715" start="13034" end="13042" title="vineyard" label="vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060566" start="13230" end="13252" title="House of the Centenary" label="House of the Centenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="13501" end="13516" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="13546" end="13552" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q690653" start="13613" end="13624" title="Geographica" label="Geographica"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="13947" end="13956" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="14107" end="14113" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="14168" end="14184" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235638" start="14532" end="14549" title="List of natural disasters by death toll" label="most catastrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q196939" start="14625" end="14635" title="Witness" label="eyewitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="14647" end="14664" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="14899" end="14905" title="Volcanic rock" label="stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="14907" end="14912" title="Volcanic ash" label="ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q552571" start="14917" end="14929" title="volcanic gas" label="volcanic gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692360" start="14949" end="14956" title="Volcanic eruption" label="spewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="14957" end="14968" title="Lava" label="molten rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="14984" end="14990" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q209233" start="15057" end="15071" title="thermal energy" label="thermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="15088" end="15115" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="Hiroshima-Nagasaki bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="15131" end="15138" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="15143" end="15154" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758272" start="15173" end="15190" title="pyroclastic surge" label="pyroclastic surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q209245" start="15237" end="15243" title="tephra" label="tephra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718708" start="15317" end="15342" title="62 Pompeii earthquake" label="powerful earthquake in 62"/>
<link wikidata="Q168707" start="15755" end="15772" title="Pliny the Younger" label="Pliny the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758272" start="16563" end="16580" title="pyroclastic surge" label="pyroclastic surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="17008" end="17015" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="19104" end="19111" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="19204" end="19219" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q401231" start="19264" end="19271" title="Misenum" label="Misenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="20156" end="20167" title="tsunami" label="wave action"/>
<link wikidata="Q201385" start="20175" end="20188" title="Bay of Naples" label="Bay of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q123900778" start="20289" end="20304" title="sheet lightning" label="sheet lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q173292" start="20379" end="20384" title="Capri" label="Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q540867" start="20822" end="20833" title="Roman Navy" label="Roman fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q547910" start="21587" end="21594" title="Stabiae" label="Stabiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737" start="22605" end="22628" title="Castellammare di Stabia" label="Castellammare di Stabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q255778" start="23060" end="23068" title="Drusilla (daughter of Agrippa I)" label="Drusilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q316915" start="23088" end="23102" title="Antonius Felix" label="Antonius Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="24969" end="24980" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="25067" end="25081" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="25223" end="25242" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="25248" end="25254" title="Goths" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="25365" end="25375" title="lava flows" label="lava flows"/>
<link wikidata="Q47212" start="25745" end="25750" title="lahar" label="lahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q747501" start="26168" end="26185" title="Vesuvian eruption" label="Vesuvian eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q8111" start="26234" end="26254" title="1908 Summer Olympics" label="1908 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="26318" end="26324" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="26341" end="26348" title="comunes" label="comunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q72527" start="26661" end="26686" title="San Sebastiano al Vesuvio" label="San Sebastiano al Vesuvio"/>
<link wikidata="Q72253" start="26688" end="26702" title="Massa di Somma" label="Massa di Somma"/>
<link wikidata="Q72293" start="26708" end="26717" title="Ottaviano" label="Ottaviano"/>
<link wikidata="Q72497" start="26731" end="26752" title="San Giorgio a Cremano" label="San Giorgio a Cremano"/>
<link wikidata="Q221616" start="27007" end="27023" title="pyroclastic flow" label="pyroclastic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="27045" end="27074" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635322" start="27083" end="27106" title="340th Bombardment Group" label="340th Bombardment Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227458" start="27120" end="27136" title="Pompeii Airfield" label="Pompeii Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q72708" start="27142" end="27150" title="Terzigno" label="Terzigno"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="27331" end="27340" title="Plexiglas" label="Plexiglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q502117" start="27393" end="27406" title="B-25 Mitchell" label="B-25 Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q488634" start="28431" end="28438" title="magma chamber" label="chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="28514" end="28521" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="28612" end="28626" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="28631" end="28645" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692360" start="28774" end="28782" title="eruption" label="eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663889" start="28801" end="28818" title="internal pressure" label="internal pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q847257" start="29157" end="29163" title="felsic" label="felsic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130787" start="29183" end="29191" title="silicate" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="29228" end="29235" title="viscous" label="viscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q210510" start="29426" end="29429" title="VEI" label="VEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330018" start="29661" end="29677" title="prevailing winds" label="prevailing winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q13433" start="29885" end="29893" title="Avellino" label="Avellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="29909" end="29916" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q606332" start="30238" end="30258" title="emergency evacuation" label="emergency evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024736" start="30335" end="30345" title="Vesuvius red zone" label="zona rossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="30614" end="30622" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364844" start="30921" end="30932" title="false alarm" label="false alarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q755123" start="30981" end="30994" title="Campi Flegrei" label="Campi Flegrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="31148" end="31156" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q967776" start="31637" end="31657" title="Osservatorio Vesuvio" label="Osservatorio Vesuvio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="31750" end="31753" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="31779" end="31788" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q740686" start="31795" end="31819" title="synthetic aperture radar" label="synthetic aperture radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747649" start="31860" end="31867" title="geophysical survey" label="surveys"/>
<link wikidata="Q105880" start="31912" end="31920" title="fumarole" label="fumarole"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="32339" end="32349" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q635414" start="32457" end="32470" title="Vesuvius National Park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q142031" start="32873" end="32882" title="funicular" label="funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q369453" start="33082" end="33100" title="Funiculì, Funiculà" label="Funiculì, Funiculà"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="33110" end="33129" title="Neapolitan language" label="Neapolitan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087418" start="33234" end="33258" title="Battle of Mount Vesuvius" label="Battle of Mount Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603389" start="33261" end="33301" title="List of volcanic eruptions by death toll" label="List of volcanic eruptions by death toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q393174" start="33304" end="33330" title="List of volcanoes in Italy" label="List of volcanoes in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891004" start="33333" end="33356" title="List of stratovolcanoes" label="List of stratovolcanoes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46818" wikidata="Q623344" url="?curid=46818" title="Surveillance aircraft">
<text>Surveillance aircraft are aircraft used for surveillance. They are primarily operated by military forces and government agencies in roles including intelligence gathering, maritime patrol, battlefield and airspace surveillance, observation (e.g. artillery spotting), and law enforcement.

Surveillance aircraft usually carry limited defensive armament, if any. They do not require high-performance capability or stealth characteristics and may be modified civilian aircraft. Surveillance aircraft have also included moored balloons (e.g. TARS) and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).

==Definitions==


The terms &quot;surveillance&quot; and &quot;reconnaissance&quot; have sometimes been used interchangeably. In the military context, a distinction can be drawn between surveillance, which monitors a changing situation in real time, and reconnaissance, which captures a static picture for analysis. Surveillance is sometimes grouped with intelligence, target acquisition, and reconnaissance to form ISTAR.

The term observation was used when the main sensor was the human eye.

==History==

=== Pre World War I ===
The French were the first to adopt hydrogen-filled balloons on the battlefield for reconnaissance. In the early 1790s, the French would deploy a hydrogen-filled balloon that held two soldiers: one who possessed a telescope, and the other would relay information to troops on the ground. These balloons did not cross into enemy lines; they were deployed on friendly lines for the purpose of surveillance from a higher point of view. These balloons formed the first air force in 1794, which was referred to as the Compagnie d&#x27;Aéronautiers. Also in 1794, during the Battle of Fleurus, the French Aerostatic Corps balloon &quot;L&#x27;Entreprenant&quot; remained afloat for nine hours. French officers used the balloon to observe the movements of the Austrian Army, dropping notes to the ground for collection by the French Army [2] and also signaled messages using semaphores.

This method of surveillance would eventually be adopted by the Union Army in the Civil War. American inventor Thadeus Low proposed this invention to President Abraham Lincoln, to which a similar idea would be adopted. The Union Army would use balloons that could hold as many as five soldiers, and they would use telegraphs to relay information.

In the 1880s, a British meteorologist named Douglas Archibald experimented with unmanned surveillance vehicles. Douglas rigged cameras to a kite and used a long cable attached to the kite&#x27;s string to activate the shutter. This invention would eventually catch the eyes of American Army Corporal William Eddy.

During the Spanish-American War of 1898, Eddy adopted his own version of Archibald’s kite-mounted camera. Eddy’s kite was responsible for creating the first-ever military aerial surveillance photos.

===World War I===
One of the first aircraft used for surveillance was the Rumpler Taube during World War I, when aviators like Fred Zinn evolved entirely new methods of reconnaissance and photography. The translucent wings of the plane made it very difficult for ground-based observers to detect a Taube at an altitude above 400 m. The French also called this plane &quot;the Invisible Aircraft&quot;, and it is sometimes also referred to as the &quot;world&#x27;s very first stealth plane&quot;. German Taube aircraft were able to detect the advancing Russian army during the Battle of Tannenberg (1914).

Aircraft were initially used for reconnaissance missions. The pilots of these initial aircraft would track the movement of enemy troops using photographs. These photos would be used to understand enemy formations and create maps that would eventually be used by infantry. By 1916, these aircraft would assist in the spotting of artillery, and the guidance and coordination of infantry. These aircraft forced enemy troops to camouflage their position to hide from aerial observation.

Eventually, surveillance aircraft would be highly valued due to commander’s reliance on their information. However, surveillance aircraft would fly a low, slow, and predictable flight path, and with the introduction of aerial combat, surveillance aircraft were an easy target.

===World War II===
Pre-war, the British built and flew two Fleet Shadower aircraft, including the General Aircraft Fleet Shadower, that could follow and observe the enemy fleet at a distance. However, they were made obsolete by the 1940s with the introduction of airborne radar.

Air observation posts were developed during World War II. Light aircraft such as the Auster were used by the British Royal Artillery for artillery spotting. By the mid-1960s, air observation was generally taken over by light observation helicopters.

===Cold War===
Spy flights were a source of major contention between the United States and the Soviet Union during most of the 1960s. Due to the difficulty of surveillance in the USSR, US policymakers established the National Reconnaissance Office. To combat this difficulty of surveillance, the US military developed the U2. This aircraft could fly at altitudes of 70,000 feet to avoid detection from KGB surveillance. The U2 was also equipped with a Hycon 73B camera. This camera was capable of capturing details as small as 2.5 feet wide. In 1962, a U2 captured images that discovered nuclear missiles in Cuba. These photos would initiate what we know as the Cuban Missile Crisis.

Aerial Reconnaissance was dangerous: Out of 152 cryptologists who died in the Cold War, 64 of them were participating in aerial reconnaissance missions. During the time period of 1945-1977, more than forty reconnaissance aircraft were shot down in the European and Pacific areas.

The US Military originally used standard aircraft like B-29s for reconnaissance missions. Eventually, variants of the aircraft were designed for reconnaissance, e.g. the C-130 and RC-130. These repurposed aircraft were sometimes referred to as “ferret” aircraft, and intelligence personnel commanding these aircraft were nicknamed “backenders”.

The United States also performed surveillance using repurposed Ryan Firebee unmanned target drones. Variants of these vehicles, designated the Model 147, could fly for 2500 miles.

In May 1991, the Department of the Navy reported that at least one UAV was airborne at all times during Operation Desert Storm.

=== War on terror ===
During the global war on terror, the US military developed defenses to surveillance aircraft to combat surveillance use. The United States military used precision cameras, drones that detect drones, and direct-energy weapons that disrupt control links and GPS navigation.

==Roles==

=== Maritime patrol ===

The main components of maritime surveillance consist of sightings from ship captains and aircraft pilots. However, due to the radar horizon, surveillance aircraft are preferred as they can identify targets hundreds of miles further than vessels. An example of this today is the Coast Guard’s use of unmanned aerial systems (UASs) to improve their capabilities while reducing the risk for service members. Currently, the Coast Guard has roughly 250 drone certified officers across the US. The main uses of UASs within maritime activities are search and rescue operations and responding to different environmental disasters. The Coast Guard’s use of unmanned drones specifically led them to creating an “Unmanned Systems Strategic Plan.” This plan would expand the use of current aerial surveillance systems to new challenges such as drug trafficking surveillance, migrant interdiction, and ice operations. With regards to environmental tasks, UASs will be expanded to address marine safety, fishing activity, and navigational uses. The Coast Guard outlines the future of aerial surveillance in maritime patrol as improving current UAS systems, integrating improved sensors and AI/ML, and creating more organized command and control plans/operations.

Maritime patrol aircraft are typically large, slow machines capable of flying continuously for many hours, with a wide range of sensors. Such aircraft include the Hawker-Siddeley Nimrod, the Breguet Atlantique, the Tupolev Tu-95, the Lockheed P-2 Neptune and the Lockheed P-3 Orion/CP-140 Aurora. Smaller ship-launched observation seaplanes were used from World War I through World War II.

===Law enforcement===
Unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) are being increasingly deployed by U.S. law enforcement agencies. In August 2023, a Congressional Research Service to members of Congress described the multiple uses of these aircraft, including general surveillance and intelligence or evidence gathering. Unmanned surveillance drones can also be used to identify the locations of suspects who may be hiding or analyze the physical layout of a room before officers enter. Furthermore, unmanned surveillance drones can be used by law enforcement to light up large areas where it may be dark and difficult for officers to use traditional means of illumination. There are a few federal laws that apple to the use of unmanned surveillance systems, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) currently only has 2 options for the use of this technology by law enforcement. The first is that they can only operate them under 400 feet and need to maintain visual of the aircraft. Second, operators of the aircraft need to receive specific license and certifications to operate them. In response to the few and vague laws, the Department of Justice (DOJ) and Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has created policies to regulate the use and deployment of these drones domestically.

Predator UAVs have been used by the US for border patrol.

===Battlefield and airspace surveillance===
==Current military applications==
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) surveillance aircraft have been &quot;deployed or are under development in many countries, including Israel, Iran, the UK, the United States, Canada, China, India, South Africa and Pakistan.&quot; Most air forces around the world lack dedicated surveillance planes.

Several countries adapt aircraft for electronic intelligence (ELINT) gathering. The Beech RC-12 Super King Air and Boeing RC-135 Rivet Joint are examples of this activity.

Unmanned surveillance UAVs include both airships—such as Sky Sentinel and HiSentinel 80—and airplanes.

=== South China Sea ===
The United States military has flown reconnaissance flights, called sensitive reconnaissance operations (SRO) by the U.S. Air Force, to monitor expansionist developments by the People’s Republic of China, North Korea, and Russia in the Indo-Pacific region for decades; however, recent operations in the region have focused on monitoring movements by the People’s Republic of China. More than ten different aircraft are used for SRO missions in the theater, including manned aircraft USAF RC-135 Rivet Joint and U-2 Dragon Lady, and the unmanned aircraft RQ-4 Global Hawk. Reconnaissance missions are capable of changing course within minutes to monitor activity and therefore used for reconnaissance missions more often than satellites, which can take hours or days to change position and are vulnerable to anti-satellite weapons.

=== Russian invasion of Ukraine ===
Small unmanned drones have been used by the Ukrainian military to identify enemy units and navigate artillery fire for safer and more efficient attacks on Russian targets, record propaganda videos of ambushes for posting on social media, and document alleged Russian war crimes and damages. Class I and III drone systems, classified by NATO as those of less than 150 kilograms and more than 600 kilograms, respectively, have been the most frequently used in the region. Turkish Bayraktar TB2 military drones have often been utilized by Ukraine in both reconnaissance and strike missions, and both Ukrainian and Russian militaries have used hobby drones donated to them by civilians, such as DJI Mavic mini drones, to conduct surveillance and strikes on enemy troops.

=== Israel-Hamas War ===
The United States military had flown MQ-9 Reapers, unmanned aerial vehicles capable of more than 20 consecutive hours of flight, over the Gaza Strip for at least a month after the surprise attack on Israel by Hamas on October 7, 2023. According to the U.S. Defense Department, flights collected surveillance with the purpose of locating hostages taken by Hamas during the surprise attack on Israel and finding signs of life, but did not aid Israeli military ground operations. The British military also carried out flights over Gaza to locate hostages initially using unarmed Shadow R1 aircraft. As of March 2024, the Israeli military conducted hundreds of flight hours and almost 100 sorties in Gaza using the Oron reconnaissance aircraft, previously used as a business jet and upgraded to include advanced sensors and defense systems.

=== Israel-Hezbollah Conflict ===
On June 18, 2024, Hezbollah released drone footage capturing sensitive sites in northern Israel, including military complexes and naval bases around Haifa. This action showcased areas such as the Rafael Military Industries Complex and various naval facilities. Hezbollah&#x27;s campaign aims to intimidate and threaten Israel by displaying its surveillance capabilities and asserting its ability to penetrate Israeli defenses. This act highlights Hezbollah&#x27;s growing technological and operational threats against Israel&#x27;s security.

===Business aircraft===
With smaller equipment, long-range business aircraft can be modified in surveillance aircraft to perform specialized missions cost-effectively, from ground surveillance to maritime patrol:
* the , 6,000 nmi Bombardier Global 6000 is the platform for the USAF Northrop Grumman E-11A Battlefield Airborne Communications Node, the radar-carrying ground-surveillance Raytheon Sentinel for the UK Royal Air Force, and Saab&#x27;s GlobalEye AEW&amp;C carrying its Erieye AESA radar as UK&#x27;s Marshall ADG basis for Elint/Sigint for the United Arab Emirates; it is also the base for the proposed Saab AB Swordfish MPA and the USAF Lockheed Martin J-Stars Recap battlefield-surveillance program, while IAI&#x27;s ELI-3360 MPA is based on the Global 5000;
* The , 6,750 nmi Gulfstream G550 was selected for the IAI EL/W-2085 Conformal Airborne Early Warning AESA radar for Italy, Singapore and Israel (which also has IAI Sigint G550s) while L3 Technologies transfers the U.S. Compass Call electronic-attack system to the G550 CAEW-based EC-37B, like the NC-37B range-support aircraft, and will modify others for Australia&#x27;s program, Northrop Grumman proposes the G550 for the J-Stars Recap;
* Dassault Aviation developed the Falcon 900 MPA and Falcon 2000 Maritime Multirole Aircraft for France (which delayed its Avsimar requirement), South Korea and the Japan Coast Guard with a mission system developed with L3 and Thales Group;
* Embraer delivered several EMB-145s as a platform for AEW&amp;C, MPA and multi-intelligence;
* the Beechcraft King Air 350ER is a platform for ISR versions, including L3&#x27;s Spyder II and Sierra Nevada Corp.&#x27;s Scorpion and as the MC-12W for the U.S. Army.

== Current civilian applications ==
Drones are increasingly used in conservation work to complete tasks such as mapping forest cover, tracking wildlife, and enforcing environmental laws by catching illegal loggers or poachers.

=== Monitoring protests ===
Surveillance drones, helicopters, and airplanes were deployed over 15 cities during the 2020 George Floyd protests. Unmanned aircraft were used to track the movements of protestors and to provide aerial views of violent acts and arson. The recorded video was sent to a digital network that could be accessed by various federal agencies and local law enforcement for use in criminal investigations. However, the National Air Security Operations Center stated the drones flew at a height that made it impossible to identify individuals or license plates.

=== Border patrol ===
Surveillance aircraft have recently been used to patrol maritime borders that are much longer than land borders and typically have less personnel. The Schengen Area in the European Union has recently used it to monitor their southern border in the Mediterranean. They gather intelligence including illegal crossings, search and rescue operations, smuggling, and fishing. Belgium has also deployed drones to monitor irregular maritime activity and to find children lost on the beach.

== Ethics and regulations ==

=== Public opinion ===
A 2014 survey from the Pew Center showed that pluralities or majorities of people in 39 of 44 countries oppose American drone strikes in the Middle East. Only in Israel, Kenya, and the USA do at least half of the public support American drone strikes. Additionally, following the Edward Snowden incident, concern within the US is only increasing regarding the government respecting people’s privacy and civil liberties. Regarding the use of surveillance drones domestically in the US, the public tends to consider the benefits of this kind of surveillance versus the risks to individual privacy. Findings from an ethical analysis suggest people understand the benefits UAVs contribute to protecting the public while at the same time poses a risk to individual safety. A report from 2014 found 70%-73% of U.S. adults believed government use of surveillance drones was “excessive” and “violates personal privacy.” Subsequently, only 39% believed it “increased public safety” and only 10% believed it was “necessary” for surveillance. Furthermore, the public is more opposed to surveillance drones being in the hands of private individuals and businesses, rather than the government.

=== Applicable law ===
In the U.S., case law holds that airborne surveillance does not violate privacy rights protected under the 14th Amendment of the Constitution, so long as unmanned aircraft systems are not in &quot;general public use&quot;. The lack of widespread use of such systems justifies individuals&#x27; reasonable expectations of privacy again this type of surveillance.

In the European Union, Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union 2000 provides that people have a right of privacy and Article 8 protects the right to one&#x27;s individual personal data. Under these provisions, aerial surveillance of public spaces would be lawful but surveillance of one&#x27;s private home be subject to administrative oversight.

The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act (RIPA) of 2000 applies to air surveillance in the United Kingdom. RIPA prohibits large-scale and generalized surveillance, and RIPA authorization is required for individualized surveillance of private residences.

==See also==
* High-Altitude Long Endurance aircraft
* MikroKopter
* Reconnaissance aircraft
* Treaty on Open Skies
* Micro air vehicle
* Wide-area motion imagery

==References==

==Further reading==

==External links==
* US Centennial of Flight Commission: &quot;Military Use of Balloons During the Napoleonic Era&quot;. Retrieved April 1, 2007.
* Maps of FBI and DHS surveillance flights over the United States in 2015</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q623344" start="0" end="21" title="Surveillance aircraft" label="Surveillance aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="26" end="34" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="44" end="56" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="148" end="170" title="intelligence gathering" label="intelligence gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765889" start="172" end="187" title="maritime patrol" label="maritime patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="214" end="226" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="228" end="239" title="observation" label="observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q97210751" start="246" end="264" title="artillery spotting" label="artillery spotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q753283" start="412" end="419" title="Stealth aircraft" label="stealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256453" start="516" end="531" title="Tethered balloon" label="moored balloons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11897066" start="538" end="542" title="Tethered Aerostat Radar System" label="TARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="548" end="571" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685884" start="951" end="969" title="target acquisition" label="target acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="975" end="989" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q678227" start="1682" end="1699" title="Battle of Fleurus (1794)" label="Battle of Fleurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501675" start="1705" end="1728" title="French Aerostatic Corps" label="French Aerostatic Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q694460" start="2930" end="2943" title="Rumpler Taube" label="Rumpler Taube"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2951" end="2962" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086984" start="2983" end="2992" title="Fred Zinn" label="Fred Zinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q153858" start="3433" end="3460" title="Battle of Tannenberg (1914)" label="Battle of Tannenberg (1914)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="3725" end="3733" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q471145" start="4166" end="4179" title="Aerial warfare" label="aerial combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894603" start="4323" end="4354" title="General Aircraft Fleet Shadower" label="General Aircraft Fleet Shadower"/>
<link wikidata="Q161341" start="4488" end="4502" title="airborne radar" label="airborne radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698120" start="4505" end="4525" title="Air observation post" label="Air observation post"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4549" end="4561" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372231" start="4563" end="4577" title="Light aircraft" label="Light aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681626" start="4590" end="4596" title="Taylorcraft Auster" label="Auster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="4622" end="4637" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543102" start="4730" end="4753" title="Military helicopter" label="observation helicopters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4851" end="4863" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q427818" start="4973" end="5003" title="National Reconnaissance Office" label="National Reconnaissance Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q189064" start="5078" end="5080" title="Lockheed U-2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="5158" end="5161" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="5364" end="5368" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q128160" start="5418" end="5438" title="Cuban Missile Crisis" label="Cuban Missile Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5519" end="5527" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="5726" end="5737" title="United States Armed Forces" label="US Military"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="5777" end="5782" title="Boeing B-29 Superfortress" label="B-29s"/>
<link wikidata="Q182027" start="5892" end="5897" title="Lockheed C-130 Hercules" label="C-130"/>
<link wikidata="Q56611856" start="5902" end="5908" title="Lockheed RC-130 Hercules" label="RC-130"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906749" start="6131" end="6143" title="Ryan Firebee" label="Ryan Firebee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384350" start="6211" end="6220" title="Ryan Model 147" label="Model 147"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="6353" end="6375" title="Gulf War" label="Operation Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="6411" end="6431" title="War on terror" label="global war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q658414" start="7959" end="7983" title="Maritime patrol aircraft" label="Maritime patrol aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q128993" start="8122" end="8144" title="Hawker-Siddeley Nimrod" label="Hawker-Siddeley Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q662271" start="8150" end="8168" title="Breguet Atlantique" label="Breguet Atlantique"/>
<link wikidata="Q181815" start="8174" end="8187" title="Tupolev Tu-95" label="Tupolev Tu-95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422495" start="8193" end="8213" title="Lockheed P-2 Neptune" label="Lockheed P-2 Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q155490" start="8222" end="8240" title="Lockheed P-3 Orion" label="Lockheed P-3 Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164696" start="8241" end="8254" title="Lockheed CP-140 Aurora" label="CP-140 Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q96397086" start="8278" end="8298" title="observation seaplane" label="observation seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="9102" end="9133" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="9471" end="9492" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="9503" end="9534" title="United States Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q198024" start="9628" end="9636" title="General Atomics MQ-1 Predator" label="Predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="9664" end="9684" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="US for border patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="9765" end="9794" title="Unmanned Aerial Vehicle" label="Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="10124" end="10129" title="ELINT" label="ELINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q634227" start="10146" end="10151" title="Beech Aircraft" label="Beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q552893" start="10152" end="10172" title="C-12 Huron" label="RC-12 Super King Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="10177" end="10183" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q132516" start="10184" end="10202" title="Boeing RC-135" label="RC-135 Rivet Joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157042" start="10292" end="10304" title="Sky Sentinel" label="Sky Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10540" end="10566" title="China" label="People’s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="10568" end="10579" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="10585" end="10591" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132516" start="10851" end="10869" title="Boeing RC-135" label="RC-135 Rivet Joint"/>
<link wikidata="Q162066" start="10917" end="10933" title="Northrop Grumman RQ-4 Global Hawk" label="RQ-4 Global Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q936105" start="11275" end="11293" title="Armed Forces of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian military"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="11567" end="11571" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q17501733" start="11709" end="11722" title="Bayraktar TB2" label="Bayraktar TB2"/>
<link wikidata="Q96051495" start="11922" end="11931" title="DJI Mavic" label="DJI Mavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="12162" end="12172" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="12204" end="12257" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="surprise attack on Israel by Hamas on October 7, 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094597" start="12600" end="12609" title="Shadow R1" label="Shadow R1"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="12914" end="12923" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895863" start="13498" end="13515" title="business aircraft" label="business aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q373171" start="13670" end="13692" title="Bombardier Global 6000" label="Bombardier Global 6000"/>
<link wikidata="Q373171" start="13722" end="13743" title="Northrop Grumman E-11" label="Northrop Grumman E-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q740866" start="13826" end="13843" title="Raytheon Sentinel" label="Raytheon Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="13852" end="13870" title="UK Royal Air Force" label="UK Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245646" start="13888" end="13897" title="GlobalEye" label="GlobalEye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185094" start="13921" end="13927" title="Erieye" label="Erieye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773469" start="13952" end="13964" title="Marshall ADG" label="Marshall ADG"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="13975" end="13980" title="Elint" label="Elint"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="13981" end="13987" title="Sigint" label="Sigint"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="13996" end="14016" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q219501" start="14055" end="14062" title="Saab AB" label="Saab AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="14090" end="14105" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14106" end="14119" title="JSTARS#Future" label="J-Stars Recap"/>
<link wikidata="Q876017" start="14160" end="14163" title="Israel Aerospace Industries" label="IAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q658414" start="14180" end="14183" title="Maritime patrol aircraft" label="MPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q29367260" start="14231" end="14246" title="Gulfstream G550" label="Gulfstream G550"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572440" start="14268" end="14281" title="IAI EL/W-2085" label="IAI EL/W-2085"/>
<link wikidata="Q164400" start="14315" end="14325" title="AESA radar" label="AESA radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="14337" end="14346" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="14351" end="14357" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781428" start="14398" end="14413" title="L3 Technologies" label="L3 Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q29367260" start="14433" end="14445" title="Gulfstream EA-37B Compass Call" label="Compass Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q329953" start="14595" end="14611" title="Northrop Grumman" label="Northrop Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q460487" start="14655" end="14672" title="Dassault Aviation" label="Dassault Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141409" start="14687" end="14697" title="Falcon 900" label="Falcon 900"/>
<link wikidata="Q26790" start="14706" end="14717" title="Falcon 2000" label="Falcon 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q565418" start="14818" end="14835" title="Japan Coast Guard" label="Japan Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161666" start="14880" end="14892" title="Thales Group" label="Thales Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q105557" start="14896" end="14903" title="Embraer" label="Embraer"/>
<link wikidata="Q109423211" start="14922" end="14929" title="EMB-145" label="EMB-145"/>
<link wikidata="Q161341" start="14949" end="14958" title="AEW&amp;amp;C" label="AEW&amp;amp;C"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="14974" end="14986" title="Military intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094597" start="14994" end="15017" title="Beechcraft King Air 350" label="Beechcraft King Air 350"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974529" start="15038" end="15041" title="Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance" label="ISR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483455" start="15086" end="15105" title="Sierra Nevada Corp." label="Sierra Nevada Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q552893" start="15133" end="15139" title="MC-12W" label="MC-12W"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="15148" end="15157" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="15196" end="15202" title="Unmanned aerial vehicle" label="Drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="15280" end="15292" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q597393" start="15358" end="15373" title="Illegal logging" label="illegal loggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="15504" end="15530" title="George Floyd protests" label="2020 George Floyd protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="16143" end="16156" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="16164" end="16178" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="16240" end="16253" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="16363" end="16370" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="17841" end="17875" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="14th Amendment of the Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q265236" start="18137" end="18188" title="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union" label="Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138784" start="18478" end="18516" title="Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000" label="Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643643" start="18746" end="18774" title="High-Altitude Long Endurance" label="High-Altitude Long Endurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850196" start="18786" end="18797" title="MikroKopter" label="MikroKopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041792" start="18800" end="18823" title="Reconnaissance aircraft" label="Reconnaissance aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928989" start="18826" end="18846" title="Treaty on Open Skies" label="Treaty on Open Skies"/>
<link wikidata="Q773392" start="18849" end="18866" title="Micro air vehicle" label="Micro air vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637642" start="18869" end="18893" title="Wide-area motion imagery" label="Wide-area motion imagery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46821" wikidata="Q4864842" url="?curid=46821" title="Barry Took">
<text>Barry Took (19 June 192831 March 2002) was an English writer, television presenter and comedian. His decade-and-a-half writing partnership with Marty Feldman led to the television series &quot;Bootsie and Snudge&quot;, the radio comedy &quot;Round the Horne&quot; and other projects.

He is also remembered in the UK for presenting &quot;Points of View&quot;, a BBC Television programme featuring viewers&#x27; letters on the BBC&#x27;s output, and the BBC Radio 4 programme &quot;The News Quiz&quot;.

Took was known as the &quot;Father of Monty Python&quot;, for bringing together the comedy performers who would establish &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot;.

==Early life and education==
The son of a manager at the Danish Bacon Company, Took was born in Victoria Road, Muswell Hill, north London, and lived in Winton Avenue, Bounds Green. When evacuated to Wisbech in Cambridgeshire during the Second World War, he ran away from his assigned home there, cycling 20 miles to Peterborough in order to get a train back to London. He attended Stationers School but left at the age of 15. His elder brother Philip would eventually work for the US Space Program before dying as a young man.

==Career==
With his limited education, Took found work as an office boy for a publisher and a cinema projectionist. During his period of National Service in the Royal Air Force, in which he played the trumpet, he began performing and later worked as a stand-up comedian, eventually becoming a West End revue performer, working on &quot;For Amusement Only&quot; and &quot;For Adults Only&quot;.

Took&#x27;s best comedy writing was done in collaboration with Marty Feldman, whom he first met in 1954. The two men wrote for several television shows in the 1950s and 1960s, including &quot;The Army Game&quot; and its spin-off &quot;Bootsie and Snudge&quot;. He co-wrote &quot;Beyond Our Ken&quot; for two series (1958–59) with Eric Merriman for BBC Radio before leaving after a disagreement with his fellow writer. With Marty Feldman he wrote most episodes of &quot;Round the Horne&quot;; the intermittent partnership between them continued until 1974.

In the late 1960s, Took became comedy advisor to the BBC, and was responsible for bringing together the performers who formed &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot; before he moved to the US to work briefly on &quot;Rowan and Martin&#x27;s Laugh In&quot;. He returned to the UK in early 1970 and was involved in setting up the BBC series &quot;The Goodies&quot;, although he had returned to take up the position of Head of Light Entertainment at London Weekend Television. He resigned from this position when Stella Richman, his superior and the Director of Programming, was dismissed. &quot;On the Move&quot; (1975–76), a programme linked to a national campaign to promote adult literacy, was written by Took and featured Bob Hoskins and Donald Gee. He was involved in two further television series in support of this initiative, &quot;Your Move&quot; and &quot;Write Away&quot;.

In 1977, Took hosted his own comedy sketch show, &quot;Took and Co&quot;. Also featuring Robin Bailey, Chris Emmett, Andrew Sachs and Gwen Taylor. The series ran for seven episodes late at night on ITV.

In 1979, he became chairman of &quot;The News Quiz&quot; on BBC Radio 4, a role he filled until 1981 and again from 1986 to 1995. In the same year he became a presenter of &quot;Points of View&quot;, staying with the programme for over seven years.

In 1983 he became known to a younger TV audience when he presented the quiz, &#x27;What&#x27;s it&#x27;, on the BBC1 Saturday morning show, &quot;Saturday Superstore&quot;, in its first series.
Took also hosted the BBC Radio 2 comedy panel game &quot;The Impressionists&quot;, which included Peter Goodwright, Roger Kitter, David Jason and Dave Evans and, in 1998, the single-series revival of &quot;Twenty Questions&quot; titled &quot;Guess What?&quot;.

He had seven books published, including his autobiography and several histories of comedy. He also wrote Kenneth Williams&#x27;s life story for the &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot; in 1996.

==Personal life and final years==
During his time with the Royal Air Force Took met his first wife, Dorothy &quot;Dot&quot; Bird, who was serving in the Women&#x27;s Royal Air Force. They married in 1950 and had three children (Barry, Susan and David), but were later divorced. In 1964, he married Lynden &quot;Lyn&quot; Leonard, this second marriage resulting in a daughter named Elinor. The couple separated in 1999, and eventually divorced. He also spoke publicly about his experiences with depression and of undergoing extensive psychotherapy for several years.

After suffering from bladder cancer during the 1970s, he was diagnosed with cancer of the oesophagus in 1999, and suffered a stroke four weeks after undergoing major surgery. He died on Easter Sunday 2002, aged 73, in a nursing home in Enfield.

==Autobiography==
*&quot;A Point of View&quot; (1990)

==References==
==External links==
* 
*Barry Took – Comedy Zone
*BBC News article reporting his death</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4864842" start="0" end="10" title="Barry Took" label="Barry Took"/>
<link wikidata="Q332670" start="144" end="157" title="Marty Feldman" label="Marty Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944073" start="193" end="211" title="Bootsie and Snudge" label="Bootsie and Snudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371210" start="242" end="257" title="Round the Horne" label="Round the Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281138" start="338" end="352" title="Points of View (TV series)" label="Points of View"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="362" end="376" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="426" end="429" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="453" end="464" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753924" start="481" end="494" title="The News Quiz" label="The News Quiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="631" end="664" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432670" start="784" end="796" title="Muswell Hill" label="Muswell Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q734547" start="798" end="810" title="north London" label="north London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643178" start="840" end="852" title="Bounds Green" label="Bounds Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917386" start="859" end="868" title="Evacuations of civilians in Britain during World War II" label="evacuated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012031" start="872" end="879" title="Wisbech" label="Wisbech"/>
<link wikidata="Q172438" start="989" end="1001" title="Peterborough" label="Peterborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604351" start="1054" end="1071" title="Stationers&amp;#x27; Company&amp;#x27;s School" label="Stationers School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1338" end="1354" title="Conscription in the United Kingdom#After 1945" label="National Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1362" end="1377" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="1503" end="1508" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1537" end="1555" title="For Amusement Only" label="For Amusement Only"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1572" end="1587" title="For Adults Only (revue)" label="For Adults Only"/>
<link wikidata="Q332670" start="1659" end="1672" title="Marty Feldman" label="Marty Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714312" start="1788" end="1801" title="The Army Game" label="The Army Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944073" start="1831" end="1849" title="Bootsie and Snudge" label="Bootsie and Snudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858458" start="1875" end="1889" title="Beyond Our Ken" label="Beyond Our Ken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3056342" start="1926" end="1939" title="Eric Merriman" label="Eric Merriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q332670" start="2019" end="2032" title="Marty Feldman" label="Marty Feldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371210" start="2065" end="2080" title="Round the Horne" label="Round the Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="2285" end="2318" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235088" start="2376" end="2408" title="Rowan and Martin&amp;#x27;s Laugh In" label="Rowan and Martin&amp;#x27;s Laugh In"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987329" start="2504" end="2515" title="The Goodies (TV series)" label="The Goodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076979" start="2606" end="2631" title="London Weekend Television" label="London Weekend Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607128" start="2669" end="2683" title="Stella Richman" label="Stella Richman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091425" start="2752" end="2763" title="On the Move (TV series)" label="On the Move"/>
<link wikidata="Q211283" start="2883" end="2894" title="Bob Hoskins" label="Bob Hoskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352232" start="3131" end="3143" title="Robin Bailey" label="Robin Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106499" start="3145" end="3157" title="Chris Emmett" label="Chris Emmett"/>
<link wikidata="Q76963" start="3159" end="3171" title="Andrew Sachs" label="Andrew Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780144" start="3176" end="3187" title="Gwen Taylor" label="Gwen Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="3240" end="3243" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753924" start="3283" end="3296" title="The News Quiz" label="The News Quiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="3306" end="3317" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281138" start="3424" end="3438" title="Points of View (TV series)" label="Points of View"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426749" start="3642" end="3661" title="Saturday Superstore" label="Saturday Superstore"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="3711" end="3722" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q22959275" start="3788" end="3804" title="Peter Goodwright" label="Peter Goodwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704554" start="3806" end="3818" title="Roger Kitter" label="Roger Kitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q964329" start="3820" end="3831" title="David Jason" label="David Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q302368" start="3896" end="3912" title="Twenty Questions" label="Twenty Questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615080" start="3932" end="3943" title="Guess What?" label="Guess What?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093792" start="4057" end="4073" title="Kenneth Williams" label="Kenneth Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="4106" end="4145" title="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography" label="Oxford Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108612" start="4315" end="4343" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="4656" end="4666" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="4695" end="4708" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="4750" end="4764" title="bladder cancer" label="bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q372701" start="4805" end="4829" title="oesophageal cancer" label="cancer of the oesophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="4854" end="4860" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q210531" start="4965" end="4972" title="London Borough of Enfield" label="Enfield"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46823" wikidata="Q269412" url="?curid=46823" title="George V">
<text>George V (George Frederick Ernest Albert; 3 June 1865 – 20 January 1936) was King of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Emperor of India, from 6 May 1910 until his death in 1936.

George was born during the reign of his paternal grandmother, Queen Victoria, as the second son of the Prince and Princess of Wales (later King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra). He was third in the line of succession to the British throne behind his father and his elder brother, Prince Albert Victor. From 1877 to 1892, George served in the Royal Navy, until his elder brother&#x27;s unexpected death in January 1892 put him directly in line for the throne. The next year George married his brother&#x27;s former fiancée, Princess Victoria Mary of Teck, and they had six children. When Queen Victoria died in 1901, George&#x27;s father ascended the throne as Edward VII, and George was created Prince of Wales. He became king-emperor on his father&#x27;s death in 1910.

George&#x27;s reign saw the rise of socialism, communism, fascism, Irish republicanism, and the Indian independence movement, all of which radically changed the political landscape of the British Empire, which itself reached its territorial peak by the beginning of the 1920s. The Parliament Act 1911 established the supremacy of the elected British House of Commons over the unelected House of Lords. As a result of the First World War (1914–1918), the empires of his first cousins Nicholas II of Russia and Wilhelm II of Germany fell, while the British Empire expanded to its greatest effective extent. In 1917, George became the first monarch of the House of Windsor, which he renamed from the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha as a result of anti-German public sentiment. He appointed the first Labour ministry in 1924, and the 1931 Statute of Westminster recognised the Empire&#x27;s Dominions as separate, independent states within the British Commonwealth of Nations.

George suffered from smoking-related health problems during his later reign. On his death in January 1936, he was succeeded by his eldest son, Edward VIII. Edward abdicated in December of that year and was succeeded by his younger brother Albert, who took the regnal name George VI.

==Early life and education==
George was born on 3 June 1865, in Marlborough House, London. He was the second son of Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, and Alexandra, Princess of Wales. His father was the eldest son of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, and his mother was the eldest daughter of King Christian IX and Queen Louise of Denmark. He was baptised at Windsor Castle on 7 July 1865 by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Charles Longley.
As a younger son of the Prince of Wales, there was little expectation that George would become king. He was third in line to the throne, after his father and elder brother, Prince Albert Victor. George was only 17 months younger than Albert Victor, and the two princes were educated together. John Neale Dalton was appointed as their tutor in 1871. Neither Albert Victor nor George excelled intellectually. As their father thought that the navy was &quot;the very best possible training for any boy&quot;, in September 1877, when George was 12 years old, both brothers joined the cadet training ship HMS &quot;Britannia&quot; at Dartmouth, Devon.

For three years from 1879, the princes served on , accompanied by Dalton. They toured the colonies of the British Empire in the Caribbean, South Africa and Australia, and visited Norfolk, Virginia, as well as South America, the Mediterranean, Egypt, and East Asia. In 1881 on a visit to Japan, George had a local artist tattoo a blue and red dragon on his arm, and was received in an audience by the Emperor Meiji; George and his brother presented Empress Haruko with two wallabies from Australia. At Jerusalem in 1882, the princes attended a Sephardic Passover dinner, and got tattoos of the Jerusalem Cross to commemorate their visit twenty years after their father had obtained the same tattoo. George wrote of the experience &quot;I was tattooed by the same man who tattooed Papa.&quot; Dalton wrote an account of their journey entitled &quot;The Cruise of HMS Bacchante&quot;. Between Melbourne and Sydney, Dalton recorded a sighting of the &quot;Flying Dutchman&quot;, a mythical ghost ship. When they returned to Britain, the Queen complained that her grandsons could not speak French or German, and so they spent six months in Lausanne in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to learn another language. After Lausanne, the brothers were separated; Albert Victor attended Trinity College, Cambridge, while George continued in the Royal Navy. He travelled the world, visiting many areas of the British Empire. During his naval career he commanded &quot;Torpedo Boat 79&quot; in home waters, then on the North America and West Indies Station. His last active service was in command of HMS &quot;Melampus&quot; in 1891–1892. From then on, his naval rank was largely honorary.

==Marriage==

As a young man destined to serve in the navy, Prince George served for many years under the command of his uncle Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, who was stationed in Malta. There, he grew close to and fell in love with his cousin Princess Marie of Edinburgh. His grandmother, father and uncle all approved the match, but his own mother and Marie&#x27;s mother opposed it. The Princess of Wales thought the family was too pro-German, and the Duchess of Edinburgh disliked England. The Duchess, the only daughter of Alexander II of Russia, resented the fact that, as the wife of a younger son of the British sovereign, she had to yield precedence to George&#x27;s mother, whose father had been a minor German prince before being called unexpectedly to the throne of Denmark. Guided by her mother, Marie refused George when he proposed to her. She married Ferdinand, Crown Prince of Romania, in 1893.

In November 1891, George&#x27;s brother, Albert Victor, became engaged to his second cousin once removed Princess Victoria Mary of Teck, known as &quot;May&quot; within the family. Her parents were Francis, Duke of Teck (a member of a morganatic, cadet branch of the House of Württemberg), and Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge, a male-line granddaughter of George III and a first cousin of Queen Victoria.

On 14 January 1892, six weeks after the formal engagement, Albert Victor died of pneumonia during an influenza pandemic, leaving George second in line to the throne and likely to succeed after his father. George had only just recovered from a serious illness himself, having been confined to bed for six weeks with typhoid fever, the disease that was thought to have killed his grandfather Prince Albert. Queen Victoria still regarded Princess May as a suitable match for her grandson, and George and May grew close during their shared period of mourning.

A year after Albert Victor&#x27;s death, George proposed to May and was accepted. They married on 6 July 1893 at the Chapel Royal in St James&#x27;s Palace, London. Throughout their lives, they remained devoted to each other. George was, on his own admission, unable to express his feelings easily in speech, but they often exchanged loving letters and notes of endearment.

==Duke of York==
The death of his elder brother effectively ended George&#x27;s naval career, as he was now second in line to the throne, after his father. George was created Duke of York, Earl of Inverness, and Baron Killarney by Queen Victoria on 24 May 1892, and received lessons in constitutional history from J. R. Tanner.

The Duke and Duchess of York had five sons and a daughter. Randolph Churchill claimed that George was a strict father, to the extent that his children were terrified of him, and that George had remarked to the Earl of Derby: &quot;My father was frightened of his mother, I was frightened of my father, and I am damned well going to see to it that my children are frightened of me.&quot; In reality, there is no direct source for the quotation and it is likely that George&#x27;s parenting style was little different from that adopted by most people at the time. Whether this was the case or not, his children did seem to resent his strict nature, his son Prince Henry going as far as to describe him as a &quot;terrible father&quot; in later years.

They lived mainly at York Cottage, a relatively small house in Sandringham, Norfolk, where their way of life mirrored that of a comfortable middle-class family rather than royalty. George preferred a simple, almost quiet, life, in marked contrast to the lively social life pursued by his father. His official biographer, Harold Nicolson, later despaired of George&#x27;s time as Duke of York, writing: &quot;He may be all right as a young midshipman and a wise old king, but when he was Duke of York ... he did nothing at all but kill [&quot;i.e.&quot; shoot] animals and stick in stamps.&quot; George was an avid stamp collector, which Nicolson disparaged, but George played a large role in building the Royal Philatelic Collection into the most comprehensive collection of United Kingdom and Commonwealth stamps in the world, in some cases setting record purchase prices for items.

In October 1894, George&#x27;s maternal uncle-by-marriage, Alexander III of Russia, died. At the request of his father, &quot;out of respect for poor dear Uncle Sasha&#x27;s memory&quot;, George joined his parents in Saint Petersburg for the funeral. He and his parents remained in Russia for the wedding a week later of the new Russian emperor, his maternal first cousin Nicholas II, to one of George&#x27;s paternal first cousins, Princess Alix of Hesse and by Rhine, who had once been considered as a potential bride for George&#x27;s elder brother.

==Prince of Wales==
As Duke of York, George carried out a wide variety of public duties. On the death of Queen Victoria on 22 January 1901, George&#x27;s father ascended the throne as King Edward VII. George inherited the title of Duke of Cornwall, and for much of the rest of that year, he was known as the Duke of Cornwall and York.

In 1901, the Duke and Duchess toured the British Empire. Their tour included Gibraltar, Malta, Port Said, Aden, Ceylon, Singapore, Australia, New Zealand, Mauritius, South Africa, Canada, and the Colony of Newfoundland. The tour was designed by Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain with the support of Prime Minister Lord Salisbury to reward the Dominions for their participation in the South African War of 1899–1902. George presented thousands of specially designed South African War medals to colonial troops. In South Africa, the royal party met civic leaders, African leaders, and Boer prisoners, and was greeted by elaborate decorations, expensive gifts, and fireworks displays. Despite this, not all residents responded favourably to the tour. Many white Cape Afrikaners resented the display and expense, the war having weakened their capacity to reconcile their Afrikaner-Dutch culture with their status as British subjects. Critics in the English-language press decried the enormous cost at a time when families faced severe hardship.

In Australia, George opened the first session of the Australian Parliament on the creation of the Commonwealth of Australia. In New Zealand, he praised the military values, bravery, loyalty, and obedience to duty of New Zealanders, and the tour gave New Zealand a chance to show off its progress, especially in its adoption of up-to-date British standards in communications and the processing industries. The implicit goal was to advertise New Zealand&#x27;s attractiveness to tourists and potential immigrants, while avoiding news of growing social tensions, by focusing the attention of the British press on a land few knew about. On his return to Britain, in a speech at Guildhall, London, George warned of &quot;the impression which seemed to prevail among [our] brethren across the seas, that the Old Country must wake up if she intends to maintain her old position of pre-eminence in her colonial trade against foreign competitors.&quot;

On 9 November 1901, George was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester. George&#x27;s father wished to prepare him for his future role as king. In contrast to Edward himself, whom Queen Victoria had deliberately excluded from state affairs, George was given wide access to state documents by his father. George in turn allowed his wife access to his papers, as he valued her counsel and she often helped write his speeches. As Prince of Wales, he supported reforms in naval training, including cadets being enrolled at the ages of twelve and thirteen, and receiving the same education, whatever their class and eventual assignments. The reforms were implemented by the then Second (later First) Sea Lord, Sir John Fisher.

From November 1905 to March 1906, George and May toured British India, where he was disgusted by racial discrimination and campaigned for greater involvement of Indians in the government of the country. The tour was almost immediately followed by a trip to Spain for the wedding of King Alfonso XIII to George&#x27;s cousin Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg, at which the bride and groom narrowly avoided assassination when the driver of their coach and more than a dozen spectators were killed by a bomb thrown by an anarchist, Mateu Morral. A week after returning to Britain, George and May travelled to Norway for the coronation of King Haakon VII, George&#x27;s cousin and brother-in-law, and Queen Maud, George&#x27;s sister.

==Reign==

On 6 May 1910, Edward VII died, and George became king. He wrote in his diary:
George had never liked his wife&#x27;s habit of signing official documents and letters as &quot;Victoria Mary&quot; and insisted she drop one of those names. They both thought she should not be called Queen Victoria, and so she became Queen Mary. Later that year, a radical propagandist, Edward Mylius, published a lie that George had secretly married in Malta as a young man, and that consequently his marriage to Queen Mary was bigamous. The lie had first surfaced in print in 1893, but George had shrugged it off as a joke. In an effort to kill off rumours, Mylius was arrested, tried and found guilty of criminal libel, and was sentenced to a year in prison.

George objected to the anti-Catholic wording of the Accession Declaration that he would be required to make at the opening of his first parliament. He made it known that he would refuse to open parliament unless it was changed. As a result, the Accession Declaration Act 1910 shortened the declaration and removed the most offensive phrases.
George and Mary&#x27;s coronation took place at Westminster Abbey on 22 June 1911, and was celebrated by the Festival of Empire in London. In July, the King and Queen visited Ireland for five days; they received a warm welcome, with thousands of people lining the route of their procession to cheer.
Later in 1911, the King and Queen travelled to India for the Delhi Durbar, where they were presented to an assembled audience of Indian dignitaries and princes as the Emperor and Empress of India on 12 December 1911. George wore the newly created Imperial Crown of India at the ceremony and declared the shifting of the Indian capital from Calcutta to Delhi. He was the only Emperor of India to be present at his own Delhi Durbar.

As he and Mary travelled throughout the subcontinent, George took the opportunity to indulge in big game hunting in Nepal, shooting 21 tigers, 8 rhinoceroses and a bear over 10 days. He was a keen and expert marksman. On a later occasion, on 18 December 1913, he shot over a thousand pheasants in six hours (about one bird every 20 seconds) while visiting the home of Lord Burnham. Even George had to acknowledge that &quot;we went a little too far&quot; that day.

===National politics===

George inherited the throne at a politically turbulent time. Lloyd George&#x27;s People&#x27;s Budget had been rejected the previous year by the Conservative and Unionist-dominated House of Lords, contrary to the normal convention that the Lords did not veto money bills. Liberal Prime Minister H. H. Asquith had asked the previous king to give an undertaking that he would create sufficient Liberal peers to allow the passage of Liberal legislation. Edward had reluctantly agreed, provided the Lords rejected the budget after two successive general elections. After the January 1910 general election, the Conservative peers allowed the budget, for which the government now had an electoral mandate, to pass without a vote.

Asquith attempted to curtail the power of the Lords through constitutional reforms, which were again blocked by the Upper House. A constitutional conference on the reforms broke down in November 1910 after 21 meetings. Asquith and Lord Crewe, Liberal leader in the Lords, asked George to grant a dissolution, leading to a second general election, and to promise to create sufficient Liberal peers if the Lords blocked the legislation again. If George refused, the Liberal government would otherwise resign, which would have given the appearance that the monarch was taking sides – with &quot;the peers against the people&quot; – in party politics. The King&#x27;s two private secretaries, the Liberal Lord Knollys and the Unionist Lord Stamfordham, gave George conflicting advice. Knollys advised George to accept the Cabinet&#x27;s demands, while Stamfordham advised George to accept the resignation. Like his father, George reluctantly agreed to the dissolution and creation of peers, although he felt his ministers had taken advantage of his inexperience to browbeat him. After the December 1910 general election, the Lords let the bill pass on hearing of the threat to swamp the house with new peers. The subsequent Parliament Act 1911 permanently removed – with a few exceptions – the power of the Lords to veto bills. George later came to feel that Knollys had withheld information from him about the willingness of the opposition to form a government if the Liberals had resigned.

The 1910 general elections had left the Liberals as a minority government dependent upon the support of the Irish Nationalist Party. As desired by the Nationalists, Asquith introduced legislation that would give Ireland Home Rule, but the Conservatives and Unionists opposed it. As tempers rose over the Home Rule Bill, which would never have been possible without the Parliament Act, relations between the elderly Knollys and the Conservatives became poor, and he was pushed into retirement. Desperate to avoid the prospect of civil war in Ireland between Unionists and Nationalists, George called a meeting of all parties at Buckingham Palace in July 1914 in an attempt to negotiate a settlement. After four days the conference ended without an agreement. Political developments in Britain and Ireland were overtaken by events in Europe, and the issue of Irish Home Rule was suspended for the duration of the war.

===First World War===
On 4 August 1914, George wrote in his diary, &quot;I held a council at 10:45 to declare war with Germany. It is a terrible catastrophe but it is not our fault. ... Please to God it may soon be over.&quot; From 1914 to 1918, Britain and its allies were at war with the Central Powers, led by the German Empire. German Kaiser Wilhelm II, who for the British public came to symbolise all the horrors of the war, was the King&#x27;s first cousin. George&#x27;s paternal grandfather was Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha; consequently, the King and his children bore the German titles Prince and Princess of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and Duke and Duchess of Saxony. Queen Mary, although born in England like her mother, was the daughter of the Duke of Teck, a descendant of the German Dukes of Württemberg. George had brothers-in-law and cousins who were British subjects but who bore German titles such as Duke and Duchess of Teck, Prince and Princess of Battenberg, and Prince and Princess of Schleswig-Holstein. When H. G. Wells wrote about Britain&#x27;s &quot;alien and uninspiring court&quot;, George replied: &quot;I may be uninspiring, but I&#x27;ll be damned if I&#x27;m alien.&quot;

On 17 July 1917, George appeased British nationalist feelings by issuing a royal proclamation that changed the name of the British royal house from the German-sounding House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha to the House of Windsor. He and all his British relatives relinquished their German titles and styles and adopted British-sounding surnames. George compensated his male relatives by giving them British peerages. His cousin Prince Louis of Battenberg, who earlier in the war had been forced to resign as First Sea Lord through anti-German feeling, became Louis Mountbatten, 1st Marquess of Milford Haven, while Queen Mary&#x27;s brothers became Adolphus Cambridge, 1st Marquess of Cambridge, and Alexander Cambridge, 1st Earl of Athlone.
In letters patent gazetted on 11 December 1917, the King restricted the style of &quot;Royal Highness&quot; and the titular dignity of &quot;Prince (or Princess) of Great Britain and Ireland&quot; to the children of the Sovereign, the children of the sons of the Sovereign and the eldest living son of the eldest son of a Prince of Wales. The letters patent also stated that &quot;the titles of Royal Highness, Highness or Serene Highness, and the titular dignity of Prince and Princess shall cease except those titles already granted and remaining unrevoked&quot;. George&#x27;s relatives who fought on the German side, such as Ernest Augustus, Crown Prince of Hanover, and Charles Edward, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, had their British peerages suspended by a 1919 Order in Council under the provisions of the Titles Deprivation Act 1917. Under pressure from his mother, George also removed the Garter flags of his German relations from St George&#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle.

When Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, George&#x27;s first cousin, was overthrown in the Russian Revolution of 1917, the British government offered political asylum to the Tsar and his family, but worsening conditions for the British people, and fears that revolution might come to the British Isles, led George to think that the presence of the Romanovs would be seen as inappropriate. Despite the later claims of Lord Mountbatten of Burma that Prime Minister David Lloyd George was opposed to the rescue of the Russian imperial family, the letters of Lord Stamfordham suggest that it was George V who opposed the idea against the advice of the government. Advance planning for a rescue was undertaken by MI1, a branch of the British secret service, but because of the strengthening position of the Bolshevik revolutionaries and wider difficulties with the conduct of the war, the plan was never put into operation. Nicholas and his immediate family remained in Russia, where they were killed by the Bolsheviks in 1918. George wrote in his diary: &quot;It was a foul murder. I was devoted to Nicky, who was the kindest of men and thorough gentleman: loved his country and people.&quot; The following year, Nicholas&#x27;s mother, Marie Feodorovna, and other members of the extended Russian imperial family were rescued from Crimea by a British warship.

Two months after the end of the war, the King&#x27;s youngest son, John, died aged 13 after a lifetime of ill health. George was informed of his death by Queen Mary, who wrote, &quot;[John] had been a great anxiety to us for many years ... The first break in the family circle is hard to bear but people have been so kind &amp; sympathetic &amp; this has helped us much.&quot;

In May 1922, George toured Belgium and northern France, visiting the First World War cemeteries and memorials being constructed by the Imperial War Graves Commission. The event was described in a poem, &quot;The King&#x27;s Pilgrimage&quot; by Rudyard Kipling. The tour, and one short visit to Italy in 1923, were the only times George agreed to leave the United Kingdom on official business after the end of the war.

===Post-war reign===

Before the First World War, most of Europe was ruled by monarchs related to George, but during and after the war, the monarchies of Austria, Germany, Greece, and Spain, like Russia, fell to revolution and war. In March 1919, Lieutenant-Colonel Edward Lisle Strutt was dispatched on the personal authority of the King to escort the former Emperor Charles I of Austria and his family to safety in Switzerland. In 1922, a Royal Navy ship was sent to Greece to rescue his cousins Prince and Princess Andrew.

Political turmoil in Ireland continued as the Nationalists fought for independence; George expressed his horror at government-sanctioned killings and reprisals to Prime Minister Lloyd George. At the opening session of the Parliament of Northern Ireland on 22 June 1921, the King appealed for conciliation in a speech part drafted by General Jan Smuts and approved by Lloyd George. A few weeks later, a truce was agreed. Negotiations between Britain and the Irish secessionists led to the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty. By the end of 1922, Ireland was partitioned, the Irish Free State was established, and Lloyd George was out of office.

George and his advisers were concerned about the rise of socialism and the growing labour movement, which they mistakenly associated with republicanism. The socialists no longer believed in their anti-monarchical slogans and were ready to come to terms with the monarchy if it took the first step. George adopted a more democratic, inclusive stance that crossed class lines and brought the monarchy closer to the public and the working class—a dramatic change for the King, who was most comfortable with naval officers and landed gentry. He cultivated friendly relations with moderate Labour Party politicians and trade union officials. His abandonment of social aloofness conditioned the royal family&#x27;s behaviour and enhanced its popularity during the economic crises of the 1920s and for over two generations thereafter.

The years between 1922 and 1929 saw frequent changes in government. In 1924, George appointed the first Labour Prime Minister, Ramsay MacDonald, in the absence of a clear majority for any one of the three major parties. George&#x27;s tact in appointing the first Labour government (which lasted less than a year) allayed the suspicions of the party&#x27;s sympathisers that he would work against their interests. During the General Strike of 1926, George advised the government of Conservative Stanley Baldwin against taking inflammatory action, and took exception to suggestions that the strikers were &quot;revolutionaries&quot; saying, &quot;Try living on their wages before you judge them.&quot;

In 1926, George hosted an Imperial Conference in London at which the Balfour Declaration accepted the growth of the British Dominions into self-governing &quot;autonomous Communities within the British Empire, equal in status, in no way subordinate one to another&quot;. The Statute of Westminster 1931 formalised the Dominions&#x27; legislative independence and established that the succession to the throne could not be changed unless all the Parliaments of the Dominions as well as the Parliament at Westminster agreed. The Statute&#x27;s preamble described the monarch as &quot;the symbol of the free association of the members of the British Commonwealth of Nations&quot;, who were &quot;united by a common allegiance&quot;.

In the wake of a world financial crisis, George encouraged the formation of a National Government in 1931 led by MacDonald and Baldwin, and volunteered to reduce the civil list to help balance the budget. He was concerned by the rise to power in Germany of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party. In 1934, George bluntly told the German ambassador Leopold von Hoesch that Germany was now the peril of the world, and that there was bound to be a war within ten years if Germany went on at the present rate; he warned the British ambassador in Berlin, Eric Phipps, to be suspicious of the Nazis.

In 1932, George agreed to deliver a Royal Christmas speech on the radio, an event that became annual thereafter. He was not in favour of the innovation originally but was persuaded by the argument that it was what his people wanted. By the Silver Jubilee of his reign in 1935, he had become a well-loved king, saying in response to the crowd&#x27;s adulation, &quot;I cannot understand it, after all I am only a very ordinary sort of fellow.&quot;

George&#x27;s relationship with his eldest son and heir, Edward, deteriorated in these later years. George was disappointed in Edward&#x27;s failure to settle down in life and appalled by his many affairs with married women. In contrast, he was fond of his second son, Prince Albert (later George VI), and doted on his eldest granddaughter, Princess Elizabeth; he nicknamed her &quot;Lilibet&quot;, and she affectionately called him &quot;Grandpa England&quot;. In 1935, George said of his son Edward: &quot;After I am dead, the boy will ruin himself within 12 months&quot;, and of Albert and Elizabeth: &quot;I pray to God my eldest son will never marry and have children, and that nothing will come between Bertie and Lilibet and the throne&quot;.

==Declining health and death==
The First World War took a toll on George&#x27;s health: he was seriously injured on 28 October 1915 when thrown by his horse at a troop review in France, and his heavy smoking exacerbated recurring breathing problems. He suffered from chronic bronchitis. In 1925, on the instruction of his doctors, he was reluctantly sent on a recuperative private cruise in the Mediterranean; it was his third trip abroad since the war, and his last. In November 1928, he fell seriously ill with septicaemia, which localised between the base of his right lung and diaphragm in the form of an empyema that required drainage. For the next two years his son Edward took over many of his duties. In 1929, the suggestion of a further rest abroad was rejected by the King &quot;in rather strong language&quot;. Instead, he retired for three months to Craigweil House, Aldwick, in the seaside resort of Bognor, Sussex. As a result of his stay, the town acquired the suffix &quot;Regis&quot; – Latin for &quot;of the King&quot;. A myth later grew that his last words, on being told that he would soon be well enough to revisit the town, were &quot;Bugger Bognor!&quot;

George never fully recovered. In his final year, he was occasionally administered oxygen. The death of his favourite sister, Victoria, in December 1935 depressed him deeply. On the evening of 15 January 1936, George took to his bedroom at Sandringham House complaining of a cold; he remained in the room until his death. He became gradually weaker, drifting in and out of consciousness. Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin later said:

By 20 January, George was close to death. His physicians, led by Lord Dawson of Penn, issued a bulletin with the words &quot;The King&#x27;s life is moving peacefully towards its close.&quot; Dawson&#x27;s private diary, unearthed after his death and made public in 1986, reveals that George&#x27;s last words, a mumbled &quot;God damn you!&quot;, were addressed to his nurse, Catherine Black, when she gave him a sedative that night. Dawson, who supported the &quot;gentle growth of euthanasia&quot;, admitted in the diary that he ended the King&#x27;s life:
Dawson wrote that he acted to preserve the King&#x27;s dignity, to prevent further strain on the family, and so that George&#x27;s death at 11:55 pm could be announced in the morning edition of &quot;The Times&quot; newspaper rather than &quot;less appropriate ... evening journals&quot;. Neither Queen Mary, who was intensely religious and might not have sanctioned euthanasia, nor the Prince of Wales were consulted. The royal family did not want the King to endure pain and suffering and did not want his life prolonged artificially but neither did they approve Dawson&#x27;s actions. &quot;British Pathé&quot; announced the King&#x27;s death the following day, in which he was described as &quot;for each one of us, more than a King, a father of a great family&quot;.

The German composer Paul Hindemith went to a BBC studio on the morning after the King&#x27;s death and in six hours wrote &quot;Trauermusik&quot; (&quot;Mourning Music&quot;), for viola and orchestra. It was performed that same evening in a live broadcast by the BBC, with Adrian Boult conducting the BBC Symphony Orchestra and the composer as soloist.
At the procession to George&#x27;s lying in state in Westminster Hall, the cross surmounting the Imperial State Crown atop George&#x27;s coffin fell off and landed in the gutter as the cortège turned into New Palace Yard. George&#x27;s eldest son and successor, Edward VIII, saw it fall and wondered whether it was a bad omen for his new reign. As a mark of respect to their father, George&#x27;s four surviving sons – Edward, Albert, Henry, and George – mounted the guard, known as the Vigil of the Princes, at the catafalque on the night before the funeral. The vigil was not repeated until the death of George&#x27;s daughter-in-law, Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, in 2002. George V was interred at St George&#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle, on 28 January 1936. Edward abdicated before the year was out, leaving Albert to ascend the throne as George VI.

==Legacy==
George V disliked sitting for portraits and despised modern art; he was so displeased by one portrait by Charles Sims that he ordered it to be burned. He did admire sculptor Bertram Mackennal, who created statues of George for display in Madras and Delhi, and William Reid Dick, whose statue of George V stands outside Westminster Abbey, London.

Although he and his wife occasionally toured the British Empire, George preferred to stay at home pursuing his hobbies of stamp collecting and game shooting and lived a life that later biographers would consider dull because of its conventionality. He was not an intellectual: on returning from one evening at the opera he wrote, &quot;Went to Covent Garden and saw &quot;Fidelio&quot; and damned dull it was.&quot; He was earnestly devoted to Britain and its Empire. He explained, &quot;it has always been my dream to identify myself with the great idea of Empire.&quot; He appeared hard-working and became widely admired by the people of Britain and the Empire, as well as &quot;the Establishment&quot;. In the words of historian David Cannadine, King George V and Queen Mary were an &quot;inseparably devoted couple&quot; who upheld &quot;character&quot; and &quot;family values&quot;.

George established a standard of conduct for British royalty that reflected the values and virtues of the upper middle-class rather than upper-class lifestyles or vices. Acting within his constitutional bounds, he dealt skilfully with a succession of crises: Ireland, the First World War, and the first socialist minority government in Britain. He was by temperament a traditionalist who never fully appreciated or approved the revolutionary changes under way in British society. Nevertheless, he invariably wielded his influence as a force of neutrality and moderation, seeing his role as mediator rather than final decision maker.

==Titles, honours and arms==

As Duke of York, George&#x27;s arms were the royal arms, with an inescutcheon of the arms of Saxony, all differenced with a label of three points argent, the centre point bearing an anchor azure. The anchor was removed from his coat of arms as the Prince of Wales. As King, he bore the royal arms. In 1917, he removed, by warrant, the Saxony inescutcheon from the arms of all male-line descendants of the Prince Consort domiciled in the United Kingdom (although the royal arms themselves had never borne the shield).
==Issue==

==Ancestry==


==See also==
* Household of George V and Mary
* Interwar Britain
* List of covers of &quot;Time&quot; magazine (1920s), (1930s)
* King George&#x27;s Fields

==Notes==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* Matthew, H. C. G. (September 2004; online edition May 2009), &quot;George V (1865–1936)&quot;, &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, Oxford University Press, , retrieved 1 May 2010 (Subscription required)
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* excerpt
* wide-ranging political, social and economic coverage, 1910–35

==External links==
* George V at the official website of the British monarchy
* George V at the official website of the Royal Collection Trust
* George V at BBC History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="0" end="8" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="77" end="103" title="King of the United Kingdom" label="King of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="112" end="129" title="British Dominions" label="British Dominions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352166" start="135" end="151" title="Emperor of India" label="Emperor of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q115554812" start="175" end="184" title="Death and state funeral of George V" label="his death"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="257" end="271" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="339" end="349" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="354" end="369" title="Queen Alexandra" label="Queen Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832870" start="400" end="432" title="succession to the British throne" label="succession to the British throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q159670" start="474" end="494" title="Prince Albert Victor" label="Prince Albert Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="536" end="546" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979112" start="667" end="681" title="Wedding of Prince George and Princess Victoria Mary" label="George married"/>
<link wikidata="Q76927" start="717" end="747" title="Princess Victoria Mary of Teck" label="Princess Victoria Mary of Teck"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958841" start="781" end="800" title="Death of Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria died"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="889" end="904" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363033" start="916" end="928" title="king-emperor" label="king-emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509126" start="932" end="955" title="Death and state funeral of Edward VII" label="his father&amp;#x27;s death"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1002" end="1011" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1013" end="1022" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="1024" end="1031" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="1033" end="1052" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="1062" end="1090" title="Indian independence movement" label="Indian independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1154" end="1168" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080258" start="1247" end="1266" title="Parliament Act 1911" label="Parliament Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="1308" end="1332" title="British House of Commons" label="British House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1352" end="1366" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1387" end="1402" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="1449" end="1470" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="1475" end="1496" title="Wilhelm II of Germany" label="Wilhelm II of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q81589" start="1619" end="1635" title="House of Windsor" label="House of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753846" start="1663" end="1693" title="House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1709" end="1737" title="Anti-German sentiment#First World War" label="anti-German public sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453246" start="1756" end="1777" title="First MacDonald ministry" label="first Labour ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="1795" end="1822" title="1931 Statute of Westminster" label="1931 Statute of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1905" end="1936" title="British Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="2082" end="2093" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q307716" start="2095" end="2111" title="Abdication of Edward VIII" label="Edward abdicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="2211" end="2220" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q565532" start="2287" end="2304" title="Marlborough House" label="Marlborough House"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="2339" end="2369" title="Albert Edward, Prince of Wales" label="Albert Edward, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="2375" end="2403" title="Alexandra, Princess of Wales" label="Alexandra, Princess of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="2438" end="2452" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="2457" end="2470" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q151305" start="2514" end="2531" title="King Christian IX" label="King Christian IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q166028" start="2536" end="2559" title="Louise of Hesse-Kassel" label="Queen Louise of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="2580" end="2594" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="2617" end="2641" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145542" start="2643" end="2658" title="Charles Longley" label="Charles Longley"/>
<link wikidata="Q159670" start="2833" end="2853" title="Prince Albert Victor" label="Prince Albert Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574624" start="2953" end="2970" title="John Neale Dalton" label="John Neale Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q628548" start="3260" end="3285" title="HMS Prince of Wales (1860)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Britannia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007083" start="3289" end="3305" title="Dartmouth, Devon" label="Dartmouth, Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="3414" end="3428" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="3436" end="3445" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q49231" start="3487" end="3504" title="Norfolk, Virginia" label="Norfolk, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3536" end="3549" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="3708" end="3721" title="Emperor Meiji" label="Emperor Meiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q269520" start="3756" end="3770" title="Empress Haruko" label="Empress Haruko"/>
<link wikidata="Q623169" start="3780" end="3789" title="wallabies" label="wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="3851" end="3860" title="Sephardic Jew" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="3861" end="3869" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q387268" start="3901" end="3916" title="Jerusalem Cross" label="Jerusalem Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="4198" end="4207" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="4212" end="4218" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q39252" start="4260" end="4275" title="Flying Dutchman" label="Flying Dutchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="4443" end="4451" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="4585" end="4611" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="4643" end="4653" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412541" start="4815" end="4852" title="North America and West Indies Station" label="North America and West Indies Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563088" start="4896" end="4920" title="HMS Melampus (1890)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Melampus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q158143" start="5114" end="5146" title="Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744657" start="5169" end="5174" title="Crown Colony of Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="5233" end="5260" title="Princess Marie of Edinburgh" label="Princess Marie of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q158154" start="5343" end="5362" title="Grand Duchess Maria Alexandrovna of Russia" label="Marie&amp;#x27;s mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="5517" end="5539" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="5856" end="5890" title="Ferdinand, Crown Prince of Romania" label="Ferdinand, Crown Prince of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q76927" start="6007" end="6037" title="Princess Victoria Mary of Teck" label="Princess Victoria Mary of Teck"/>
<link wikidata="Q535987" start="6100" end="6121" title="Francis, Duke of Teck" label="Francis, Duke of Teck"/>
<link wikidata="Q210761" start="6137" end="6147" title="morganatic" label="morganatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q699788" start="6169" end="6189" title="House of Württemberg" label="House of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q233997" start="6196" end="6231" title="Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge" label="Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6262" end="6272" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="6393" end="6402" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658304" start="6413" end="6431" title="1889–1890 pandemic" label="influenza pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="6627" end="6640" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062692" start="6986" end="6998" title="Chapel Royal" label="Chapel Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q272162" start="7002" end="7024" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Palace" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q337222" start="7419" end="7431" title="Duke of York" label="Duke of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326299" start="7433" end="7450" title="Earl of Inverness" label="Earl of Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604925" start="7456" end="7471" title="Baron Killarney" label="Baron Killarney"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990312" start="7558" end="7570" title="J. R. Tanner" label="J. R. Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7606" end="7630" title="#Issue" label="five sons and a daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q183105" start="7632" end="7650" title="Randolph Churchill" label="Randolph Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q338427" start="7783" end="7796" title="Edward Stanley, 17th Earl of Derby" label="Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q117174" start="8228" end="8240" title="Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester" label="Prince Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320376" start="8344" end="8356" title="York Cottage" label="York Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006803" start="8386" end="8406" title="Sandringham, Norfolk" label="Sandringham, Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q332956" start="8644" end="8659" title="Harold Nicolson" label="Harold Nicolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q856075" start="8937" end="8952" title="stamp collector" label="stamp collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q659933" start="9028" end="9055" title="Royal Philatelic Collection" label="Royal Philatelic Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="9267" end="9290" title="Alexander III of Russia" label="Alexander III of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099781" start="9501" end="9512" title="Wedding of Nicholas II and Alexandra Feodorovna" label="the wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="9580" end="9591" title="Nicholas II" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="9641" end="9676" title="Princess Alix of Hesse and by Rhine" label="Princess Alix of Hesse and by Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27958841" start="9858" end="9881" title="death of Queen Victoria" label="death of Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="9951" end="9961" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494846" start="9993" end="10009" title="Duke of Cornwall" label="Duke of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="10139" end="10153" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="10204" end="10208" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984260" start="10294" end="10316" title="Colony of Newfoundland" label="Colony of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="10362" end="10380" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="10416" end="10430" title="Lord Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="10486" end="10503" title="South African War" label="South African War"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="10866" end="10875" title="Afrikaner" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q382118" start="11197" end="11218" title="Australian Parliament" label="Australian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136559" start="11226" end="11267" title="Constitutional history of Australia" label="creation of the Commonwealth of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81279" start="11818" end="11835" title="Guildhall, London" label="Guildhall, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q180729" start="12128" end="12143" title="Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277249" start="12148" end="12163" title="Earl of Chester" label="Earl of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q334999" start="12798" end="12813" title="Sir John Fisher" label="Sir John Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="12872" end="12885" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731032" start="13087" end="13170" title="Wedding of Alfonso XIII and Princess Victoria Eugenie" label="wedding of King Alfonso XIII to George&amp;#x27;s cousin Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58425014" start="13201" end="13231" title="Morral affair" label="narrowly avoided assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q58425014" start="13342" end="13354" title="Mateu Morral" label="Mateu Morral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375054" start="13434" end="13444" title="Coronations in Norway" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="13448" end="13463" title="King Haakon VII" label="King Haakon VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q154423" start="13510" end="13520" title="Maud of Wales" label="Queen Maud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509126" start="13571" end="13586" title="Death and state funeral of Edward VII" label="Edward VII died"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344564" start="13923" end="13936" title="Edward Mylius" label="Edward Mylius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185630" start="14243" end="14257" title="criminal libel" label="criminal libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063123" start="14322" end="14335" title="anti-Catholic" label="anti-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672509" start="14544" end="14574" title="Accession Declaration Act 1910" label="Accession Declaration Act 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611403" start="14641" end="14674" title="George and Mary&amp;#x27;s coronation" label="George and Mary&amp;#x27;s coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="14689" end="14706" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445776" start="14750" end="14768" title="Festival of Empire" label="Festival of Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15002" end="15014" title="Delhi Durbar#Durbar of 1911" label="Delhi Durbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5352166" start="15108" end="15136" title="Emperor and Empress of India" label="Emperor and Empress of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524939" start="15188" end="15211" title="Imperial Crown of India" label="Imperial Crown of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="15281" end="15289" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q98139791" start="15469" end="15494" title="1911 George V hunting in Nepal" label="big game hunting in Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q214169" start="15657" end="15665" title="pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q336876" start="15741" end="15753" title="Edward Levy-Lawson, 1st Baron Burnham" label="Lord Burnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="15925" end="15937" title="Lloyd George" label="Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374979" start="15945" end="15965" title="People&amp;#x27;s Budget" label="People&amp;#x27;s Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="16009" end="16021" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q634805" start="16026" end="16034" title="Unionism in Ireland" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="16045" end="16059" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857741" start="16123" end="16133" title="money bill" label="money bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="16136" end="16143" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166714" start="16159" end="16172" title="H. H. Asquith" label="H. H. Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075752" start="16435" end="16464" title="January 1910 general election" label="January 1910 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q336421" start="16820" end="16830" title="Robert Crewe-Milnes, 1st Marquess of Crewe" label="Lord Crewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313174" start="17290" end="17302" title="Francis Knollys, 1st Viscount Knollys" label="Lord Knollys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798002" start="17320" end="17336" title="Lord Stamfordham" label="Lord Stamfordham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076583" start="17674" end="17704" title="December 1910 general election" label="December 1910 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15080258" start="17809" end="17828" title="Parliament Act 1911" label="Parliament Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q123488303" start="18186" end="18209" title="Irish Nationalist Party" label="Irish Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279790" start="18262" end="18307" title="Home Rule Act 1914" label="legislation that would give Ireland Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983228" start="18679" end="18722" title="Buckingham Palace Conference" label="meeting of all parties at Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649241" start="18955" end="18964" title="Suspensory Act 1914" label="suspended"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="19241" end="19263" title="Allies of World War I" label="Britain and its allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19272" end="19275" title="World War I" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="19285" end="19299" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="19312" end="19325" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="19341" end="19351" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="19499" end="19537" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227570" start="19798" end="19818" title="Dukes of Württemberg" label="Dukes of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="20033" end="20044" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="20338" end="20349" title="royal house" label="royal house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753846" start="20375" end="20405" title="House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q81589" start="20413" end="20429" title="House of Windsor" label="House of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q57468" start="20629" end="20655" title="Prince Louis of Battenberg" label="Prince Louis of Battenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362267" start="20709" end="20723" title="First Sea Lord" label="First Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q336084" start="20850" end="20895" title="Adolphus Cambridge, 1st Marquess of Cambridge" label="Adolphus Cambridge, 1st Marquess of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q335091" start="20901" end="20941" title="Alexander Cambridge, 1st Earl of Athlone" label="Alexander Cambridge, 1st Earl of Athlone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="20946" end="20960" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q437001" start="21572" end="21612" title="Ernest Augustus, Crown Prince of Hanover" label="Ernest Augustus, Crown Prince of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q160467" start="21618" end="21663" title="Charles Edward, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Charles Edward, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="21712" end="21728" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757778" start="21757" end="21784" title="Titles Deprivation Act 1917" label="Titles Deprivation Act 1917"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21842" end="21854" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle#Heraldry" label="Garter flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449634" start="21884" end="21923" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Chapel, Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="22009" end="22027" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="22068" end="22084" title="political asylum" label="political asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="22266" end="22274" title="Romanovs" label="Romanovs"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="22335" end="22360" title="Lord Mountbatten of Burma" label="Lord Mountbatten of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="22381" end="22399" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212723" start="22626" end="22629" title="MI1" label="MI1"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="22720" end="22729" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356047" start="22907" end="22939" title="Execution of the Romanov family" label="killed by the Bolsheviks in 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q153601" start="23151" end="23167" title="Marie Feodorovna" label="Marie Feodorovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="23245" end="23251" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q310488" start="23342" end="23346" title="Prince John of the United Kingdom" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117074" start="23788" end="23818" title="Imperial War Graves Commission" label="Imperial War Graves Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744466" start="23861" end="23887" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Pilgrimage" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="23897" end="23912" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="24105" end="24120" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q957878" start="24338" end="24357" title="Edward Lisle Strutt" label="Edward Lisle Strutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="24440" end="24460" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Charles I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="24513" end="24523" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156531" start="24570" end="24576" title="Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q116062" start="24581" end="24596" title="Princess Andrew" label="Princess Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="24658" end="24681" title="Irish War of Independence" label="fought for independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="24777" end="24789" title="Lloyd George" label="Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300937" start="24821" end="24851" title="Parliament of Northern Ireland" label="Parliament of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q214321" start="24940" end="24949" title="Jan Smuts" label="Jan Smuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="25102" end="25120" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anglo-Irish Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="25142" end="25165" title="Partition of Ireland" label="Ireland was partitioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="25171" end="25187" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="25827" end="25839" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="26198" end="26214" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="26495" end="26517" title="General Strike of 1926" label="General Strike of 1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="26552" end="26564" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="26565" end="26580" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139567" start="26798" end="26817" title="Imperial Conference" label="Imperial Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q195559" start="26841" end="26860" title="Balfour Declaration of 1926" label="Balfour Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="26888" end="26905" title="British Dominions" label="British Dominions"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="27047" end="27074" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="27520" end="27542" title="Great Depression" label="world financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926884" start="27581" end="27600" title="National Government (United Kingdom)" label="National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q206874" start="27669" end="27679" title="civil list" label="civil list"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="27749" end="27756" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="27760" end="27772" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="27781" end="27791" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q214431" start="27844" end="27862" title="Leopold von Hoesch" label="Leopold von Hoesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q831031" start="28046" end="28057" title="Eric Phipps" label="Eric Phipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q767054" start="28127" end="28149" title="Royal Christmas speech" label="Royal Christmas speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878140" start="28331" end="28345" title="Silver Jubilee of George V" label="Silver Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="28597" end="28603" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28830" end="28839" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="28881" end="28899" title="Elizabeth II" label="Princess Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q173022" start="29558" end="29576" title="chronic bronchitis" label="chronic bronchitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="29804" end="29815" title="septicaemia" label="septicaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339539" start="29900" end="29907" title="empyema" label="empyema"/>
<link wikidata="Q333633" start="29922" end="29930" title="Drainage (medical)" label="drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312623" start="30153" end="30168" title="Craigweil House" label="Craigweil House"/>
<link wikidata="Q890621" start="30204" end="30210" title="Bognor" label="Bognor"/>
<link wikidata="Q115681039" start="30448" end="30454" title="Bugger" label="Bugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q234542" start="30595" end="30603" title="Princess Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q935116" start="30709" end="30726" title="Sandringham House" label="Sandringham House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167328" start="30966" end="30985" title="Lord Dawson of Penn" label="Lord Dawson of Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668003" start="31278" end="31293" title="Catherine Black (nurse)" label="Catherine Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="31385" end="31395" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="31661" end="31670" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893565" start="32055" end="32068" title="British Pathé" label="British Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q57244" start="32254" end="32268" title="Paul Hindemith" label="Paul Hindemith"/>
<link wikidata="Q427522" start="32362" end="32373" title="Trauermusik" label="Trauermusik"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="32497" end="32500" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q372697" start="32507" end="32519" title="Adrian Boult" label="Adrian Boult"/>
<link wikidata="Q795630" start="32535" end="32557" title="BBC Symphony Orchestra" label="BBC Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157233" start="32622" end="32636" title="lying in state" label="lying in state"/>
<link wikidata="Q114004148" start="32640" end="32656" title="Westminster Hall" label="Westminster Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358618" start="32684" end="32704" title="Imperial State Crown" label="Imperial State Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875347" start="32792" end="32807" title="New Palace Yard" label="New Palace Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="33014" end="33020" title="George VI" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q117174" start="33022" end="33027" title="Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q160770" start="33033" end="33039" title="Prince George, Duke of Kent" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493752" start="33074" end="33094" title="Vigil of the Princes" label="Vigil of the Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q930343" start="33103" end="33113" title="catafalque" label="catafalque"/>
<link wikidata="Q115554812" start="33138" end="33145" title="Death and state funeral of George V" label="funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q10633" start="33224" end="33256" title="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother" label="Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q307716" start="33360" end="33369" title="Abdication of Edward VIII" label="abdicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="33510" end="33520" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082527" start="33562" end="33574" title="Charles Sims (painter)" label="Charles Sims"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895798" start="33631" end="33648" title="Bertram Mackennal" label="Bertram Mackennal"/>
<link wikidata="Q472840" start="33717" end="33734" title="William Reid Dick" label="William Reid Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604483" start="33742" end="33760" title="Statue of George V, Westminster" label="statue of George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="33776" end="33793" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="33853" end="33867" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q856075" start="33926" end="33942" title="stamp collecting" label="stamp collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944976" start="33947" end="33960" title="Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom" label="game shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q55018" start="34148" end="34161" title="Royal Opera House" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q193778" start="34176" end="34183" title="Fidelio" label="Fidelio"/>
<link wikidata="Q574562" start="34485" end="34502" title="the Establishment" label="the Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382556" start="34536" end="34551" title="David Cannadine" label="David Cannadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811480" start="34672" end="34685" title="family values" label="family values"/>
<link wikidata="Q165762" start="35403" end="35413" title="royal arms" label="royal arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q740263" start="35423" end="35435" title="inescutcheon" label="inescutcheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q562152" start="35443" end="35457" title="Coat of arms of Saxony" label="arms of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q202581" start="35482" end="35487" title="Label (heraldry)" label="label"/>
<link wikidata="Q936472" start="35504" end="35510" title="argent" label="argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785501" start="35547" end="35552" title="Azure (heraldry)" label="azure"/>
<link wikidata="Q57200536" start="35586" end="35621" title="Coat of arms of the Prince of Wales" label="coat of arms as the Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845151" start="35916" end="35946" title="Household of George V and Mary" label="Household of George V and Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224721" start="35949" end="35965" title="Interwar Britain" label="Interwar Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633147" start="35968" end="36019" title="List of covers of Time magazine (1920s)" label="List of covers of &amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine (1920s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633144" start="36021" end="36028" title="List of covers of Time magazine (1930s)" label="(1930s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411592" start="36031" end="36056" title="King George&amp;#x27;s Fields" label="King George&amp;#x27;s Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145336" start="36106" end="36123" title="Colin Matthew" label="Matthew, H. C. G."/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="36498" end="36514" title="British monarchy" label="British monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459037" start="36557" end="36579" title="Royal Collection Trust" label="Royal Collection Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631715" start="36594" end="36605" title="BBC History" label="BBC History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46825" wikidata="Q57065" url="?curid=46825" title="Otto Hahn">
<text>Otto Hahn (; 8 March 1879 – 28 July 1968) was a German chemist who was a pioneer in the field of radiochemistry. He is referred to as the father of nuclear chemistry and discoverer of nuclear fission, the science behind nuclear reactors and nuclear weapons. Hahn and Lise Meitner discovered isotopes of the radioactive elements radium, thorium, protactinium and uranium. He also discovered the phenomena of atomic recoil and nuclear isomerism, and pioneered rubidium–strontium dating. In 1938, Hahn, Meitner and Fritz Strassmann discovered nuclear fission, for which Hahn alone was awarded the 1944 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.

A graduate of the University of Marburg, which awarded him a doctorate in 1901, Hahn studied under Sir William Ramsay at University College London and at McGill University in Montreal under Ernest Rutherford, where he discovered several new radioactive isotopes. He returned to Germany in 1906; Emil Fischer let him use a former woodworking shop in the basement of the Chemical Institute at the University of Berlin as a laboratory. Hahn completed his habilitation in early 1907 and became a &quot;Privatdozent&quot;. In 1912, he became head of the Radioactivity Department of the newly founded Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry (KWIC). Working with Austrian physicist Lise Meitner in the building that now bears their names, they made a series of groundbreaking discoveries, culminating with her isolation of the longest-lived isotope of protactinium in 1918.

During World War I he served with a &quot;Landwehr&quot; regiment on the Western Front, and with the chemical warfare unit headed by Fritz Haber on the Western, Eastern and Italian fronts, earning the Iron Cross (2nd Class) for his part in the First Battle of Ypres. After the war he became the head of the KWIC, while remaining in charge of his own department. Between 1934 and 1938, he worked with Strassmann and Meitner on the study of isotopes created by neutron bombardment of uranium and thorium, which led to the discovery of nuclear fission. He was an opponent of Nazism and the persecution of Jews by the Nazi Party that caused the removal of many of his colleagues, including Meitner, who was forced to flee Germany in 1938. During World War II, he worked on the German nuclear weapons program, cataloguing the fission products of uranium. At the end of the war he was arrested by the Allied forces and detained in Farm Hall with nine other German scientists, from July 1945 to January 1946.

Hahn served as the last president of the Kaiser Wilhelm Society for the Advancement of Science in 1946 and as the founding president of its successor, the Max Planck Society from 1948 to 1960. In 1959 in Berlin he co-founded the Federation of German Scientists, a non-governmental organisation committed to the ideal of responsible science. As he worked to rebuild German science, he became one of the most influential and respected citizens of post-war West Germany.

==Early life and education==
Otto Hahn was born in Frankfurt am Main on 8 March 1879, the youngest son of Heinrich Hahn (1845–1922), a prosperous glazier (and founder of the Glasbau Hahn company), and Charlotte Hahn née Giese (1845–1905). He had an older half-brother Karl, his mother&#x27;s son from her previous marriage, and two older brothers, Heiner and Julius. The family lived above his father&#x27;s workshop. The younger three boys were educated at the &quot;Klinger Oberrealschule&quot; in Frankfurt. At the age of 15, he began to take a special interest in chemistry, and carried out simple experiments in the laundry room of the family home. His father wanted Otto to study architecture, as he had built or acquired several residential and business properties, but Otto persuaded him that his ambition was to become an industrial chemist.

In 1897, after passing his &quot;Abitur&quot;, Hahn began to study chemistry at the University of Marburg. His subsidiary subjects were mathematics, physics, mineralogy and philosophy. Hahn joined the Students&#x27; Association of Natural Sciences and Medicine, a student fraternity and a forerunner of today&#x27;s &quot;Landsmannschaft Nibelungi&quot; (Coburger Convent der akademischen Landsmannschaften und Turnerschaften). He spent his third and fourth semesters at the University of Munich, studying organic chemistry under Adolf von Baeyer, physical chemistry under , and inorganic chemistry under Karl Andreas Hofmann. In 1901, Hahn received his doctorate in Marburg for a dissertation entitled &quot;On Bromine Derivates of Isoeugenol&quot;, a topic in classical organic chemistry. He completed his one-year military service (instead of the usual two because he had a doctorate) in the 81st Infantry Regiment, but unlike his brothers, did not apply for a commission. He then returned to the University of Marburg, where he worked for two years as assistant to his doctoral supervisor, &quot;Geheimrat&quot; professor Theodor Zincke.

==Early career in London and Canada==

===Discovery of radiothorium and other &quot;new elements&quot;===
Hahn&#x27;s intention was still to work in industry. He received an offer of employment from Eugen Fischer, the director of (and the father of organic chemist Hans Fischer), but a condition of employment was that Hahn had to have lived in another country and have a reasonable command of another language. With this in mind, and to improve his knowledge of English, Hahn took up a post at University College London in 1904, working under Sir William Ramsay, who was known for having discovered the noble gases. Here Hahn worked on radiochemistry, at that time a very new field. In early 1905, in the course of his work with salts of radium, Hahn discovered a new substance he called radiothorium (thorium-228), which at that time was believed to be a new radioactive element. In fact, it was an isotope of the known element thorium; the concept of an isotope, along with the term, was coined in 1913 by the British chemist Frederick Soddy.

Ramsay was enthusiastic when yet another new element was found in his institute, and he intended to announce the discovery in a correspondingly suitable way. In accordance with tradition this was done before the committee of the venerable Royal Society. At the session of the Royal Society on 16 March 1905 Ramsay communicated Hahn&#x27;s discovery of radiothorium. The &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; informed its readers:

Hahn published his results in the &quot;Proceedings of the Royal Society&quot; on 24 May 1905. It was the first of more than 250 scientific publications in the field of radiochemistry. At the end of his time in London, Ramsay asked Hahn about his plans for the future, and Hahn told him about the job offer from Kalle &amp; Co. Ramsay told him radiochemistry had a bright future, and that someone who had discovered a new radioactive element should go to the University of Berlin. Ramsay wrote to Emil Fischer, the head of the chemistry institute there, who replied that Hahn could work in his laboratory, but could not be a &quot;Privatdozent&quot; because radiochemistry was not taught there. At this point, Hahn decided that he first needed to know more about the subject, so he wrote to the leading expert on the field, Ernest Rutherford. Rutherford agreed to take Hahn on as an assistant, and Hahn&#x27;s parents undertook to pay Hahn&#x27;s expenses.

From September 1905 until mid-1906, Hahn worked with Rutherford&#x27;s group in the basement of the Macdonald Physics Building at McGill University in Montreal. There was some scepticism about the existence of radiothorium, which Bertram Boltwood memorably described as a compound of thorium X and stupidity. Boltwood was soon convinced that it did exist, although he and Hahn differed on what its half-life was. William Henry Bragg and Richard Kleeman had noted that the alpha particles emitted from radioactive substances always had the same energy, providing a second way of identifying them, so Hahn set about measuring the alpha particle emissions of radiothorium. In the process, he found that a precipitation of thorium A (polonium-216) and thorium B (lead-212) also contained a short-lived &quot;element&quot;, which he named thorium C (which was later identified as polonium-212). Hahn was unable to separate it, and concluded that it had a very short half-life (it is about 300 ns). He also identified radioactinium (thorium-227) and radium D (later identified as lead-210). Rutherford remarked that: &quot;Hahn has a special nose for discovering new elements.&quot;
==Chemical Institute in Berlin==
===Discovery of mesothorium I===

In 1906, Hahn returned to Germany, where Fischer placed at his disposal a former woodworking shop (&quot;Holzwerkstatt&quot;) in the basement of the Chemical Institute to use as a laboratory. Hahn equipped it with electroscopes to measure alpha and beta particles and gamma rays. In Montreal these had been made from discarded coffee tins; Hahn made the ones in Berlin from brass, with aluminium strips insulated with amber. These were charged with hard rubber sticks that he rubbed against the sleeves of his suit. It was not possible to conduct research in the wood shop, but Alfred Stock, the head of the inorganic chemistry department, let Hahn use a space in one of his two private laboratories. Hahn purchased two milligrams of radium from Friedrich Oskar Giesel, the discoverer of emanium (radon), for 100 marks a milligram (), and obtained thorium for free from Otto Knöfler, whose Berlin firm was a major producer of thorium products.

In the space of a few months Hahn discovered mesothorium I (radium-228), mesothorium II (actinium-228), and – independently from Boltwood – the mother substance of radium, ionium (later identified as thorium-230). In subsequent years, mesothorium I assumed great importance because, like radium-226 (discovered by Pierre and Marie Curie), it was ideally suited for use in medical radiation treatment, but cost only half as much to manufacture. Along the way, Hahn determined that just as he was unable to separate thorium from radiothorium, so he could not separate mesothorium I from radium.

In Canada there had been no requirement to be circumspect when addressing the egalitarian New Zealander Rutherford, but many people in Germany found his manner off-putting, and characterised him as an &quot;Anglicised Berliner&quot;. Hahn completed his habilitation in early 1907, and became a &quot;Privatdozent&quot;. A thesis was not required; the Chemical Institute accepted one of his publications on radioactivity instead. Most of the organic chemists at the Chemical Institute did not regard Hahn&#x27;s work as real chemistry. Fischer objected to Hahn&#x27;s contention in his habilitation colloquium that many radioactive substances existed in such tiny amounts that they could only be detected by their radioactivity, venturing that he had always been able to detect substances with his keen sense of smell, but soon gave in. One department head remarked: &quot;it is incredible what one gets to be a &quot;Privatdozent&quot; these days!&quot;
Physicists were more accepting of Hahn&#x27;s work, and he began attending a colloquium at the Physics Institute conducted by Heinrich Rubens. It was at one of these colloquia where, on 28 September 1907, he made the acquaintance of the Austrian physicist Lise Meitner. Almost the same age as himself, she was only the second woman to receive a doctorate from the University of Vienna, and had already published two papers on radioactivity. Rubens suggested her as a possible collaborator. So began the thirty-year collaboration and lifelong close friendship between the two scientists.

In Montreal, Hahn had worked with physicists including at least one woman, Harriet Brooks, but it was difficult for Meitner at first. Women were not yet admitted to universities in Prussia. Meitner was allowed to work in the wood shop, which had its own external entrance, but could not enter the rest of the institute, including Hahn&#x27;s laboratory space upstairs. If she wanted to go to the toilet, she had to use one at the restaurant down the street. The following year, women were admitted to universities, and Fischer lifted the restrictions and had women&#x27;s toilets installed in the building.

===Discovery of radioactive recoil===
Harriet Brooks observed a radioactive recoil in 1904, but interpreted it wrongly. Hahn and Meitner succeeded in demonstrating the radioactive recoil incident to alpha particle emission and interpreted it correctly. Hahn pursued a report by Stefan Meyer and Egon Schweidler of a decay product of actinium with a half-life of about 11.8 days. Hahn determined that it was actinium X (radium-223). He also discovered that at the moment when a radioactinium (thorium-227) atom emits an alpha particle, it does so with great force, and the actinium X experiences a recoil. This is enough to free it from chemical bonds, and it has a positive charge, and can be collected at a negative electrode. 

Hahn was thinking only of actinium, but on reading his paper, Meitner told him that he had found a new way of detecting radioactive substances. They set up some tests, and soon found actinium C″″ (thallium-207) and thorium C″″ (thallium-208). The physicist Walther Gerlach described radioactive recoil as &quot;a profoundly significant discovery in physics with far-reaching consequences&quot;.
==Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry==
In 1910, Hahn was appointed professor by the Prussian Minister of Culture and Education, August von Trott zu Solz. Two years later, Hahn became head of the Radioactivity Department of the newly founded Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry (KWIC) in Berlin-Dahlem (in what is today the Hahn-Meitner-Building of the Free University of Berlin). This came with an annual salary of 5,000 marks (). In addition, he received 66,000 marks in 1914 () from Knöfler for the mesothorium process, of which he gave 10 per cent to Meitner. The new institute was inaugurated on 23 October 1912 in a ceremony presided over by Kaiser Wilhelm II. The Kaiser was shown glowing radioactive substances in a dark room.

The move to new accommodation was fortuitous, as the wood shop had become heavily contaminated by radioactive liquids that had been spilt, and radioactive gases that had vented and then decayed and settled as radioactive dust, making sensitive measurements impossible. To ensure that their clean new laboratories stayed that way, Hahn and Meitner instituted strict procedures. Chemical and physical measurements were conducted in different rooms, people handling radioactive substances had to follow protocols that included not shaking hands, and rolls of toilet paper were hung next to every telephone and door handle. Strongly radioactive substances were stored in the old wood shop, and later in a purpose-built radium house on the institute grounds.
===World War I===
In July 1914—shortly before the outbreak of World War I—Hahn was recalled to active duty with the army in a &quot;Landwehr&quot; regiment. They marched through Belgium, where the platoon he commanded was armed with captured machine guns. He was awarded the Iron Cross (2nd Class) for his part in the First Battle of Ypres. He was a joyful participant in the Christmas truce of 1914, and was commissioned as a lieutenant. In mid-January 1915, he was summoned to meet chemist Fritz Haber, who explained his plan to break the trench deadlock with chlorine gas. Hahn raised the issue that the Hague Convention banned the use of projectiles containing poison gases, but Haber explained that the French had already initiated chemical warfare with tear gas grenades, and he planned to get around the letter of the convention by releasing gas from cylinders instead of shells.
Haber&#x27;s new unit was called Pioneer Regiment 35. After brief training in Berlin, Hahn, together with physicists James Franck and Gustav Hertz, was sent to Flanders again to scout for a site for a first gas attack. He did not witness the attack because he and Franck were off selecting a position for the next attack. Transferred to Poland, at the Battle of Bolimów on 12 June 1915, they released a mixture of chlorine and phosgene gas. Some German troops were reluctant to advance when the gas started to blow back, so Hahn led them across No Man&#x27;s land. He witnessed the death agonies of Russians they had poisoned, and unsuccessfully attempted to revive some with gas masks. He was transferred to Berlin as a human guinea pig testing poisonous gases and gas masks. On their next attempt on 7 July, the gas again blew back on German lines, and Hertz was poisoned. This assignment was interrupted by a mission at the front in Flanders and again in 1916 by a mission to Verdun to introduce shells filled with phosgene to the Western Front. Then once again he was hunting along both fronts for sites for gas attacks. In December 1916 he joined the new gas command unit at Imperial Headquarters.

Between operations, Hahn returned to Berlin, where he was able to slip back to his old laboratory and work with Meitner, continuing with their research. In September 1917 he was one of three officers, disguised in Austrian uniforms, sent to the Isonzo front in Italy to find a suitable location for an attack, using newly developed rifled &quot;minenwerfers&quot; that simultaneously hurled hundreds of containers of poison gas onto enemy targets. They selected a site where the Italian trenches were sheltered in a deep valley so that a gas cloud would persist. The following Battle of Caporetto broke the Italian lines, and the Central Powers overran much of northern Italy. That summer Hahn was accidentally poisoned by phosgene while testing a new model of gas mask. At the end of the war he was in the field in mufti on a secret mission to test a pot that heated and released a cloud of arsenicals.

===Discovery of protactinium===

In 1913, chemists Frederick Soddy and Kasimir Fajans independently observed that alpha decay caused atoms to move down two places on the periodic table, while the loss of two beta particles restored it to its original position. Under the resulting reorganisation of the periodic table, radium was placed in group II, actinium in group III, thorium in group IV and uranium in group VI. This left a gap between thorium and uranium. Soddy predicted that this unknown element, which he referred to (after Dmitri Mendeleev) as &quot;ekatantalium&quot;, would be an alpha emitter with chemical properties similar to tantalium. It was not long before Fajans and Oswald Helmuth Göhring discovered it as a decay product of a beta-emitting product of thorium. Based on the radioactive displacement law of Fajans and Soddy, this was an isotope of the missing element, which they named &quot;brevium&quot; after its short half life. However, it was a beta emitter, and therefore could not be the mother isotope of actinium. This had to be another isotope of the same element.

Hahn and Meitner set out to find the missing mother isotope. They developed a new technique for separating the tantalum group from pitchblende, which they hoped would speed the isolation of the new isotope. The work was interrupted by the First World War. Meitner became an X-ray nurse, working in Austrian Army hospitals, but she returned to the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in October 1916. Hahn joined the new gas command unit at Imperial Headquarters in Berlin in December 1916 after travelling between the western and eastern front, Berlin and Leverkusen between mid-1914 and late 1916.

Most of the students, laboratory assistants and technicians had been called up, so Hahn, who was stationed in Berlin between January and September 1917, and Meitner had to do everything themselves. By December 1917 she was able to isolate the substance, and after further work were able to prove that it was indeed the missing isotope. Meitner submitted her and Hahn&#x27;s findings for publication in March 1918 to the scientific paper &quot;Physikalischen Zeitschrift&quot; under the title (&quot;The Mother Substance of Actinium; A New Radioactive Element with a Long Lifetime&quot;). Although Fajans and Göhring had been the first to discover the element, custom required that an element was represented by its longest-lived and most abundant isotope, and while brevium had a half life of 1.7 minutes, Hahn and Meitner&#x27;s isotope had one of 32,500 years. The name brevium no longer seemed appropriate. Fajans agreed to Meitner and Hahn naming the element &quot;protoactinium&quot;.

In June 1918, Soddy and John Cranston announced that they had extracted a sample of the isotope, but unlike Hahn and Meitner were unable to describe its characteristics. They acknowledged Hahn´s and Meitner&#x27;s priority, and agreed to the name. The connection to uranium remained a mystery, as neither of the known isotopes of uranium decayed into protactinium. It remained unsolved until the mother isotope, uranium-235, was discovered in 1929. For their discovery Hahn and Meitner were repeatedly nominated for the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in the 1920s by several scientists, among them Max Planck, Heinrich Goldschmidt, and Fajans himself. In 1949, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) named the new element definitively protactinium, and confirmed Hahn and Meitner as discoverers.

===Discovery of nuclear isomerism===

With the discovery of protactinium, most of the decay chains of uranium had been mapped. When Hahn returned to his work after the war, he looked back over his 1914 results, and considered some anomalies that had been dismissed or overlooked. He dissolved uranium salts in a hydrofluoric acid solution with tantalic acid. First the tantalum in the ore was precipitated, then the protactinium. In addition to the uranium X1 (thorium-234) and uranium X2 (protactinium-234), Hahn detected traces of a radioactive substance with a half-life of between 6 and 7 hours. There was one isotope known to have a half-life of 6.2 hours, mesothorium II (actinium-228). This was not in any probable decay chain, but it could have been contamination, as the KWICy had experimented with it. Hahn and Meitner demonstrated in 1919 that when actinium is treated with hydrofluoric acid, it remains in the insoluble residue. Since mesothorium II was an isotope of actinium, the substance was not mesothorium II; it was protactinium. Hahn was now confident enough he had found something that he named his new isotope &quot;uranium Z&quot;. In February 1921, he published the first report on his discovery.

Hahn determined that uranium Z had a half-life of around 6.7 hours (with a two per cent margin of error) and that when uranium X1 decayed, it became uranium X2 about 99.75 per cent of the time, and uranium Z around 0.25 per cent of the time. He found that the proportion of uranium X to uranium Z extracted from several kilograms of uranyl nitrate remained constant over time, strongly indicating that uranium X was the mother of uranium Z. To prove this, Hahn obtained a hundred kilograms of uranyl nitrate; separating the uranium X from it took weeks. He found that the half-life of the parent of uranium Z differed from the known 24-day half-life of uranium X1 by no more than two or three days, but was unable to get a more accurate value. Hahn concluded that uranium Z and uranium X2 were both the same isotope of protactinium (protactinium-234), and they both decayed into uranium II (uranium-234), but with different half-lives.

Uranium Z was the first example of nuclear isomerism. Walther Gerlach later remarked that this was &quot;a discovery that was not understood at the time but later became highly significant for nuclear physics&quot;. Not until 1936 was Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker able to provide a theoretical explanation of the phenomenon. For this discovery, whose full significance was recognised by very few, Hahn was again proposed for the Nobel Prize in Chemistry by Bernhard Naunyn, Goldschmidt and Planck.

===&quot;Applied Radiochemistry&quot;===
In 1924, Hahn was elected to full membership of the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin, by a vote of thirty white balls to two black. While still remaining the head of his own department, he became Deputy Director of the KWIC in 1924, and succeeded Alfred Stock as the director in 1928. Meitner became the director of the Physical Radioactivity Division, while Hahn headed the Chemical Radioactivity Division. 

In the early 1920s, Hahn created a new line of research. Using the &quot;emanation method&quot;, which he had recently developed, and the &quot;emanation ability&quot;, he founded what became known as &quot;applied radiochemistry&quot; for the researching of general chemical and physical-chemical questions. In 1936 Cornell University Press published a book in English (and later in Russian) titled &quot;Applied Radiochemistry&quot;, which contained the lectures given by Hahn when he was a visiting professor at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, in 1933. This publication had a major influence on almost all nuclear chemists and physicists in the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and the Soviet Union during the 1930s and 1940s. Hahn is referred to as the father of nuclear chemistry, which emerged from applied radiochemistry.

==National Socialist Germany==

===Impact of National Socialism===
Fritz Strassmann had come to the KWIC to study under Hahn to improve his employment prospects. After the Nazi Party (NSDAP) came to power in Germany in 1933, Strassmann declined a lucrative offer of employment because it required political training and Nazi Party membership. Later, rather than become a member of a Nazi-controlled organisation, Strassmann resigned from the Society of German Chemists when it became part of the Nazi German Labour Front. As a result, he could neither work in the chemical industry nor receive his habilitation, the prerequisite for an academic position. Meitner persuaded Hahn to hire Strassmann as an assistant. Soon he would be credited as a third collaborator on the papers they produced, and would sometimes even be listed first.

Hahn spent February to June 1933 in the United States and Canada as a visiting professor at Cornell University. He gave an interview to the Toronto &quot;Star Weekly&quot; in which he painted a flattering portrait of Adolf Hitler: 

The April 1933 Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service banned Jews and communists from academia. Meitner was exempt from its impact because she was an Austrian rather than a German citizen. Haber was likewise exempt as a veteran of World War I, but chose to resign his directorship of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry in protest on 30 April 1933. The directors of the other Kaiser Wilhelm Institutes, even the Jewish ones, complied with the new law, which applied to the KWS as a whole and those Kaiser Wilhelm institutes with more than 50% state support, which exempted the KWI for Chemistry. Hahn therefore did not have to fire any of his own full-time staff, but as the interim director of Haber&#x27;s institute, he dismissed a quarter of its staff, including three department heads. Gerhart Jander was appointed the new director of Haber&#x27;s old institute, and reoriented it towards chemical warfare research.

Like most KWS institute directors, Haber had accrued a large discretionary fund. It was his wish that it be distributed to the dismissed staff to facilitate their emigration. Hahn brokered a deal whereby 10 per cent of the funds would be allocated to Haber&#x27;s people and the rest to KWS, but the Rockefeller Foundation insisted that the funds be used for their original scientific research or else be returned. In August 1933 the administrators of the KWS were alerted that several boxes of Rockefeller Foundation-funded equipment were about to be shipped to Herbert Freundlich, one of the department heads that Hahn had dismissed, who was now working in England. , a Nazi Party member, was in charge while Planck, the president of the KWS since 1930, was on vacation, and he ordered the shipment halted. Hahn complied, but he disgreed with the decision on the grounds that funds from abroad should not be diverted to military research, which the KWS was increasingly undertaking. When Planck returned from vacation, he ordered Hahn to expedite the shipment.

Haber died on 29 January 1934. A memorial service was held on the first anniversary of his death. University professors were forbidden to attend, so they sent their wives in their place. Hahn, Planck and Joseph Koeth attended, and gave speeches. The aging Planck did not seek re-election, and was succeeded in 1937 as president by Carl Bosch, a winner of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry and the chairman of the board of IG Farben, a company which had bankrolled the Nazi Party since 1932. Telschow became Secretary of the KWS. He was an enthusiastic supporter of the Nazis, but was also loyal to Hahn, being one of his former students, and Hahn welcomed his appointment. Hahn&#x27;s chief assistant, Otto Erbacher, became the KWI for Chemistry&#x27;s party steward (&quot;Vertrauensmann&quot;).

===Rubidium–strontium dating===
While Hahn was in North America in 1905–1906, his attention had been drawn to a mica-like mineral from Manitoba that contained rubidium. He had studied the radioactive decay of rubidium-87, and had estimated its half-life at 2 x 1011 years. It occurred to him that by comparing the quantity of strontium in the mineral (which had once been rubidium) with that of the remaining rubidium, he could measure the age of the mineral, assuming that his original calculation of the half-life was reasonably accurate. This would be a superior dating method to studying the decay of uranium, because some of the uranium turns into helium, which then escapes, resulting in rocks appearing to be younger than they really were. Jacob Papish helped Hahn obtain several kilograms of the mineral.

In 1937, Strassmann and Ernst Walling extracted 253.4 milligrams of strontium carbonate from 1,012 grams of the mineral, all of which was the strontium-87 isotope, indicating that it had all been produced from radioactive decay of rubidium-87. The age of the mineral had been estimated at 1,975 million years from uranium minerals in the same deposit, which implied that the half-life of rubidium-87 was 2.3 x 1011 years: quite close to Hahn&#x27;s original calculation. Rubidium–strontium dating became a widely used technique for dating rocks in the 1950s, when mass spectrometry became common.

===Discovery of nuclear fission===
After James Chadwick discovered the neutron in 1932, Irène Curie and Frédéric Joliot irradiated aluminium foil with alpha particles. They found that this results in a short-lived radioactive isotope of phosphorus. They noted that positron emission continued after the neutron emissions ceased. Not only had they discovered a new form of radioactive decay, they had transmuted an element into a hitherto unknown radioactive isotope of another, thereby inducing radioactivity where there had been none before. Radiochemistry was now no longer confined to certain heavy elements, but extended to the entire periodic table. Chadwick noted that being electrically neutral, neutrons could penetrate the atomic nucleus more easily than protons or alpha particles. Enrico Fermi and his colleagues in Rome picked up on this idea, and began irradiating elements with neutrons.

The radioactive displacement law of Fajans and Soddy said that beta decay causes isotopes to move one element up on the periodic table, and alpha decay causes them to move two down. When Fermi&#x27;s group bombarded uranium atoms with neutrons, they found a complex mix of half-lives. Fermi therefore concluded that the new elements with atomic numbers greater than 92 (known as transuranium elements) had been created. Meitner and Hahn had not collaborated for many years, but Meitner was eager to investigate Fermi&#x27;s results. Hahn, initially, was not, but he changed his mind when Aristid von Grosse suggested that what Fermi had found was an isotope of protactinium. They set out to determine whether or not the 13-minute isotope was indeed an isotope of protactinium.

Between 1934 and 1938, Hahn, Meitner and Strassmann found a great number of radioactive transmutation products, all of which they regarded as transuranic. At that time, the existence of actinides was not yet established, and uranium was wrongly believed to be a group 6 element similar to tungsten. It followed that the first transuranic elements would be similar to group 7 to 10 elements, i.e. rhenium and platinoids. They established the presence of multiple isotopes of at least four such elements, and (mistakenly) identified them as elements with atomic numbers 93 through 96. They were the first scientists to measure the 23-minute half-life of uranium-239 and to establish chemically that it was an isotope of uranium, but were unable to continue this work to its logical conclusion and identify the real element 93. They identified ten different half-lives, with varying degrees of certainty. To account for them, Meitner had to hypothesise a new class of reaction and the alpha decay of uranium, neither of which had ever been reported before, and for which physical evidence was lacking. Hahn and Strassmann refined their chemical procedures, while Meitner devised new experiments to shine more light on the reaction processes.

In May 1937, they issued parallel reports, one in the &quot;Zeitschrift für Physik&quot; with Meitner as the principal author, and one in the &quot;Chemische Berichte&quot; with Hahn as the principal author. Hahn concluded his by stating emphatically: (&quot;Above all, their chemical distinction from all previously known elements needs no further discussion&quot;). Meitner, however, was increasingly uncertain. She considered the possibility that the reactions were from different isotopes of uranium; three were known: uranium-238, uranium-235 and uranium-234. However, when she calculated the neutron cross section, it was too large to be anything other than the most abundant isotope, uranium-238. She concluded that it must be another case of the nuclear isomerism that Hahn had discovered in protactinium. She therefore ended her report on a very different note to Hahn, reporting that: (&quot;The processes must be neutron capture by uranium-238, which leads to three isomeric nuclei of uranium-239. This result is very difficult to reconcile with current concepts of the nucleus.&quot;)

With the &quot;Anschluss&quot;, Germany&#x27;s annexation of Austria on 12 March 1938, Meitner lost her Austrian citizenship, and fled to Sweden. She carried only a little money, but before she left, Hahn gave her a diamond ring he had inherited from his mother. Meitner continued to correspond with Hahn by mail. In late 1938 Hahn and Strassmann found evidence of isotopes of an alkaline earth metal in their sample. Finding a group 2 metal was problematic, because it did not logically fit with the other elements found thus far. Hahn initially suspected it to be radium, produced by splitting off two alpha-particles from the uranium nucleus, but chipping off two alpha particles via this process was unlikely. The idea of turning uranium into barium (by removing around 100 nucleons) was seen as preposterous.

During a visit to Copenhagen on 10 November, Hahn discussed these results with Niels Bohr, Meitner, and Otto Robert Frisch. Further refinements of the technique, leading to the decisive experiment on 16–17 December 1938, produced puzzling results: the three isotopes consistently behaved not as radium, but as barium. Hahn, who did not inform the physicists in his Institute, described the results exclusively in a letter to Meitner on 19 December:

In her reply, Meitner concurred. &quot;At the moment, the interpretation of such a thoroughgoing breakup seems very difficult to me, but in nuclear physics we have experienced so many surprises, that one cannot unconditionally say: &#x27;it is impossible&#x27;.&quot; On 22 December 1938, Hahn sent a manuscript to &quot;Naturwissenschaften&quot; reporting their radiochemical results, which were published on 6 January 1939. On 27 December, Hahn telephoned the editor of the &quot;Naturwissenschaften&quot; and requested an addition to the article, speculating that some platinum group elements previously observed in irradiated uranium, which were originally interpreted as transuranium elements, could in fact be technetium (then called &quot;masurium&quot;), mistakenly believing that the atomic masses had to add up rather than the atomic numbers. By January 1939, he was sufficiently convinced of the formation of light elements that he published a new revision of the article, retracting former claims of observing transuranic elements and neighbours of uranium.

As a chemist, Hahn was reluctant to propose a revolutionary discovery in physics, but Meitner and Frisch worked out a theoretical interpretation of nuclear fission, a term appropriated by Frisch from biology. In January and February they published two articles discussing and experimentally confirming their theory. In their second publication on nuclear fission, Hahn and Strassmann used the term &quot;Uranspaltung&quot; (uranium fission) for the first time, and predicted the existence and liberation of additional neutrons during the fission process, opening up the possibility of a nuclear chain reaction. This was shown to be the case by Frédéric Joliot and his team in March 1939. Edwin McMillan and Philip Abelson used the cyclotron at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory to bombard uranium with neutrons, and were able to identify an isotope with a 23-minute half-life that was the daughter of uranium-239, and therefore the real element 93, which they named neptunium. &quot;There goes a Nobel Prize&quot;, Hahn remarked.

At the KWIC, Kurt Starke independently produced element 93, using only the weak neutron sources available there. Hahn and Strassmann then began researching its chemical properties. They knew that it should decay into the real element 94, which according to the latest version of the liquid drop model of the nucleus propounded by Bohr and John Archibald Wheeler, would be even more fissile than uranium-235, but were unable to detect its radioactive decay. They concluded that it must have an extremely long half-life, perhaps millions of years. Part of the problem was that they still believed that element 94 was a platinoid, which confounded their attempts at chemical separation.

===World War II===

On 24 April 1939, Paul Harteck and his assistant, Wilhelm Groth, had written to the Armed Forces High Command (OKW), alerting it to the possibility of the development of an atomic bomb. In response, the Army Weapons Branch (HWA) had established a physics section under the nuclear physicist Kurt Diebner. After World War II broke out on 1 September 1939, the HWA moved to control the German nuclear weapons program. From then on, Hahn participated in a ceaseless series of meetings related to the project. After the Director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics, Peter Debye, left for the United States in 1940 and never returned, Diebner was installed as its director. Hahn reported to the HWA on the progress of his research. Together with his assistants, Hans-Joachim Born, Siegfried Flügge, Hans Götte, Walter Seelmann-Eggebert and Strassmann, he catalogued about one hundred fission product isotopes. They also investigated means of isotope separation; the chemistry of element 93; and methods for purifying uranium oxides and salts.

On the night of 15 February 1944, the KWIC building was struck by a bomb. Hahn&#x27;s office was destroyed, along with his correspondence with Rutherford and other researchers, and many of his personal possessions. The office was the intended target of the raid, which had been ordered by Brigadier General Leslie Groves, the director of the Manhattan Project, in the hope of disrupting the German uranium project. Albert Speer, the Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production, arranged for the institute to move to Tailfingen in southern Germany. All work in Berlin ceased by July. Hahn and his family moved to the house of a textile manufacturer there.

Life became precarious for those married to Jewish women. One was Philipp Hoernes, a chemist working for Auergesellschaft, the firm that mined the uranium ore used by the project. After the firm let him go in 1944, Hoernes faced being conscripted for forced labour. At the age of 60, it was doubtful that he would survive. Hahn and Nikolaus Riehl arranged for Hoernes to work at the KWIC, claiming that his work was essential to the uranium project and that uranium was highly toxic, making it hard to find people to work with it. Hahn was aware that uranium ore was fairly safe in the laboratory, although not so much for the 2,000 female slave labourers from the Sachsenhausen concentration camp who mined it in Oranienburg. Another physicist with a Jewish wife was . Hahn certified that his work was important to the war effort, and that his wife Maria, who had a doctorate in physics, was required as his assistant. After he died on 19 September 1944, Maria faced being sent to a concentration camp. Hahn mounted a lobbying campaign to get her released, but to no avail, and she was sent to the Theresienstadt Ghetto in January 1945. She survived the war, and was reunited with her daughters in England after the war.

==Post-war==
===Incarceration in Farm Hall===

On 25 April 1945, an armoured task force from the British/American Alsos Mission arrived in Tailfingen, and surrounded the KWIC. Hahn was informed that he was under arrest. When asked about reports related to his secret work on uranium, Hahn replied: &quot;I have them all here&quot;, and handed over 150 reports. He was taken to Hechingen, where he joined Erich Bagge, Horst Korsching, Max von Laue, Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker and Karl Wirtz. They were then taken to a dilapidated château in Versailles, where they heard about the signing of the German Instrument of Surrender at Reims on 7 May. Over the following days they were joined by Kurt Diebner, Walther Gerlach, Paul Harteck and Werner Heisenberg. All were physicists except Hahn and Harteck, who were chemists, and all had worked on the German nuclear weapons program except von Laue, although he was well aware of it.
They were relocated to the Château de Facqueval in Modave, Belgium, where Hahn used the time to work on his memoirs and then, on 3 July, were flown to England. They arrived at Farm Hall, Godmanchester, near Cambridge, on 3 July. While they were there, all their conversations, indoors and out, were covertly recorded with hidden microphones. They were given British newspapers, which Hahn was able to read. He was greatly disturbed by their reports of the Potsdam Conference, where German territory was ceded to Poland and the USSR. In August 1945, the German scientists were informed of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima. Up to this point the scientists, except Harteck, were completely certain that their project was further advanced than any in other countries, and the Alsos Mission&#x27;s chief scientist, Samuel Goudsmit, did nothing to correct this impression. Now the reason for their incarceration in Farm Hall suddenly became apparent.

As they recovered from the shock of the announcement, they began to rationalise what had happened. Hahn noted that he was glad that they had not succeeded, and von Weizsäcker suggested that they should claim that they had not wanted to. They drafted a memorandum on the project, noting that fission was discovered by Hahn and Strassmann. The revelation that Nagasaki had been destroyed by a plutonium bomb came as another shock, as it meant that the Allies had not only been able to successfully conduct uranium enrichment, but had mastered nuclear reactor technology as well. The memorandum became the first draft of a postwar apologia. The idea that Germany had lost the war because its scientists were morally superior was as outrageous as it was unbelievable, but struck a chord in postwar German academia. It infuriated Goudsmit, whose parents had been murdered in Auschwitz. On 3 January 1946, exactly six months after they had arrived at Farm Hall, the group was allowed to return to Germany. Hahn, Heisenberg, von Laue and von Weizsäcker were brought to Göttingen, which was controlled by the British occupation authorities.

===The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1944===
On 16 November 1945 the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences announced that Hahn had been awarded the 1944 Nobel Prize in Chemistry &quot;for his discovery of the fission of heavy atomic nuclei.&quot; Hahn was still at Farm Hall when the announcement was made; thus, his whereabouts were a secret, and it was impossible for the Nobel committee to send him a congratulatory telegram. Instead, he learned about his award on 18 November through the &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot;. His fellow interned scientists celebrated his award by giving speeches, making jokes, and composing songs.

Hahn had been nominated for the chemistry and the physics Nobel prizes many times even before the discovery of nuclear fission. Several more followed for the discovery of fission. The Nobel prize nominations were vetted by committees of five, one for each award. Although Hahn and Meitner received nominations for physics, radioactivity and radioactive elements had traditionally been seen as the domain of chemistry, and so the Nobel Committee for Chemistry evaluated the nominations. The committee received reports from Theodor Svedberg and . These chemists were impressed by Hahn&#x27;s work, but felt that of Meitner and Frisch was not extraordinary, and did not understand why the physics community regarded their work as seminal. As for Strassmann, although his name was on the papers, there was a long-standing policy of conferring awards on the most senior scientist in a collaboration. The committee therefore recommended that Hahn alone be given the chemistry prize.
Under Nazi rule, Germans had been forbidden to accept Nobel prizes after the Nobel Peace Prize had been awarded to Carl von Ossietzky in 1936. The Nobel Committee for Chemistry&#x27;s recommendation was therefore rejected by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1944, which also decided to defer the award for one year. When the Academy reconsidered the award in September 1945, the war was over and thus the German boycott had ended. Also, the chemistry committee had now become more cautious, as it was apparent that much research had taken place in the United States in secret, and suggested deferring for another year, but the Academy was swayed by Göran Liljestrand, who argued that it was important for the Academy to assert its independence from the Allies of World War II, and award the prize to a German, as it had done after World War I when it had awarded it to Fritz Haber. Hahn therefore became the sole recipient of the 1944 Nobel Prize for Chemistry.

The invitation to attend the Nobel festivities was transmitted via the British Embassy in Stockholm. On 4 December, Hahn was persuaded by two of his Alsos captors, American Lieutenant Colonel Horace K. Calvert and British Lieutenant Commander Eric Welsh, to write a letter to the Nobel committee accepting the prize but stating that he would not be able to attend the award ceremony on 10 December since his captors would not allow him to leave Farm Hall. When Hahn protested, Welsh reminded him that Germany had lost the war. Under the Nobel Foundation statutes, Hahn had six months to deliver the Nobel Prize lecture, and until 1 October 1946 to cash the 150,000 Swedish krona cheque.

Hahn was repatriated from Farm Hall on 3 January 1946, but it soon became apparent that difficulties obtaining permission to travel from the British government meant that he would be unable to travel to Sweden before December 1946. Accordingly, the Academy of Sciences and the Nobel Foundation obtained an extension from the Swedish government. Hahn attended the year after he was awarded the prize. On 10 December 1946, the anniversary of the death of Alfred Nobel, King Gustav V of Sweden presented him with his Nobel Prize medal and diploma. Hahn gave 10,000 krona of his prize to Strassmann, who refused to use it.

===Founder and President of the Max Planck Society===

The suicide of Albert Vögler on 14 April 1945 left the KWS without a president. The British chemist Bertie Blount was placed in charge of its affairs while the Allies decided what to do with it, and he decided to install Max Planck as an interim president. Now aged 87, Planck was in the small town of Rogätz, in an area that the Americans were preparing to hand over to the Soviet Union. The Dutch astronomer Gerard Kuiper from the Alsos Mission fetched Planck in a jeep and brought him to Göttingen on 16 May. Planck wrote to Hahn, who was still in captivity in England, on 25 July, and informed Hahn that the directors of the KWS had voted to make him the next president, and asked if he would accept the position. Hahn did not receive the letter until September, and did not think he was a good choice, as he regarded himself as a poor negotiator, but his colleagues persuaded him to accept. After his return to Germany, he assumed the office on 1 April 1946.

Allied Control Council Law No. 25 on the control of scientific research dated 29 April 1946 restricted German scientists to conducting basic research only, and on 11 July the Allied Control Council dissolved the KWS on the insistence of the Americans, who considered that it had been too close to the national socialist regime, and was a threat to world peace. However, the British, who had voted against the dissolution, were more sympathetic, and offered to let the Kaiser Wilhelm Society continue in the British Zone, on one condition: that the name be changed. Hahn and Heisenberg were distraught at this prospect. To them it was an international brand that represented political independence and scientific research of the highest order. Hahn noted that it had been suggested that the name be changed during the Weimar Republic, but the Social Democratic Party of Germany had been persuaded not to. To Hahn, the name represented the good old days of the German Empire, however authoritarian and undemocratic it was, before the hated Weimar Republic. Heisenberg asked Niels Bohr for support, but Bohr recommended that the name be changed. Lise Meitner wrote to Hahn, explaining that:

In September 1946, a new Max Planck Society was established at Bad Driburg in the British Zone. On 26 February 1948, after the US and British zones were fused into Bizonia, it was dissolved to make way for the Max Planck Society, with Hahn as the founding president. It took over the 29 institutes of the former Kaiser Wilhelm Society that were located in the British and American zones. When the Federal Republic of Germany (or West-Germany) was formed in 1949, the five institutes located in the French zone joined them. The KWIC, now under Strassmann, built and renovated new accommodation in Mainz, but work proceeded slowly, and it did not relocate from Tailfingen until 1949. Hahn&#x27;s insistence on retaining Telschow as the general secretary nearly caused a rebellion against his presidency. In his efforts to rebuild German science, Hahn was generous in issuing &quot;persilschein&quot; (whitewash certificates), writing one for Gottfried von Droste, who had joined the &quot;Sturmabteilung&quot; (SA) in 1933 and the NSDAP in 1937, and wore his SA uniform at the KWIC, and for Heinrich Hörlein and Fritz ter Meer from IG Farben. Hahn served as president of the Max Planck Society until 1960, and succeeded in regaining the renown that had once been enjoyed by the Kaiser Wilhelm Society. New institutes were founded and old ones expanded, the budget rose from 12 million Deutsche Marks in 1949 (equivalent to € million in ) to 47 million in 1960 (equivalent to € million in ), and the workforce grew from 1,400 to nearly 3,000.

===Spokesman for social responsibility===
After the Second World War, Hahn came out strongly against the use of nuclear energy for military purposes. He saw the application of his scientific discoveries to such ends as a misuse, or even a crime. The historian Lawrence Badash wrote: &quot;His wartime recognition of the perversion of science for the construction of weapons, and his postwar activity in planning the direction of his country&#x27;s scientific endeavours now inclined him increasingly toward being a spokesman for social responsibility.&quot;

In early 1954, he wrote the article &quot;Cobalt 60 – Danger or Blessing for Mankind?&quot;, about the misuse of atomic energy, which was widely reprinted and transmitted in the radio in Germany, Norway, Austria, and Denmark, and in an English version worldwide via the BBC. The international reaction was encouraging. The following year he initiated and organized the Mainau Declaration of 1955, in which he and other international Nobel Prize-winners called attention to the dangers of atomic weapons and urgently warned the nations of the world against the use of &quot;force as a final resort&quot;, and which was issued a week after the similar Russell-Einstein Manifesto. In 1956, Hahn repeated his appeal with the signature of 52 of his Nobel colleagues from all parts of the world.

Hahn was also instrumental in and one of the authors of the Göttingen Manifesto of 13 April 1957, in which, together with 17 leading German atomic scientists, he protested against a proposed nuclear arming of the West German armed forces (&quot;Bundeswehr&quot;). This resulted in Hahn receiving an invitation to meet the Chancellor of Germany, Konrad Adenauer and other senior officials, including the Defense Minister, Franz Josef Strauss, and Generals Hans Speidel and Adolf Heusinger (who had both been generals in the Nazi era). The two generals argued that the &quot;Bundeswehr&quot; needed nuclear weapons, and Adenauer accepted their advice. A communiqué was drafted that said that the Federal Republic did not manufacture nuclear weapons, and would not ask its scientists to do so. Instead, the German forces were equipped with US nuclear weapons.

On 13 November 1957, in the &quot;Konzerthaus&quot; (Concert Hall) in Vienna, Hahn warned of the &quot;dangers of A- and H-bomb-experiments&quot;, and declared that &quot;today war is no means of politics anymore – it will only destroy all countries in the world&quot;. His highly acclaimed speech was transmitted internationally by the Austrian radio, Österreichischer Rundfunk (ÖR). On 28 December 1957, Hahn repeated his appeal in an English translation for the Bulgarian Radio in Sofia, which was broadcast in all Warsaw pact states.

In 1959 Hahn co-founded in Berlin the Federation of German Scientists (VDW), a non-governmental organisation, which has been committed to the ideal of responsible science. The members of the Federation feel committed to taking into consideration the possible military, political, and economic implications and possibilities of atomic misuse when carrying out their scientific research and teaching. With the results of its interdisciplinary work the VDW not only addresses the general public, but also the decision-makers at all levels of politics and society. Right up to his death, Otto Hahn never tired of warning of the dangers of the nuclear arms race between the great powers and of the radioactive contamination of the planet. 

Lawrence Badash wrote:
He was one of the signatories of the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution. As a result, for the first time in human history, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt a Constitution for the Federation of Earth.

==Private life==

In June 1911, while attending a conference in Stettin, Hahn met (1887–1968), a student at the Royal School of Art in Berlin. They saw each other again in Berlin, and became engaged in November 1912. On 22 March 1913 the couple were married in Stettin, where Edith&#x27;s father, Paul Ferdinand Junghans, was a high-ranking law officer and President of the City Parliament until his death in 1915. After a honeymoon at Punta San Vigilio on Lake Garda in Italy, they visited Vienna, and then Budapest, where they stayed with George de Hevesy. 

They had one child, , who was born on 9 April 1922. Hanno enlisted in the army in 1942, and served on the Eastern Front in World War II as a panzer commander. He lost an arm in combat. After the war he became an art historian and architectural researcher (at the Hertziana in Rome), known for his discoveries in the early Cistercian architecture of the 12th century. In August 1960, while on a study trip in France, Hanno died in a car accident, together with his wife and assistant Ilse Hahn née Pletz. They left a fourteen-year-old son, .

In 1990, the for outstanding contributions to Italian art history was established in memory of Hanno and Ilse Hahn to support young and talented art historians. It is awarded biennially by the Bibliotheca Hertziana – Max Planck Institute for Art History in Rome.
==Death and Legacy==
===Death===

Hahn was shot in the back in October 1951 by a disgruntled inventor who wished to highlight the neglect of his ideas by mainstream scientists. Hahn was injured in a motor vehicle accident in 1952, and had a minor heart attack the following year. In 1962, he published a book, &quot;Vom Radiothor zur Uranspaltung&quot; (&quot;From the radiothor to Uranium fission&quot;). It was released in English in 1966 with the title &quot;Otto Hahn: A Scientific Autobiography&quot;, with an introduction by Glenn Seaborg. The success of this book may have prompted him to write another, fuller autobiography, &quot;Otto Hahn. Mein Leben&quot;, but before it could be published, he fractured one of the vertebrae in his neck while getting out of a car. He gradually became weaker and died in Göttingen on 28 July 1968. His wife Edith survived him by only a fortnight. He was buried in the Stadtfriedhof in Göttingen.
The day after his death, the Max Planck Society published the following obituary notice:

Fritz Strassmann wrote:

Otto Robert Frisch recalled:

The Royal Society in London wrote in an obituary:
===Legacy===
Hahn is considered the father of radiochemistry and nuclear chemistry. He is chiefly remembered for the discovery of nuclear fission, the basis of nuclear power and nuclear weapons. Glenn Seaborg wrote that &quot;it has been given to very few men to make contributions to science and to humanity of the magnitude of those made by Otto Hahn&quot;. His award of the 1944 Nobel Prize for Chemistry was in recognition of this discovery but was attainted by sexism and antisemitism in Meitner being overlooked. Conflict between chemists and physicists and the theorists and experimentalists also played a role. Hahn&#x27;s efforts to rehabilitate the image of Germany after the war also became problematic. He was no Nazi, but tolerated those who were. He was not culpable, but was complicit. In a letter to James Franck dated 22 February 1946, Meitner wrote:

===Honours and awards===
During his lifetime Hahn was awarded orders, medals, scientific prizes, and fellowships of Academies, Societies, and Institutions from all over the world. At the end of 1999, the German news magazine &quot;Focus&quot; published an inquiry of 500 leading natural scientists, engineers, and physicians about the most important scientists of the 20th century. In this poll Hahn was elected third (with 81 points), after the theoretical physicists Albert Einstein and Max Planck, and thus the most significant chemist of his time.

As well as the Nobel Prize in Chemistry (1944), Hahn was awarded:
* the Emil Fischer Medal of the Society of German Chemists (1922),
* the Cannizaro Prize of the Royal Academy of Science in Rome (1938),
* the Copernicus Prize of the University of Konigsberg (1941),
* the Gothenius Medal of the Akademie der Naturforscher (1943),
* the Max Planck Medal of the German Physical Society, with Lise Meitner (1949),
* the Goethe Medal of the city of Frankfurt-on-the-Main (1949),
* the Golden Paracelsus Medal of the Swiss Chemical Society (1953),
* the Faraday Lectureship Prize with Medal from the Royal Society of Chemistry (1956),
* the Grotius Medal of the Hugo Grotius Foundation (1956),
* the Wilhelm Exner Medal of the Austrian Industry Association (1958),
* the Helmholtz Medal of the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities (1959),
* and the Harnack medal in Gold from the Max Planck Society (1959).
Hahn became the honorary president of the Max Planck Society in 1962.
* He was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (1957).
*His honorary memberships of foreign academies and scientific societies included:
** the Romanian Physical Society in Bucharest,
** the Royal Spanish Society for Chemistry and Physics and the Spanish National Research Council,
** and the Academies in Allahabad, Bangalore, Berlin, Boston, Bucharest, Copenhagen, Göttingen, Halle, Helsinki, Lisbon, Madrid, Mainz, Munich, Rome, Stockholm, the Vatican, and Vienna.

He was an honorary fellow of University College London,
* and an honorary citizen of the cities of Frankfurt am Main and Göttingen in 1959, and of Berlin (1968).
* Hahn was made an Officer of the &quot;Ordre National de la Légion d&#x27;Honneur&quot; of France (1959),
* and was awarded the Grand Cross First Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany (1959).
* In 1966, US President Lyndon B. Johnson and the United States Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) awarded Hahn, Lise Meitner and Fritz Strassmann the Enrico Fermi Award. The diploma for Hahn bore the words: &quot;For pioneering research in the naturally occurring radioactivities and extensive experimental studies culminating in the discovery of fission.&quot;
* He received honorary doctorates from
** the University of Gottingen,
** the Technische Universität Darmstadt,
** the Goethe University Frankfurt in 1949,
** and the University of Cambridge in 1957.

Objects named after Hahn include:
* NS &quot;Otto Hahn&quot;, the only European nuclear-powered civilian ship (1964);
* a crater on the Moon (shared with his namesake Friedrich von Hahn);
* and the asteroid &quot;19126 Ottohahn&quot;;
* the Otto Hahn Prize of both the German Chemical and Physical Societies and the city of Frankfurt/Main;
* the Otto Hahn Medal – An Incentive for Young Scientists – and the Otto Hahn Award of the Max Planck Society;
* and the Otto Hahn Peace Medal in Gold of the United Nations Association of Germany (DGVN) in Berlin (1988).

Proposals were made at various times, first in 1971 by American chemists, that the newly synthesised element 105 should be named &quot;hahnium&quot; in Hahn&#x27;s honour, but in 1997 the IUPAC named it dubnium, after the Russian research centre in Dubna. In 1992 element 108 was discovered by a German research team, and they proposed the name hassium (after Hesse). In spite of the long-standing convention to give the discoverer the right to suggest a name, a 1994 IUPAC committee recommended that it be named &quot;hahnium&quot;. After protests from the German discoverers, the name hassium (Hs) was adopted internationally in 1997.

==See also==
*List of peace activists

==Publications in English==
*
*

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* Otto Hahn – winner of the Enrico Fermi Award 1966 U.S Government, Department of Energy
* including the Nobel Lecture on 13 December 1946 &quot;From the Natural Transmutations of Uranium to Its Artificial Fission&quot;
* Award Ceremony Speech honoring Otto Hahn by Professor Arne Westgren, Stockholm.
* Otto Hahn and the Discovery of Nuclear Fission BR, 2008
* Otto Hahn – Discoverer of Nuclear Fission Author: Dr. Anne Hardy (Pro-Physik, 2004)
* Otto Hahn (1879–1968) – The discovery of fission Visit Berlin, 2011.
* Otto Hahn – Discoverer of nuclear fission
* Otto Hahn – Founder of the Atomic Age Author: Dr Edmund Neubauer (Translation: Brigitte Hippmann) – Website of the Otto Hahn Gymnasium (OHG), 2007.
* Otto Hahn Award
* Otto Hahn Peace Medal in Gold Website of the United Nations Association of Germany (DGVN) in Berlin
* Otto Hahn Medal
* The history of the Hahn Meitner Institute (HMI) Helmholtz-Zentrum, Berlin 2011.
* Otto Hahn heads a delegation to Israel 1959 Website of the Max Planck Society, 2011.
* Biography Otto Hahn 1879–1968
* Otto Hahn – A Life for Science, Humanity and Peace Hiroshima University Peace Lecture, held by Dietrich Hahn, 2 October 2013.
* Otto Hahn – Discoverer of nuclear fission, grandfather of the Atombomb GMX, Switzerland, 17 December 2013. Author: Marinus Brandl.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q57065" start="0" end="9" title="Otto Hahn" label="Otto Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="55" end="62" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q750955" start="97" end="111" title="radiochemistry" label="radiochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q243545" start="148" end="165" title="nuclear chemistry" label="nuclear chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="184" end="199" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="220" end="235" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="241" end="255" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189" start="267" end="279" title="Lise Meitner" label="Lise Meitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q377262" start="328" end="334" title="isotopes of radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895097" start="336" end="343" title="Isotopes of thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498986" start="345" end="357" title="isotopes of protactinium" label="protactinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369686" start="362" end="369" title="isotopes of uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588960" start="407" end="420" title="atomic recoil" label="atomic recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="425" end="442" title="nuclear isomerism" label="nuclear isomerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499814" start="458" end="483" title="rubidium–strontium dating" label="rubidium–strontium dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q60859" start="512" end="528" title="Fritz Strassmann" label="Fritz Strassmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344449" start="529" end="555" title="Discovery of nuclear fission" label="discovered nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="599" end="623" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="644" end="665" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q950726" start="729" end="743" title="William Ramsay" label="William Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="747" end="772" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="780" end="797" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="816" end="833" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q70554" start="921" end="933" title="Emil Fischer" label="Emil Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="1021" end="1041" title="University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="1078" end="1090" title="habilitation" label="habilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="1124" end="1136" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q708038" start="1221" end="1259" title="Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry" label="Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1500" end="1511" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q661908" start="1535" end="1543" title="Landwehr" label="Landwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="1566" end="1579" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="1594" end="1610" title="chemical warfare" label="chemical warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q57075" start="1626" end="1637" title="Fritz Haber" label="Fritz Haber"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="1654" end="1661" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q659745" start="1666" end="1673" title="Italian front (World War I)" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="1694" end="1704" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q853976" start="1737" end="1758" title="First Battle of Ypres" label="First Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2065" end="2071" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="2080" end="2099" title="The Holocaust" label="persecution of Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="2107" end="2117" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2235" end="2247" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q700162" start="2266" end="2296" title="German nuclear weapons program" label="German nuclear weapons program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094166" start="2314" end="2329" title="fission product" label="fission product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396781" start="2418" end="2427" title="Farm Hall" label="Farm Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q708038" start="2537" end="2590" title="Kaiser Wilhelm Society" label="Kaiser Wilhelm Society for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q158085" start="2651" end="2669" title="Max Planck Society" label="Max Planck Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701024" start="2725" end="2756" title="Federation of German Scientists" label="Federation of German Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="2950" end="2962" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="3016" end="3033" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q664283" start="3111" end="3118" title="glazier" label="glazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="3796" end="3814" title="industrial chemist" label="industrial chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q708387" start="3850" end="3856" title="Abitur" label="Abitur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="3884" end="3893" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="3901" end="3922" title="University of Marburg" label="University of Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="3966" end="3973" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="3975" end="3985" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104813" start="4172" end="4242" title="Coburger Convent der akademischen Landsmannschaften und Turnerschaften" label="Coburger Convent der akademischen Landsmannschaften und Turnerschaften"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="4292" end="4312" title="University of Munich" label="University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q57078" start="4347" end="4363" title="Adolf von Baeyer" label="Adolf von Baeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q101499" start="4422" end="4442" title="Karl Andreas Hofmann" label="Karl Andreas Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="4589" end="4606" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11165895" start="4917" end="4926" title="Geheimrat" label="Geheimrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q90591" start="4943" end="4957" title="Theodor Zincke" label="Theodor Zincke"/>
<link wikidata="Q76604" start="5225" end="5237" title="Hans Fischer" label="Hans Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="5455" end="5480" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q950726" start="5508" end="5522" title="William Ramsay" label="William Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609" start="5564" end="5573" title="noble gas" label="noble gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q750955" start="5597" end="5611" title="radiochemistry" label="radiochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="5699" end="5705" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895097" start="5749" end="5761" title="radiothorium" label="radiothorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="5821" end="5832" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="5861" end="5868" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="5890" end="5897" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q102830" start="5989" end="6004" title="Frederick Soddy" label="Frederick Soddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="6246" end="6259" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="6383" end="6398" title="Daily Telegraph" label="Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193201" start="6468" end="6500" title="Proceedings of the Royal Society" label="Proceedings of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="6887" end="6907" title="University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q70554" start="6925" end="6937" title="Emil Fischer" label="Emil Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="7059" end="7071" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="7252" end="7269" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="7516" end="7533" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q828438" start="7616" end="7632" title="Bertram Boltwood" label="Bertram Boltwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="7784" end="7793" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q133747" start="7799" end="7818" title="William Henry Bragg" label="William Henry Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q21537303" start="7823" end="7838" title="Richard Kleeman" label="Richard Kleeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="7858" end="7873" title="alpha particles" label="alpha particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q979" start="8116" end="8124" title="polonium" label="polonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q130962" start="8844" end="8856" title="electroscope" label="electroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="8879" end="8892" title="beta particle" label="beta particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="8898" end="8908" title="gamma rays" label="gamma rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q77544" start="9208" end="9220" title="Alfred Stock" label="Alfred Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q76033" start="9376" end="9398" title="Friedrich Oskar Giesel" label="Friedrich Oskar Giesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121" start="9418" end="9425" title="emanium" label="emanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q377262" start="9620" end="9631" title="mesothorium" label="mesothorium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9775" end="9786" title="Isotopes of thorium#Thorium-230" label="thorium-230"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="9889" end="9895" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="9900" end="9911" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10422" end="10434" title="Habilitation#Germany" label="habilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q504703" start="10767" end="10777" title="seminar" label="colloquium"/>
<link wikidata="Q61810" start="11249" end="11264" title="Heinrich Rubens" label="Heinrich Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189" start="11379" end="11391" title="Lise Meitner" label="Lise Meitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="11487" end="11507" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q469259" start="11786" end="11800" title="Harriet Brooks" label="Harriet Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="11892" end="11899" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588960" start="12383" end="12401" title="atomic recoil" label="radioactive recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="12518" end="12532" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q112596" start="12597" end="12609" title="Stefan Meyer (physicist)" label="Stefan Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q84955" start="12614" end="12629" title="Egon Schweidler" label="Egon Schweidler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18888805" start="12738" end="12748" title="radium-223" label="radium-223"/>
<link wikidata="Q61745" start="13306" end="13321" title="Walther Gerlach" label="Walther Gerlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q67285" start="13576" end="13600" title="August von Trott zu Solz" label="August von Trott zu Solz"/>
<link wikidata="Q708038" start="13689" end="13727" title="Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry" label="Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q153006" start="13803" end="13828" title="Free University of Berlin" label="Free University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="14098" end="14115" title="Kaiser Wilhelm II" label="Kaiser Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15002" end="15013" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q661908" start="15072" end="15080" title="Landwehr" label="Landwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="15215" end="15225" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q853976" start="15258" end="15279" title="First Battle of Ypres" label="First Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q163730" start="15316" end="15331" title="Christmas truce" label="Christmas truce"/>
<link wikidata="Q57075" start="15432" end="15443" title="Fritz Haber" label="Fritz Haber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15502" end="15514" title="Chlorine#World War I" label="chlorine gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="15547" end="15563" title="Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907" label="Hague Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="15987" end="15995" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q233219" start="16028" end="16044" title="Second Battle of Ypres" label="first gas attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467678" start="16179" end="16196" title="Battle of Bolimów" label="Battle of Bolimów"/>
<link wikidata="Q189090" start="16254" end="16262" title="phosgene" label="phosgene"/>
<link wikidata="Q773403" start="16372" end="16390" title="No Man&amp;#x27;s land" label="No Man&amp;#x27;s land"/>
<link wikidata="Q130847" start="16806" end="16812" title="Battle of Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="16861" end="16874" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q681517" start="17276" end="17288" title="Battles of the Isonzo" label="Isonzo front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639569" start="17376" end="17387" title="minenwerfer" label="minenwerfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q242644" start="17608" end="17627" title="Battle of Caporetto" label="Battle of Caporetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q10310064" start="17847" end="17852" title="mufti (dress)" label="mufti"/>
<link wikidata="Q115174775" start="17923" end="17932" title="arsenical" label="arsenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q213667" start="18007" end="18021" title="Kasimir Fajans" label="Kasimir Fajans"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="18050" end="18061" title="alpha decay" label="alpha decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="18106" end="18120" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121" start="18286" end="18294" title="actinium" label="actinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q9106" start="18470" end="18486" title="Dmitri Mendeleev" label="Dmitri Mendeleev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="18579" end="18588" title="tantalium" label="tantalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402060" start="18624" end="18646" title="Oswald Helmuth Göhring" label="Oswald Helmuth Göhring"/>
<link wikidata="Q407358" start="18732" end="18780" title="radioactive displacement law of Fajans and Soddy" label="radioactive displacement law of Fajans and Soddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428932" start="19145" end="19159" title="refractory metals" label="tantalum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="19165" end="19176" title="pitchblende" label="pitchblende"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19273" end="19288" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938" start="19579" end="19589" title="Leverkusen" label="Leverkusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q477627" start="20066" end="20092" title="Physikalische Zeitschrift" label="Physikalischen Zeitschrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109" start="20592" end="20605" title="protactinium" label="protoactinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q21608032" start="20638" end="20651" title="John Arnold Cranston" label="John Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369686" start="20932" end="20951" title="isotopes of uranium" label="isotopes of uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="21026" end="21037" title="uranium-235" label="uranium-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="21134" end="21158" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371275" start="21218" end="21238" title="Heinrich Jacob Goldschmidt" label="Heinrich Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="21324" end="21329" title="IUPAC" label="IUPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q209569" start="21740" end="21757" title="hydrofluoric acid" label="hydrofluoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q425103" start="21772" end="21785" title="tantalum pentoxide" label="tantalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q416785" start="22983" end="22997" title="uranyl nitrate" label="uranyl nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498986" start="23483" end="23499" title="protactinium-234" label="protactinium-234"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153640" start="23541" end="23552" title="uranium-234" label="uranium-234"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="23622" end="23636" title="nuclear isomer" label="nuclear isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65350" start="23822" end="23851" title="Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker" label="Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q71858" start="24045" end="24060" title="Bernhard Naunyn" label="Bernhard Naunyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="24180" end="24208" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Prussian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="24861" end="24879" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781569" start="24950" end="24972" title="Applied Radiochemistry" label="Applied Radiochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="25059" end="25077" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q217346" start="25081" end="25097" title="Ithaca, New York" label="Ithaca, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q60859" start="25459" end="25475" title="Fritz Strassmann" label="Fritz Strassmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="25564" end="25574" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q314959" start="25834" end="25860" title="Society of German Chemists" label="Society of German Chemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q312526" start="25893" end="25912" title="German Labour Front" label="German Labour Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="26368" end="26375" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112122" start="26382" end="26393" title="Star Weekly" label="Star Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="26445" end="26457" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q457260" start="26476" end="26533" title="Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service" label="Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q106173" start="27306" end="27320" title="Gerhart Jander" label="Gerhart Jander"/>
<link wikidata="Q862034" start="27737" end="27759" title="Rockefeller Foundation" label="Rockefeller Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107947" start="28000" end="28018" title="Herbert Freundlich" label="Herbert Freundlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q103525" start="28705" end="28717" title="Joseph Koeth" label="Joseph Koeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q76606" start="28832" end="28842" title="Carl Bosch" label="Carl Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="28918" end="28927" title="IG Farben" label="IG Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="29429" end="29437" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="29453" end="29461" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321050" start="29503" end="29514" title="rubidium-87" label="rubidium-87"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30041" end="30053" title="Jacob Papish" label="Jacob Papish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325627" start="30250" end="30262" title="strontium-87" label="strontium-87"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499814" start="30579" end="30604" title="Rubidium–strontium dating" label="Rubidium–strontium dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="30672" end="30689" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q80884" start="30747" end="30761" title="James Chadwick" label="James Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="30777" end="30784" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504" start="30794" end="30805" title="Irène Curie" label="Irène Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q150989" start="30810" end="30825" title="Frédéric Joliot" label="Frédéric Joliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q32385" start="30932" end="30953" title="isotopes of phosphorus" label="isotope of phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357356" start="30971" end="30988" title="positron emission" label="positron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="31438" end="31452" title="atomic nucleus" label="atomic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="31498" end="31510" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q106844" start="31988" end="32009" title="transuranium elements" label="transuranium elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q214335" start="32197" end="32215" title="Aristid von Grosse" label="Aristid von Grosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577" start="32573" end="32581" title="actinide" label="actinide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193280" start="32649" end="32664" title="group 6 element" label="group 6 element"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="32676" end="32684" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q737" start="32783" end="32790" title="rhenium" label="rhenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="32795" end="32804" title="platinoid" label="platinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q186720" start="33687" end="33709" title="Zeitschrift für Physik" label="Zeitschrift für Physik"/>
<link wikidata="Q902474" start="33775" end="33793" title="Chemische Berichte" label="Chemische Berichte"/>
<link wikidata="Q751259" start="34225" end="34246" title="neutron cross section" label="neutron cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="34740" end="34749" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112" start="35472" end="35478" title="barium" label="barium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="35619" end="35629" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q93479" start="35644" end="35662" title="Otto Robert Frisch" label="Otto Robert Frisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q324878" start="36311" end="36330" title="Die Naturwissenschaften" label="Naturwissenschaften"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="36562" end="36576" title="platinum group" label="platinum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054" start="36706" end="36716" title="technetium" label="technetium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840065" start="36783" end="36794" title="atomic mass" label="atomic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="36827" end="36840" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="37209" end="37224" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="37648" end="37670" title="nuclear chain reaction" label="nuclear chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q19009" start="37749" end="37763" title="Edwin McMillan" label="Edwin McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q377815" start="37768" end="37782" title="Philip Abelson" label="Philip Abelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q204469" start="37792" end="37801" title="cyclotron" label="cyclotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="37809" end="37838" title="Berkeley Radiation Laboratory" label="Berkeley Radiation Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105" start="38027" end="38036" title="neptunium" label="neptunium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447068" start="38105" end="38116" title="Kurt Starke" label="Kurt Starke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="38313" end="38328" title="plutonium" label="real element 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q206451" start="38375" end="38392" title="liquid drop model" label="liquid drop model"/>
<link wikidata="Q202631" start="38431" end="38453" title="John Archibald Wheeler" label="John Archibald Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="38474" end="38481" title="fissile" label="fissile"/>
<link wikidata="Q113727" start="38815" end="38827" title="Paul Harteck" label="Paul Harteck"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002172" start="38847" end="38860" title="Wilhelm Groth" label="Wilhelm Groth"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="38881" end="38906" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="Armed Forces High Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="38970" end="38981" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q66308" start="39088" end="39100" title="Kurt Diebner" label="Kurt Diebner"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39108" end="39120" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q700162" start="39181" end="39211" title="German nuclear weapons program" label="German nuclear weapons program"/>
<link wikidata="Q103835" start="39367" end="39378" title="Peter Debye" label="Peter Debye"/>
<link wikidata="Q775044" start="39562" end="39579" title="Hans-Joachim Born" label="Hans-Joachim Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q89028" start="39581" end="39597" title="Siegfried Flügge" label="Siegfried Flügge"/>
<link wikidata="Q91383" start="39611" end="39635" title="Walter Seelmann-Eggebert" label="Walter Seelmann-Eggebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094166" start="39684" end="39699" title="fission product" label="fission product"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="40133" end="40150" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q314675" start="40151" end="40164" title="Leslie Groves" label="Leslie Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="40186" end="40203" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="40259" end="40271" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q834877" start="40277" end="40323" title="Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production" label="Reich Minister of Armaments and War Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q538579" start="40363" end="40373" title="Tailfingen" label="Tailfingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q759253" start="40608" end="40624" title="Auergesellschaft" label="Auergesellschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="40738" end="40767" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="conscripted for forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q72983" start="40835" end="40849" title="Nikolaus Riehl" label="Nikolaus Riehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q154498" start="41168" end="41200" title="Sachsenhausen concentration camp" label="Sachsenhausen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q14808" start="41217" end="41228" title="Oranienburg" label="Oranienburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15111616" start="41602" end="41623" title="Theresienstadt Ghetto" label="Theresienstadt Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q662020" start="41840" end="41853" title="Alsos Mission" label="Alsos Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q494529" start="42103" end="42112" title="Hechingen" label="Hechingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q72179" start="42130" end="42141" title="Erich Bagge" label="Erich Bagge"/>
<link wikidata="Q104596" start="42143" end="42158" title="Horst Korsching" label="Horst Korsching"/>
<link wikidata="Q57067" start="42160" end="42172" title="Max von Laue" label="Max von Laue"/>
<link wikidata="Q78094" start="42208" end="42218" title="Karl Wirtz" label="Karl Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="42269" end="42279" title="Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="42323" end="42353" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="German Instrument of Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="42357" end="42362" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="42465" end="42482" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q710237" start="42707" end="42713" title="Modave" label="Modave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396781" start="42832" end="42841" title="Farm Hall" label="Farm Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533868" start="42843" end="42856" title="Godmanchester" label="Godmanchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="42863" end="42872" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="43112" end="43130" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="43248" end="43275" title="atomic bombing of Hiroshima" label="atomic bombing of Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q560839" start="43465" end="43480" title="Samuel Goudsmit" label="Samuel Goudsmit"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="44105" end="44123" title="uranium enrichment" label="uranium enrichment"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="44142" end="44157" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="44471" end="44480" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="44663" end="44672" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="44799" end="44832" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7045626" start="45784" end="45813" title="Nobel Committee for Chemistry" label="Nobel Committee for Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q186391" start="45877" end="45893" title="Theodor Svedberg" label="Theodor Svedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="46409" end="46426" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q76358" start="46447" end="46465" title="Carl von Ossietzky" label="Carl von Ossietzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q361802" start="46989" end="47006" title="Göran Liljestrand" label="Göran Liljestrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="47093" end="47115" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544459" start="47476" end="47494" title="Lieutenant colonel (United States)" label="Lieutenant Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832151" start="47525" end="47545" title="Lieutenant commander (Royal Navy)" label="Lieutenant Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387727" start="47546" end="47556" title="Eric Welsh" label="Eric Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q122922" start="47968" end="47981" title="Swedish krona" label="Swedish krona"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810" start="48444" end="48456" title="Alfred Nobel" label="Alfred Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q52890" start="48463" end="48481" title="Gustav V of Sweden" label="Gustav V of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q91173" start="48681" end="48694" title="Albert Vögler" label="Albert Vögler"/>
<link wikidata="Q555036" start="48968" end="48974" title="Rogätz" label="Rogätz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="49041" end="49053" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q192948" start="49076" end="49089" title="Gerard Kuiper" label="Gerard Kuiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="49631" end="49653" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415901" start="50138" end="50150" title="British Zone" label="British Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="50448" end="50463" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="50473" end="50507" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="50590" end="50603" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q242195" start="50883" end="50894" title="Bad Driburg" label="Bad Driburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q693911" start="50984" end="50991" title="Bizonia" label="Bizonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158085" start="51030" end="51048" title="Max Planck Society" label="Max Planck Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="51217" end="51244" title="Federal Republic of Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="51416" end="51421" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376192" start="51699" end="51711" title="persilschein" label="persilschein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588040" start="51760" end="51780" title="Gottfried von Droste" label="Gottfried von Droste"/>
<link wikidata="Q150793" start="51807" end="51821" title="Sturmabteilung" label="Sturmabteilung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597689" start="51909" end="51925" title="Heinrich Hörlein" label="Heinrich Hörlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q90996" start="51930" end="51944" title="Fritz ter Meer" label="Fritz ter Meer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="52203" end="52216" title="Deutsche Mark" label="Deutsche Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q80117141" start="52621" end="52636" title="Lawrence Badash" label="Lawrence Badash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163489" start="53289" end="53307" title="Mainau Declaration" label="Mainau Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q331878" start="53570" end="53596" title="Russell-Einstein Manifesto" label="Russell-Einstein Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767087" start="53771" end="53790" title="Göttinger Manifest" label="Göttingen Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q56010" start="53956" end="53966" title="Bundeswehr" label="Bundeswehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="54033" end="54054" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="54056" end="54071" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44620" start="54132" end="54151" title="Franz Josef Strauss" label="Franz Josef Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q61638" start="54166" end="54178" title="Hans Speidel" label="Hans Speidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60337" start="54183" end="54198" title="Adolf Heusinger" label="Adolf Heusinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="54639" end="54645" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q262386" start="54922" end="54947" title="Österreichischer Rundfunk" label="Österreichischer Rundfunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="55053" end="55058" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="55087" end="55098" title="Warsaw pact" label="Warsaw pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701024" start="55146" end="55177" title="Federation of German Scientists" label="Federation of German Scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q550452" start="55747" end="55764" title="nuclear arms race" label="nuclear arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q817114" start="55801" end="55826" title="radioactive contamination" label="radioactive contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q120735527" start="55953" end="55971" title="world constitution" label="world constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q120401897" start="56025" end="56051" title="World Constituent Assembly" label="World Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q120735527" start="56082" end="56122" title="Constitution for the Federation of Earth" label="Constitution for the Federation of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="56189" end="56196" title="Stettin" label="Stettin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19288614" start="56237" end="56266" title="Royal School of Art in Berlin" label="Royal School of Art in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414" start="56582" end="56592" title="Lake Garda" label="Lake Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q76951" start="56666" end="56682" title="George de Hevesy" label="George de Hevesy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="56792" end="56805" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864605" start="57008" end="57031" title="Cistercian architecture" label="Cistercian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q339759" start="57421" end="57481" title="Bibliotheca Hertziana – Max Planck Institute for Art History" label="Bibliotheca Hertziana – Max Planck Institute for Art History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327123" start="58403" end="58416" title="Stadtfriedhof (Göttingen)" label="Stadtfriedhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q57066" start="59442" end="59454" title="James Franck" label="James Franck"/>
<link wikidata="Q700473" start="59726" end="59731" title="Focus (German magazine)" label="Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="59964" end="59979" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60089" end="60093" title="List of Nobel laureates in Chemistry#1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q70554" start="60120" end="60138" title="Emil Fischer Medal" label="Emil Fischer Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q672420" start="60281" end="60305" title="University of Konigsberg" label="University of Konigsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q543804" start="60343" end="60369" title="Akademie der Naturforscher" label="Akademie der Naturforscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q317038" start="60384" end="60400" title="Max Planck Medal" label="Max Planck Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q819187" start="60408" end="60431" title="German Physical Society" label="German Physical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q675309" start="60465" end="60477" title="Goethe Medal" label="Goethe Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994574" start="60597" end="60622" title="Faraday Lectureship Prize" label="Faraday Lectureship Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q905549" start="60643" end="60669" title="Royal Society of Chemistry" label="Royal Society of Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q700368" start="60743" end="60762" title="Wilhelm Exner Medal" label="Wilhelm Exner Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219989" start="60814" end="60829" title="Helmholtz Medal" label="Helmholtz Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585689" start="60909" end="60922" title="Harnack medal" label="Harnack medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000710" start="61056" end="61091" title="List of Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1957" label="Foreign Member of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024362" start="61292" end="61325" title="Spanish National Research Council" label="Spanish National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="61351" end="61360" title="Allahabad" label="Allahabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355" start="61362" end="61371" title="Bangalore" label="Bangalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="61381" end="61387" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="61389" end="61398" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="61661" end="61667" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="61737" end="61758" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;Honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="61836" end="61885" title="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="61918" end="61935" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q939090" start="61944" end="61982" title="United States Atomic Energy Commission" label="United States Atomic Energy Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q931545" start="62041" end="62059" title="Enrico Fermi Award" label="Enrico Fermi Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="62299" end="62322" title="University of Gottingen" label="University of Gottingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q310695" start="62331" end="62363" title="Technische Universität Darmstadt" label="Technische Universität Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q50662" start="62372" end="62399" title="Goethe University Frankfurt" label="Goethe University Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="62420" end="62443" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q517975" start="62490" end="62514" title="Otto Hahn (ship)" label="NS &amp;quot;Otto Hahn&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473097" start="62576" end="62594" title="Hahn (crater)" label="crater on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q118014" start="62621" end="62639" title="Friedrich von Hahn" label="Friedrich von Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q742751" start="62667" end="62681" title="19126 Ottohahn" label="19126 Ottohahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q317172" start="62695" end="62710" title="Otto Hahn Prize" label="Otto Hahn Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037956" start="62800" end="62815" title="Otto Hahn Medal" label="Otto Hahn Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q314209" start="62915" end="62936" title="Otto Hahn Peace Medal" label="Otto Hahn Peace Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232" start="63219" end="63226" title="dubnium" label="dubnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q135466" start="63265" end="63270" title="Dubna" label="Dubna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252" start="63361" end="63368" title="hassium" label="hassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="63376" end="63381" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921049" start="63668" end="63691" title="List of peace activists" label="List of peace activists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46826" wikidata="Q208290" url="?curid=46826" title="Windsor">
<text>Windsor may refer to:
==Places==
*Detroit–Windsor, Michigan-Ontario, USA-Canada, North America; a cross-border metropolitan region

===Australia===
====New South Wales====
*Windsor, New South Wales
** Municipality of Windsor, a former local government area
====Queensland====
*Windsor, Queensland, a suburb of Brisbane, Queensland
**Shire of Windsor, a former local government authority around Windsor, Queensland
**Town of Windsor, a former local government authority around Windsor, Queensland
*Windsor Tablelands, a series of plateaus in Far North Queensland
====South Australia====
*Windsor, South Australia, a small town in the northern Adelaide Plains
*Windsor Gardens, South Australia, a suburb of Adelaide
====Victoria====
*Windsor, Victoria, a suburb of Melbourne
**Windsor railway station, Melbourne

===Canada===
*Grand Falls-Windsor, Newfoundland and Labrador
*Windsor, Nova Scotia
*Windsor, Ontario; in Essex County
**Windsor (Ontario provincial electoral district)
*Windsor-Essex, Essex County, Ontario; a metropolitan region
*Windsor, Quebec

===New Zealand===
*Windsor, Invercargill, suburb of Invercargill
*Windsor, North Otago, a township in North Otago

===United Kingdom===
*Windsor, Berkshire, a town near London
**Windsor Castle, Windsor, Berkshire
**Windsor Great Park
**Windsor (UK Parliament constituency), the constituency centred on this town
**Old Windsor, a village near Windsor
*Windsor, Belfast, a suburb
*Windsor, Cornwall, a hamlet
*Windsor, Lincolnshire, a hamlet

===United States===
*Windsor, California
*Windsor, Colorado
*Windsor, Connecticut
*Windsor Locks, Connecticut
**Windsor Locks station
*Windsor, Alachua County, Florida
*Windsor, Indian River County, Florida
*Windsor, Georgia
*Windsor, Mercer County, Illinois
*Windsor, Shelby County, Illinois
*Windsor, Indiana
*Windsor, Kentucky
*Windsor, Maine
*Windsor, Massachusetts
*Windsor, Missouri
*Windsor, New Hampshire
*Windsor, New Jersey
*Windsor, New York, a town
**Windsor (village), New York, within the town
*Windsor, North Carolina
*Windsor, North Dakota
*Windsor, Pennsylvania, a borough in York County
*Windsor, South Carolina
*Windsor, Vermont, a town
**Windsor (CDP), Vermont, a census-designated place in the town
*Windsor County, Vermont
*Windsor, Virginia
*Windsor Heights, West Virginia
*Windsor, Wisconsin

==People==
*House of Windsor, the house or dynasty of the present British Royal Family
*Windsor (surname), including a list of people with the name
*Windsor Davies, Welsh actor

==Title==
* Duke of Windsor, formerly King Edward VIII of the United Kingdom
* Wallis Simpson (Wallis, Duchess of Windsor), wife of the Duke
* Earl of Windsor
* Viscount Windsor
* Baron Windsor

==Design==
*Windsor cap, soft men&#x27;s cap
*Windsor chair, type of chair with a solid wood seat and turned legs
*Windsor glasses, type of eyeglasses with circular eyerims and a thin frame
*Windsor knot, type of knot used to tie a necktie
*Windsor (typeface), a 1905 serif typeface that became popular in the 1970s

==Structures==
*Windsor Castle, one of the homes of the monarch of Britain
*Windsor House (Belfast), a skyscraper in Northern Ireland
*Windsor Hotel (disambiguation), several places
*Windsor Park, a football stadium which is home to Linfield F.C. and the Northern Ireland football team
*Windsor station (disambiguation), stations of the name
*Windsor Theatre (disambiguation), cinemas and theatres with this name
*Windsor Tower (Madrid), a skyscraper in Madrid, Spain, which was destroyed in a fire in 2005
*Windsor (Port Penn, Delaware), a house listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
*Windsor (Cascade, Virginia), a plantation complex listed on the NRHP

== Transport ==
* Windsor (American automobile), a defunct American automobile maker, 1929-1930
* Windsor (British automobile), produced 1924–1927
* Chrysler Windsor, a full-size car produced 1939–1966
* &quot;Windsor&quot; (sloop), a ship wrecked off the coast of Australia in 1816
* HMS &quot;Windsor&quot;, several Royal Navy ships
* HMCS &quot;Windsor&quot;, a Canadian submarine
* USS &quot;Windsor&quot;, two ships by this name serving during WWII
* Vickers Windsor, World War II British heavy bomber
* &quot;Windsor&quot;-class attack transport, a class of US Navy ships used to transport troops and their equipment
* Ford Windsor engine, a small-block V8 engine formerly produced by Ford Motor Company
* MG Windsor EV, an electric car rebadged from Baojun Yunduo

==Other uses==
*&quot;The Windsors&quot;, UK sitcom
*&quot;Windsor&quot; (film), a 2016 film starring Barry Corbin
*Windsor (soil), the unofficial state soil of the U.S. state of Connecticut
*&quot;United States v. Windsor&quot;, a 2013 United States Supreme Court decision concerning same-sex marriage 
*Castle Windsor, part of the Castle Project (an open source application framework)
*Windsor core, a version of the Athlon 64 CPU
*Windsor tea brand

==See also==
*New Windsor (disambiguation)
*Old Windsor
*Windsor Castle (disambiguation)
*Windsor Hills (disambiguation)
*Windsor Historic District (disambiguation)
*Windsor Lake (disambiguation)
*Windsor Park (disambiguation)
*Windsor Road (disambiguation)
*Windsor Township (disambiguation)
*Winsor (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208290" start="0" end="7" title="Windsor" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266069" start="34" end="49" title="Detroit–Windsor" label="Detroit–Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026964" start="173" end="197" title="Windsor, New South Wales" label="Windsor, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080859" start="201" end="224" title="Municipality of Windsor" label="Municipality of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024534" start="277" end="296" title="Windsor, Queensland" label="Windsor, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901914" start="333" end="349" title="Shire of Windsor" label="Shire of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16901914" start="416" end="431" title="Town of Windsor" label="Town of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21906475" start="497" end="515" title="Windsor Tablelands" label="Windsor Tablelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16903564" start="587" end="611" title="Windsor, South Australia" label="Windsor, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024607" start="659" end="674" title="Windsor Gardens, South Australia" label="Windsor Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024538" start="732" end="749" title="Windsor, Victoria" label="Windsor, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024758" start="775" end="809" title="Windsor railway station, Melbourne" label="Windsor railway station, Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542592" start="825" end="871" title="Grand Falls-Windsor" label="Grand Falls-Windsor, Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973829" start="873" end="893" title="Windsor, Nova Scotia" label="Windsor, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182625" start="895" end="911" title="Windsor, Ontario" label="Windsor, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q123018374" start="931" end="978" title="Windsor (Ontario provincial electoral district)" label="Windsor (Ontario provincial electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q953088" start="995" end="1016" title="Essex County, Ontario" label="Essex County, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q139415" start="1041" end="1056" title="Windsor, Quebec" label="Windsor, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467990" start="1077" end="1098" title="Windsor, Invercargill" label="Windsor, Invercargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024527" start="1124" end="1144" title="Windsor, North Otago" label="Windsor, North Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q464955" start="1195" end="1213" title="Windsor, Berkshire" label="Windsor, Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="1236" end="1250" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569306" start="1273" end="1291" title="Windsor Great Park" label="Windsor Great Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q874276" start="1294" end="1330" title="Windsor (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Windsor (UK Parliament constituency)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529554" start="1372" end="1383" title="Old Windsor" label="Old Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852377" start="1409" end="1425" title="Windsor, Belfast" label="Windsor, Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024523" start="1437" end="1454" title="Windsor, Cornwall" label="Windsor, Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575465" start="1466" end="1487" title="Windsor, Lincolnshire" label="Windsor, Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q986852" start="1520" end="1539" title="Windsor, California" label="Windsor, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012003" start="1541" end="1558" title="Windsor, Colorado" label="Windsor, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787206" start="1560" end="1580" title="Windsor, Connecticut" label="Windsor, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q755206" start="1582" end="1608" title="Windsor Locks, Connecticut" label="Windsor Locks, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024652" start="1611" end="1632" title="Windsor Locks station" label="Windsor Locks station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024521" start="1634" end="1666" title="Windsor, Alachua County, Florida" label="Windsor, Alachua County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017521" start="1668" end="1705" title="Windsor, Indian River County, Florida" label="Windsor, Indian River County, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q65052924" start="1707" end="1723" title="Windsor, Georgia" label="Windsor, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548376" start="1725" end="1757" title="Windsor, Mercer County, Illinois" label="Windsor, Mercer County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q575938" start="1759" end="1791" title="Windsor, Shelby County, Illinois" label="Windsor, Shelby County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q22059238" start="1793" end="1809" title="Windsor, Indiana" label="Windsor, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691525" start="1811" end="1828" title="Windsor, Kentucky" label="Windsor, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449701" start="1830" end="1844" title="Windsor, Maine" label="Windsor, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020379" start="1846" end="1868" title="Windsor, Massachusetts" label="Windsor, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q958551" start="1870" end="1887" title="Windsor, Missouri" label="Windsor, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q607379" start="1889" end="1911" title="Windsor, New Hampshire" label="Windsor, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024529" start="1913" end="1932" title="Windsor, New Jersey" label="Windsor, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9096140" start="1934" end="1951" title="Windsor, New York" label="Windsor, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461044" start="1962" end="1989" title="Windsor (village), New York" label="Windsor (village), New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027103" start="2008" end="2031" title="Windsor, North Carolina" label="Windsor, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q22061169" start="2033" end="2054" title="Windsor, North Dakota" label="Windsor, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q589685" start="2056" end="2077" title="Windsor, Pennsylvania" label="Windsor, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240520" start="2105" end="2128" title="Windsor, South Carolina" label="Windsor, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939361" start="2130" end="2146" title="Windsor, Vermont" label="Windsor, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024558" start="2157" end="2179" title="Windsor (CDP), Vermont" label="Windsor (CDP), Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q513994" start="2220" end="2243" title="Windsor County, Vermont" label="Windsor County, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374209" start="2245" end="2262" title="Windsor, Virginia" label="Windsor, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856194" start="2264" end="2294" title="Windsor Heights, West Virginia" label="Windsor Heights, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024546" start="2296" end="2314" title="Windsor, Wisconsin" label="Windsor, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81589" start="2328" end="2344" title="House of Windsor" label="House of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27235787" start="2404" end="2421" title="Windsor (surname)" label="Windsor (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332384" start="2465" end="2479" title="Windsor Davies" label="Windsor Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202334" start="2506" end="2521" title="Duke of Windsor" label="Duke of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="2537" end="2548" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q209417" start="2573" end="2587" title="Wallis Simpson" label="Wallis Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q246281" start="2637" end="2652" title="Earl of Windsor" label="Earl of Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935866" start="2655" end="2671" title="Viscount Windsor" label="Viscount Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326356" start="2674" end="2687" title="Baron Windsor" label="Baron Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15603247" start="2701" end="2712" title="Windsor cap" label="Windsor cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q635443" start="2735" end="2748" title="Windsor chair" label="Windsor chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q105560331" start="2804" end="2819" title="Windsor glasses" label="Windsor glasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446491" start="2880" end="2892" title="Windsor knot" label="Windsor knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805776" start="2930" end="2948" title="Windsor (typeface)" label="Windsor (typeface)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="3022" end="3036" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024640" start="3082" end="3105" title="Windsor House (Belfast)" label="Windsor House (Belfast)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024635" start="3141" end="3171" title="Windsor Hotel (disambiguation)" label="Windsor Hotel (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049601" start="3189" end="3201" title="Windsor Park" label="Windsor Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909092" start="3293" end="3325" title="Windsor station (disambiguation)" label="Windsor station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115751445" start="3349" end="3381" title="Windsor Theatre (disambiguation)" label="Windsor Theatre (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q691888" start="3420" end="3442" title="Windsor Tower (Madrid)" label="Windsor Tower (Madrid)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14685810" start="3514" end="3543" title="Windsor (Port Penn, Delaware)" label="Windsor (Port Penn, Delaware)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17038551" start="3617" end="3644" title="Windsor (Cascade, Virginia)" label="Windsor (Cascade, Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q983973" start="3705" end="3734" title="Windsor (American automobile)" label="Windsor (American automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584025" start="3785" end="3813" title="Windsor (British automobile)" label="Windsor (British automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q828446" start="3836" end="3852" title="Chrysler Windsor" label="Chrysler Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024560" start="3891" end="3918" title="Windsor (sloop)" label="&amp;quot;Windsor&amp;quot; (sloop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5634987" start="3972" end="3995" title="HMS Windsor" label="HMS &amp;quot;Windsor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5630969" start="4024" end="4048" title="HMCS Windsor" label="HMCS &amp;quot;Windsor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7875590" start="4073" end="4096" title="USS Windsor" label="USS &amp;quot;Windsor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q602731" start="4143" end="4158" title="Vickers Windsor" label="Vickers Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024553" start="4196" end="4238" title="Windsor-class attack transport" label="&amp;quot;Windsor&amp;quot;-class attack transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3429736" start="4312" end="4331" title="Ford Windsor engine" label="Ford Windsor engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q120836291" start="4399" end="4412" title="MG Windsor EV" label="MG Windsor EV"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083604" start="4481" end="4493" title="The Windsors" label="The Windsors"/>
<link wikidata="Q27964412" start="4512" end="4538" title="Windsor (film)" label="&amp;quot;Windsor&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024561" start="4575" end="4589" title="Windsor (soil)" label="Windsor (soil)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893525" start="4657" end="4681" title="United States v. Windsor" label="United States v. Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4792" end="4806" title="Castle Project#Features" label="Castle Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q294894" start="4878" end="4887" title="Athlon 64" label="Athlon 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q413282" start="4926" end="4954" title="New Windsor (disambiguation)" label="New Windsor (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529554" start="4956" end="4967" title="Old Windsor" label="Old Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674759" start="4969" end="5000" title="Windsor Castle (disambiguation)" label="Windsor Castle (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024630" start="5002" end="5032" title="Windsor Hills (disambiguation)" label="Windsor Hills (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024634" start="5034" end="5076" title="Windsor Historic District (disambiguation)" label="Windsor Historic District (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22195697" start="5078" end="5107" title="Windsor Lake (disambiguation)" label="Windsor Lake (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024671" start="5109" end="5138" title="Windsor Park (disambiguation)" label="Windsor Park (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111802483" start="5140" end="5169" title="Windsor Road (disambiguation)" label="Windsor Road (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340220" start="5171" end="5204" title="Windsor Township (disambiguation)" label="Windsor Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221421" start="5206" end="5229" title="Winsor (disambiguation)" label="Winsor (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46827" wikidata="Q52651" url="?curid=46827" title="Jesse Owens">
<text>James Cleveland &quot;Jesse&quot; Owens (September 12, 1913 – March 31, 1980) was an American track and field athlete who won four gold medals at the 1936 Olympic Games.

Owens specialized in the sprints and the long jump and was recognized in his lifetime as &quot;perhaps the greatest and most famous athlete in track and field history&quot;. He set three world records and tied another, all in less than an hour, at the 1935 Big Ten track meet in Ann Arbor, Michigan, a feat that has never been equaled and has been called &quot;the greatest 45 minutes ever in sport&quot;.

He achieved international fame at the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin, Germany, by winning four gold medals: 100 meters, long jump, 200 meters, and 4 × 100-meter relay. He was the most successful athlete at the Games and, as a black American man, was credited by &quot;ESPN&quot; with &quot;single-handedly crushing Hitler&#x27;s myth of Aryan supremacy&quot;.

The Jesse Owens Award is USA Track &amp; Field&#x27;s highest accolade for the year&#x27;s best track and field athlete. Owens was ranked by ESPN as the sixth-greatest North American athlete of the 20th century and the highest-ranked in his sport. In 1999, he was on the six-man short-list for the BBC&#x27;s Sports Personality of the Century.

==Early life and education==
Jesse Owens, originally known as &quot;J. C.&quot;, was the youngest of ten children (three girls and seven boys) born to Henry Cleveland Owens [1881–1942] (a sharecropper) and Mary Emma Fitzgerald in Oakville, Alabama, on September 12, 1913. He was the grandson of a slave. At the age of nine, he and his family moved to Cleveland, Ohio for better opportunities as part of the Great Migration (1910–40) when 1.6 million African Americans left the segregated and rural South for the urban and industrial North. When his new teacher asked his name to enter in her roll book, he said &quot;J. C.&quot;, but because of his strong Southern accent, she thought he said &quot;Jesse&quot;. The name stuck, and he was known as Jesse Owens for the rest of his life.

As a youth, Owens took different menial jobs in his spare time: he delivered groceries, loaded freight cars, and worked in a shoe repair shop while his father and older brother worked at a steel mill. During this period, Owens realized that he had a passion for running. Throughout his life, Owens attributed the success of his athletic career to the encouragement of Charles Riley, his junior high school track coach at Fairmount Junior High School. Since Owens worked after school, Riley allowed him to practice before school instead.

Owens and Minnie Ruth Solomon (1915–2001) met at Fairmont Junior High School in Cleveland when he was 15 and she was 13. They dated steadily through high school. Ruth gave birth to their first daughter Gloria in 1932. They married on July 5, 1935, and had two more daughters together: Marlene, born in 1937, and Beverly, born in 1940. They remained married until his death in 1980.

Owens first came to national attention when he was a student of East Technical High School in Cleveland; he equaled the world record of 9.4 seconds in the dash and long-jumped at the 1933 National High School Championship in Chicago.

==Career==
===Ohio State University===
Owens attended the Ohio State University after his father found employment, which ensured that the family could be supported. Affectionately known as the &quot;Buckeye Bullet&quot; and under the coaching of Larry Snyder, Owens won a record eight individual NCAA championships, four each in 1935 and 1936. (The record of four gold medals at the NCAA was equaled only by Xavier Carter in 2006, although his many titles also included relay medals). Though Owens enjoyed athletic success, he had to live off campus with other African-American athletes. When he traveled with the team, Owens was restricted to ordering carry-out or eating at &quot;blacks-only&quot; restaurants. Similarly, he had to stay at &quot;blacks-only&quot; hotels. Owens did not receive a scholarship for his efforts, so he continued to work part-time jobs to pay for school.

===Day of days===
May 25, 1935, is remembered as the day when Jesse Owens established four world records in athletics. On that day, Owens set three world records and tied a fourth in a span of 45 minutes during the Big Ten meet at Ferry Field in Ann Arbor, Michigan. He equaled the world record for the 100-yard dash (9.4 seconds) (not to be confused with the 100-meter dash), and set world records in the long jump (, a world record that would last for 25 years); sprint (20.3 seconds); and 220-yard low hurdles (22.6 seconds, becoming the first to break 23 seconds). Both 220-yard records may also have beaten the metric records for 200 meters (flat and hurdles), which would count as two additional world records from the same performances. In 2005, University of Central Florida professor of sports history Richard C. Crepeau chose these wins on one day as the most impressive athletic achievement since 1850.

===1936 Berlin Summer Olympics===
On December 4, 1935, NAACP Secretary Walter Francis White wrote a letter to Owens, but never sent it. He was trying to dissuade Owens from taking part in the 1936 Summer Olympics in Nazi Germany, arguing that an African American should not promote a racist regime after what his race had suffered at the hands of racists in his own country. In the months prior to the Games, a movement gained momentum in favor of a boycott. Owens was convinced by the NAACP to declare: &quot;If there are minorities in Germany who are being discriminated against, the United States should withdraw from the 1936 Olympics&quot;. Yet he and others eventually took part after Avery Brundage, president of the American Olympic Committee branded them &quot;un-American agitators&quot;.


In 1936, Owens and his United States teammates sailed on the SS &quot;Manhattan&quot; and arrived in Germany to compete at the Summer Olympics in Berlin. Just before the competitions, founder of Adidas athletic shoe company Adi Dassler visited Owens in the Olympic village and persuaded Owens to wear Gebrüder Dassler Schuhfabrik shoes; this was the first sponsorship for a male African American athlete.

On August 3, Owens won the 100 m dash with a time of 10.3 seconds, defeating a teammate and a college friend Ralph Metcalfe by a tenth of a second and defeating Tinus Osendarp of the Netherlands by two-tenths of a second.

On August 4, he won the long jump with a leap of (3¼ inches short of his own world record). He initially credited this achievement to the technical advice that he received from Luz Long, the German competitor whom he defeated, but later admitted that this was not true, as he and Long did not meet until after the competition was over.

On August 5, he won the 200 m sprint with a time of 20.7 seconds, defeating teammate Mack Robinson (the older brother of Jackie Robinson).

On August 9, Owens won his fourth gold medal in the 4 × 100 m sprint relay when head coach Lawson Robertson replaced Jewish-American sprinters Marty Glickman and Sam Stoller with Owens and Ralph Metcalfe, who teamed with Frank Wykoff and Foy Draper to set a world record of 39.8 seconds in the event. Owens had initially protested the last-minute switch, but assistant coach Dean Cromwell said to him, &quot;You&#x27;ll do as you are told.&quot; Owens&#x27;s record-breaking performance of four gold medals was not equaled until Carl Lewis won gold medals in the same events at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. Owens had set the world record in the long jump with a leap of in 1935, the year before the Berlin Olympics, and this record stood for 25 years until it was broken in 1960 by countryman Ralph Boston. Coincidentally, Owens was a spectator at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome when Boston took the gold medal in the long jump.

The long-jump victory is documented, along with many other 1936 events, in the 1938 film &quot;Olympia&quot; by Leni Riefenstahl. On August 1, 1936, Nazi Germany&#x27;s leader Adolf Hitler shook hands with the German victors only and then left the stadium. International Olympic Committee president Henri de Baillet-Latour insisted that Hitler greet every medalist or none at all. Hitler opted for the latter and skipped all further medal presentations.

Owens first competed on Day 2 (August 2), running in the first (10:30 a.m.) and second (3:00 p.m.) qualifying rounds for the 100 meters final; he equaled the Olympic and world record in the first race and broke them in the second race, but the new time was not recognized, because it was wind-assisted. Later the same day, Owens&#x27;s African-American team-mate Cornelius Johnson won gold in the high jump final (which began at 5:00 p.m.) with a new Olympic record of 2.03 meters. Hitler did not publicly congratulate any of the medal winners this time; even so, the communist New York City newspaper the &quot;Daily Worker&quot; claimed Hitler received all the track winners except Johnson and left the stadium as a &quot;deliberate snub&quot; after watching Johnson&#x27;s winning jump. Hitler was subsequently accused of failing to acknowledge Owens (who won gold medals on August 3, 4 (two), and 9) or shake his hand. Owens responded to these claims at the time:

Hitler had a certain time to come to the stadium and a certain time to leave. It happened he had to leave before the victory ceremony after the 100 meters [race began at 5:45 p.m.]. But before he left I was on my way to a broadcast and passed near his box. He waved at me and I waved back. I think it was bad taste to criticize the &quot;man of the hour&quot; in another country.

In an article dated August 4, 1936, the African-American newspaper editor Robert L. Vann describes witnessing Hitler &quot;salute&quot; Owens for having won gold in the 100m sprint (August 3):

In 2014, Eric Brown, British fighter pilot and test pilot, aged 17 in 1936 and later becoming the Fleet Air Arm&#x27;s most decorated pilot, stated in a BBC documentary: &quot;I actually witnessed Hitler shaking hands with Jesse Owens and congratulating him on what he had achieved&quot;. Additionally, an article in &quot;The Baltimore Sun&quot; in August 1936 reported that Hitler sent Owens a commemorative inscribed cabinet photograph of himself. Later, on October 15, 1936, Owens repeated this claim when he addressed an audience of African Americans at a Republican rally in Kansas City, remarking: &quot;Hitler didn&#x27;t snub me—it was our president who snubbed me. The president didn&#x27;t even send me a telegram.&quot;

Owens&#x27;s success at the games caused consternation for Hitler, who was using them to show the world a resurgent Nazi Germany. He and other government officials had hoped that German athletes would dominate the games. Nazi minister Albert Speer wrote that Hitler &quot;was highly annoyed by the series of triumphs by the marvelous colored American runner, Jesse Owens. People whose antecedents came from the jungle were primitive, Hitler said with a shrug; their physiques were stronger than those of civilized whites and hence should be excluded from future games.&quot;

In Germany, Owens had been allowed to travel with and stay in the same hotels as whites, at a time when African Americans in many parts of the United States had to stay in segregated hotels that accommodated only blacks. When Owens returned to the United States, he was greeted in New York City by Mayor Fiorello La Guardia. During a Manhattan ticker-tape parade in his honor along Broadway&#x27;s Canyon of Heroes, someone handed Owens a paper bag. Owens paid it little mind until the parade concluded. When he opened it up, he found that the bag contained $10,000 in cash (). Owens&#x27;s wife Ruth later said: &quot;And he [Owens] didn&#x27;t know who was good enough to do a thing like that. And with all the excitement around, he didn&#x27;t pick it up right away. He didn&#x27;t pick it up until he got ready to get out of the car&quot;.

After the parade, Owens was not permitted to enter through the main doors of the Waldorf Astoria New York and instead forced to travel up to the reception honoring him in a freight elevator. President Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR) never invited Jesse Owens to the White House following his triumphs at the Olympic Games. When the Democrats bid for his support, Owens rejected those overtures: as a staunch Republican, he endorsed Alf Landon, Roosevelt&#x27;s Republican opponent in the 1936 presidential race. Owens was employed to do campaign outreach for African American votes for Landon in the 1936 presidential election.

==Life after the Olympics==
Owens was quoted saying the secret behind his success was, &quot;I let my feet spend as little time on the ground as possible. From the air, fast down, and from the ground, fast up.&quot;

After the games had ended, the entire Olympic team was invited to compete in Sweden. Owens decided to capitalize on his success by returning to the United States to take up some of the more lucrative endorsement offers. United States athletic officials were furious and withdrew his amateur status, which immediately ended his career. Owens was angry and stated that &quot;A fellow desires something for himself.&quot; Owens argued that the racial discrimination he had faced throughout his athletic career, such as not being eligible for scholarships in college and therefore being unable to take classes between training and working to pay his way, meant he had to give up on amateur athletics in pursuit of financial gain elsewhere.

Following the 1936 Olympics where Owens won four gold medals, racism back home led to difficulty earning a living despite his international acclaim. Owens struggled to find work and took on menial jobs as a gas station attendant, playground janitor, and manager of a dry cleaning firm and at times resorted to racing against motorbikes, cars, trucks and horses for a cash prize. People say it was degrading for an Olympic champion to run against a horse, but what was I supposed to do? I had four gold medals, but you can&#x27;t eat four gold medals. Owens was prohibited from making appearances at amateur sporting events to bolster his profile, and he found out that the commercial offers had all but disappeared. In 1937, he briefly toured with a twelve-piece jazz band under contract with Consolidated Artists but found it unfulfilling. He also made appearances at baseball games and other events.

Owens was involved politically and lent his support to the Republican Party and Alf Landon in the 1936 United States Presidential Election, saying that Adolf Hitler congratulated him but that he was snubbed by President Franklin Roosevelt after winning a gold medal. In 1942, Willis Ward—a friend and former competitor from the University of Michigan—who was then working at Ford Motor Company as Assistant Personnel Director, invited Owens to Detroit. Ward worked for the Ford Motor Company&#x27;s &quot;ad hoc civil rights division, serving as the liaison between black and white workers&quot; and was an advocate for African American employees in the personnel department. Owens wound up replacing him, and remained with Ford until 1946. In the late 1940s, Owens moved his family to Chicago and opened his own public relations agency.

In 1946, Owens joined Abe Saperstein in the formation of the West Coast Negro Baseball League, a new Negro baseball league; Owens was Vice-President and the owner of the Portland (Oregon) Rosebuds franchise. He toured with the Rosebuds, sometimes entertaining the audience in between doubleheader games by competing in races against horses. The WCBA disbanded after only two months.

Owens helped promote the exploitation film &quot;Mom and Dad&quot; in African American neighborhoods. He tried to make a living as a sports promoter, essentially an entertainer. He would give local sprinters a ten- or twenty-yard start and beat them in the 100-yd (91-m) dash. He also challenged and defeated racehorses; as he revealed later, the trick was to race a high-strung Thoroughbred that would be frightened by the starter&#x27;s shotgun and give him a bad jump. On the lack of opportunities, Owens added, &quot;There was no television, no big advertising, no endorsements then. Not for a black man, anyway.&quot;

He traveled to Rome for the 1960 Summer Olympics, where he met the 1960 100 meters champion Armin Hary of Germany, who had defeated American Dave Sime in a photo finish.

In 1965, Owens was hired as a running instructor for spring training for the New York Mets.

Owens ran a dry cleaning business and worked as a gas station attendant to earn a living, but he eventually filed for bankruptcy. In 1966, he was successfully prosecuted for tax evasion. At rock bottom, he was aided in beginning his rehabilitation. Republican President Dwight D. Eisenhower enlisted Owens as a goodwill ambassador in 1955 and sent the world-renowned track star to India, the Philippines, and Malaya to promote physical exercise as well as tout the cause of American freedom and economic opportunity in the developing world. He would continue his goodwill tours in the 1960s and 1970s. Although he lost his patronage job with the Illinois Youth Commission in 1960, Owens continued his product endorsement work for such corporations as Quaker Oats, Sears and Roebuck, and Johnson &amp; Johnson. Owens traveled the world and spoke to companies such as the Ford Motor Company and stakeholders such as the United States Olympic Committee. In 1972, he and his wife retired to Arizona.

Owens initially refused to support the black power salute by African-American sprinters Tommie Smith and John Carlos at the 1968 Summer Olympics. He told them:

The black fist is a meaningless symbol. When you open it, you have nothing but fingers—weak, empty fingers. The only time the black fist has significance is when there&#x27;s money inside. There&#x27;s where the power lies.

Four years later in his 1972 book &quot;I Have Changed&quot;, he revised his opinion:

I realized now that militancy in the best sense of the word was the only answer where the black man was concerned, that any black man who wasn&#x27;t a militant in 1970 was either blind or a coward.

Owens traveled to Munich for the 1972 Summer Olympics as a special guest of the West German government, meeting West German Chancellor Willy Brandt and former boxer Max Schmeling.

A few months before his death, Owens had unsuccessfully tried to convince President Jimmy Carter to withdraw his demand that the United States boycott the 1980 Moscow Olympics in protest of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. He argued that the Olympic ideal was supposed to be observed as a time-out from war and that it was above politics.

===Death===
Owens was a pack-a-day cigarette smoker for 35 years, starting at age 32. Beginning in December 1979, he was hospitalized on and off with an extremely aggressive and drug-resistant type of lung cancer. He died of the disease at age 66 in Tucson, Arizona, on March 31, 1980, with his wife and other family members at his bedside. He was buried next to the Lake of Memories at Oak Woods Cemetery in Chicago, near where his children and extended family still lived. The grave is inscribed:
Jimmy Carter issued a tribute to Owens: &quot;Perhaps no athlete better symbolized the human struggle against tyranny, poverty and racial bigotry.&quot;

==Legacy==

The dormitory that Owens occupied during the Berlin Olympics has been fully restored into a living museum, with pictures of his accomplishments at the games, and a letter (intercepted by the Gestapo) from a fan urging him not to shake hands with Hitler. In 2016, the 1936 Olympic journey of the eighteen Black American athletes, including Owens, was documented in the film &quot;Olympic Pride, American Prejudice&quot;.

==Awards and honors==
*1936: AP Athlete of the Year (Male)
*1936: four English oak saplings, one for each Olympic gold medal, from the German Olympic Committee, planted. One of the trees was planted at the University of Southern California, one at Rhodes High School in Cleveland, where he trained, and one is rumored to be on the Ohio State University campus but has yet to be identified. The fourth tree was at the home of Jesse Owens&#x27;s mother but was removed when the house was demolished.
*1970: inducted into the Alabama Sports Hall of Fame.
*1976: awarded Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Gerald Ford.
*1976: inducted into Silver Olympic Order for his quadruple victory in the 1936 games and his defense of sport and the ethics of sport.
*1979: awarded Living Legend Award by President Jimmy Carter.
*1980: asteroid newly discovered by Antonín Mrkos at the Kleť Observatory named 6758 Jesseowens.
*1981: USA Track and Field created the Jesse Owens Award which is given annually to the country&#x27;s top track and field athlete.
*1983: part of inaugural class into the U.S. Olympic Hall of Fame.
*1983: Track and field stadium at Cal State Los Angeles is named in Owens&#x27;s honor.
*1984: street south of the Olympic Stadium in Berlin renamed Jesse-Owens-Allee
*1984: secondary school Jesse Owens Realschule/Oberschule in Lichtenberg, Berlin named for Owens.
*March 28, 1990: posthumously presented a Congressional Gold Medal by President George H. W. Bush.
*1990 and 1998: two U.S. postage stamps have been issued to honor Owens, one in each year.
*1996: Owens&#x27;s hometown of Oakville, Alabama, dedicated the Jesse Owens Memorial Park and Museum in his honor at the same time that the Olympic Torch came through the community, 60 years after his Olympic wins. An article in the &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot; of June 7, 1996, covered the event and included this inscription written by poet Charles Ghigna that appears on a bronze plaque at the park:

* 1999: ranked the sixth greatest North American athlete of the twentieth century and the highest-ranked in his sport by ESPN.
*1999: on the six-man shortlist for the BBC&#x27;s Sports Personality of the Century.
*2001: Ohio State University dedicated Jesse Owens Memorial Stadium for track and field events. A sculpture honoring Owens occupies a place of honor in the esplanade leading to the rotunda entrance to Ohio Stadium. Owens competed for the Buckeyes on the track surrounding the football field that existed prior to the 2001 expansion of Ohio Stadium. The campus also houses three recreational centers for students and staff named in his honor.
* 2002: scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Owens on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans.
*2009: at the 2009 World Athletic Championships in Berlin, all members of the United States Track and Field team wore badges with &quot;JO&quot; on them to commemorate Owens&#x27;s victories in the same stadium 73 years before.
*2010: Ohio Historical Society proposed Owens as a finalist from a statewide vote for inclusion in Statuary Hall at the United States Capitol.
*November 15, 2010: the city of Cleveland renamed East Roadway, between Rockwell and Superior avenues in Public Square, Jesse Owens Way.
*2012: 80,000 individual pixels in the audience seating area were used as a giant video screen to show footage of Owens running around the stadium in the London 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony, just after the Olympic cauldron had been lit.
*In Cleveland, Ohio, a statue of Owens in his Ohio State track suit was installed at Fort Huntington Park, west of the old Courthouse.
*Phoenix, Arizona named the Jesse Owens Medical Centre in his honor, as well as Jesse Owens Parkway.
*Jesse Owens Park, in Tucson, Arizona, is a center of local youth athletics there.
*For his contribution to sports in Los Angeles, Owens was honored with a Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum &quot;Court of Honor&quot; plaque by the Coliseum commissioners.
*In July 2018, Ohio Governor John Kasich dedicated the 75th state park Jesse Owens State Park. It is located on AEP reclaimed mining land south of Zanesville, OH.

===Literature and film===
*1984: An Emmy Award-winning biographical television film of Owens&#x27;s life, &quot;The Jesse Owens Story&quot;, is released, with Dorian Harewood portraying Owens.
*2006: &quot;The Book Thief&quot; by Markus Zusak is released, in which a character named Rudy Steiner idolizes Owens.
*2016: A feature film titled &quot;Race&quot; about Owens with Stephan James portraying Owens was released.
*2017: In the Jordan Peele-directed film &quot;Get Out&quot;, Roman Armitage, the villainous patriarch, lost the qualification round for the 1936 Olympics to Owens, instigating his neurosurgical research and theft of young black men via brain transplant.
*2019: In &quot;Jojo Rabbit&quot;, directed by Taika Waititi, an incarnation of Adolf Hitler humorously refers to the character Elsa as &quot;a little female Jewish Jesse Owens&quot;.
*2023: In The Boys in the Boat, Jyuddah Jaymes portrays Owens in a cameo as the University of Washington Eight rowing team enters the stadium with the United States Olympic team.

== The Jesse Owens Rising Star Award ==
Beginning in 2024, a collaboration with the Owens family, the Jesse Owens Foundation, and the Wanda Diamond League, the award honouring Owens will recognise two exceptional emerging young, top-performing male and female athletes, aged 23 or under.

Each winner will receive a bronze statuette of Owens designed by Belgian sculptor Jan Desmarets.

==See also==
* List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Jesse Owens Museum
* Jesse Owens Information
* Footage of Jesse Owens winning 100m Olympic gold in 1936
* Jesse Owens – An &quot;American Experience&quot; Documentary
* &quot;This is your Life: Jesse Owens&quot;, with Ralph Edwards (video, 25 min.). NBC, 1960
* Obituary, New York Times, April 1, 1980
* 
* Owens&#x27;s accomplishments and encounter with Adolf Hitler (ESPN)
* Jesse Owens video newsreel
* Jesse Owens video in Riefenstahl&#x27;s Olympia (1936) 
* 
* , &quot;Encyclopedia of Alabama&quot;
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q52651" start="0" end="15" title="Jesse Owens" label="James Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52651" start="22" end="27" title="Jesse Owens" label="Jesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q52651" start="34" end="39" title="Jesse Owens" label="Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="94" end="109" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q159983" start="150" end="168" title="Athletics at the 1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q624482" start="196" end="202" title="Sprint (running)" label="sprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="212" end="221" title="long jump" label="long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="428" end="435" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="450" end="469" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="640" end="646" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="846" end="850" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="893" end="899" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="915" end="930" title="Aryan supremacy" label="Aryan supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540423" start="943" end="960" title="Jesse Owens Award" label="Jesse Owens Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547336" start="964" end="985" title="USA Track &amp;amp; Field" label="USA Track &amp;amp; Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="1080" end="1084" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1237" end="1240" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1248" end="1281" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Year#Sports Personality of the Century Award" label="Sports Personality of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="1472" end="1484" title="Sharecropping" label="sharecropper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116386" start="1514" end="1531" title="Oakville, Alabama" label="Oakville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="1635" end="1644" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="1646" end="1650" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="1691" end="1706" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="1761" end="1771" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="2458" end="2476" title="Middle school" label="junior high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329490" start="3056" end="3082" title="East Technical High School" label="East Technical High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3217" end="3224" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="3285" end="3306" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24845918" start="3473" end="3485" title="Larry Snyder (athlete)" label="Larry Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="3523" end="3527" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q713022" start="3635" end="3648" title="Xavier Carter" label="Xavier Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q208410" start="4204" end="4217" title="List of world records in athletics" label="world records"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="4221" end="4230" title="sport of athletics" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="4261" end="4274" title="world records" label="world records"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="4328" end="4335" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445483" start="4344" end="4355" title="Ferry Field" label="Ferry Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="4359" end="4368" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500855" start="4416" end="4429" title="100-yard dash" label="100-yard dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q170737" start="4519" end="4528" title="long jump" label="long jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q50337551" start="4614" end="4625" title="low hurdles" label="low hurdles"/>
<link wikidata="Q211155" start="4748" end="4758" title="200 meters" label="200 meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q143451" start="4866" end="4895" title="University of Central Florida" label="University of Central Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="5083" end="5088" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565918" start="5099" end="5119" title="Walter Francis White" label="Walter Francis White"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="5220" end="5240" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5244" end="5256" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q155928" start="5719" end="5733" title="Avery Brundage" label="Avery Brundage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418438" start="5752" end="5778" title="American Olympic Committee" label="American Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394001" start="5890" end="5914" title="SS Manhattan (1931)" label="SS &amp;quot;Manhattan&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="6024" end="6030" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q76751" start="6053" end="6064" title="Adi Dassler" label="Adi Dassler"/>
<link wikidata="Q517243" start="6344" end="6358" title="Ralph Metcalfe" label="Ralph Metcalfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q832258" start="6396" end="6410" title="Tinus Osendarp" label="Tinus Osendarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q60800" start="6635" end="6643" title="Luz Long" label="Luz Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377901" start="6880" end="6893" title="Mack Robinson (athlete)" label="Mack Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="6916" end="6931" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809337" start="7026" end="7042" title="Lawson Robertson" label="Lawson Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777422" start="7078" end="7092" title="Marty Glickman" label="Marty Glickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408208" start="7097" end="7108" title="Sam Stoller" label="Sam Stoller"/>
<link wikidata="Q558659" start="7156" end="7168" title="Frank Wykoff" label="Frank Wykoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361227" start="7173" end="7183" title="Foy Draper" label="Foy Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246103" start="7310" end="7323" title="Dean Cromwell" label="Dean Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q131237" start="7464" end="7474" title="Carl Lewis" label="Carl Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="7517" end="7537" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7541" end="7552" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q451509" start="7740" end="7752" title="Ralph Boston" label="Ralph Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="7799" end="7819" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q158069" start="7974" end="7981" title="Olympia (1938 film)" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55415" start="7991" end="8007" title="Leni Riefenstahl" label="Leni Riefenstahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="8055" end="8067" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q314193" start="8178" end="8201" title="Henri de Baillet-Latour" label="Henri de Baillet-Latour"/>
<link wikidata="Q544709" start="8697" end="8714" title="Cornelius Johnson (athlete)" label="Cornelius Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157607" start="8946" end="8958" title="Daily Worker" label="Daily Worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997126" start="9758" end="9772" title="Robert L. Vann" label="Robert L. Vann"/>
<link wikidata="Q348719" start="9887" end="9897" title="Eric Brown (pilot)" label="Eric Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="9976" end="9989" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="10031" end="10034" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q47287" start="10201" end="10218" title="The Baltimore Sun" label="The Baltimore Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307187" start="10459" end="10470" title="Kansas City" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="10846" end="10858" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="11291" end="11308" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652357" start="11359" end="11369" title="Racial segregation in the United States" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q312502" start="11491" end="11510" title="Fiorello La Guardia" label="Fiorello La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="11521" end="11530" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q378575" start="11531" end="11549" title="ticker-tape parade" label="ticker-tape parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="11585" end="11601" title="Canyon of Heroes" label="Canyon of Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123997" start="12113" end="12137" title="Waldorf Astoria New York" label="Waldorf Astoria New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="12233" end="12254" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q665416" start="12460" end="12470" title="Alf Landon" label="Alf Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q634429" start="12516" end="12538" title="1936 United States presidential election" label="1936 presidential race"/>
<link wikidata="Q634429" start="12628" end="12654" title="1936 United States presidential election" label="1936 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="12951" end="12957" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617137" start="13315" end="13336" title="Racism in the United States" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q665416" start="14594" end="14604" title="Al Landon" label="Alf Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q634429" start="14612" end="14652" title="1936 United States Presidential Election" label="1936 United States Presidential Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="14666" end="14678" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="14734" end="14752" title="Franklin Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022123" start="14790" end="14801" title="Willis Ward" label="Willis Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="14842" end="14864" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="14889" end="14907" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="14958" end="14965" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="14987" end="15012" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="15327" end="15343" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q318200" start="15375" end="15389" title="Abe Saperstein" label="Abe Saperstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984819" start="15414" end="15446" title="West Coast Negro Baseball League" label="West Coast Negro Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="15454" end="15475" title="Negro league baseball" label="Negro baseball league"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232028" start="15523" end="15549" title="Portland Rosebuds (baseball)" label="Portland (Oregon) Rosebuds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077036" start="15637" end="15655" title="Doubleheader (baseball)" label="doubleheader games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067324" start="15762" end="15779" title="exploitation film" label="exploitation film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026327" start="15786" end="15797" title="Mom and Dad (1945 film)" label="Mom and Dad"/>
<link wikidata="Q210826" start="16116" end="16128" title="Thoroughbred" label="Thoroughbred"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="16376" end="16380" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="16389" end="16409" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q57678" start="16453" end="16463" title="Armin Hary" label="Armin Hary"/>
<link wikidata="Q321940" start="16502" end="16511" title="Dave Sime" label="Dave Sime"/>
<link wikidata="Q198972" start="16517" end="16529" title="photo finish" label="photo finish"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="16609" end="16622" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q878156" start="16637" end="16649" title="dry cleaning" label="dry cleaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="16743" end="16753" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="16799" end="16810" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583669" start="16936" end="16955" title="goodwill ambassador" label="goodwill ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="17495" end="17513" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418438" start="17543" end="17574" title="United States Olympic Committee" label="United States Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890705" start="17661" end="17679" title="1968 Olympics Black Power salute" label="black power salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="17683" end="17699" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q52656" start="17710" end="17722" title="Tommie Smith" label="Tommie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q370729" start="17727" end="17738" title="John Carlos" label="John Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8429" start="17746" end="17766" title="1968 Summer Olympics" label="1968 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="18313" end="18319" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="18328" end="18348" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514" start="18430" end="18442" title="Willy Brandt" label="Willy Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q77102" start="18460" end="18473" title="Max Schmeling" label="Max Schmeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="18550" end="18559" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="18560" end="18572" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239539" start="18619" end="18651" title="1980 Summer Olympics boycott" label="boycott the 1980 Moscow Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="18670" end="18700" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="18854" end="18870" title="Tobacco smoking" label="cigarette smoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147416" start="18997" end="19011" title="drug-resistant" label="drug-resistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="19020" end="19031" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="19069" end="19084" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073757" start="19206" end="19224" title="Oak Woods Cemetery" label="Oak Woods Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q26865105" start="19863" end="19896" title="Olympic Pride, American Prejudice" label="Olympic Pride, American Prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q743122" start="19934" end="19956" title="AP Athlete of the Year" label="AP Athlete of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q165145" start="19976" end="19987" title="Quercus robur" label="English oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="20236" end="20257" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705325" start="20428" end="20455" title="Alabama Sports Hall of Fame" label="Alabama Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="20472" end="20501" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="20515" end="20526" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q634353" start="20556" end="20569" title="Olympic Order" label="Olympic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542686" start="20679" end="20698" title="Library of Congress Living Legend" label="Living Legend Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="20712" end="20724" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q58960" start="20762" end="20775" title="Antonín Mrkos" label="Antonín Mrkos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347780" start="20783" end="20799" title="Kleť Observatory" label="Kleť Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q313483" start="20806" end="20821" title="6758 Jesseowens" label="6758 Jesseowens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547336" start="20830" end="20849" title="USA Track and Field" label="USA Track and Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540423" start="20862" end="20879" title="Jesse Owens Award" label="Jesse Owens Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890852" start="20995" end="21020" title="U.S. Olympic Hall of Fame" label="U.S. Olympic Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026932" start="21056" end="21077" title="California State University, Los Angeles" label="Cal State Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q151374" start="21137" end="21162" title="Olympiastadion (Berlin)" label="Olympic Stadium in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9169094" start="21250" end="21261" title="Berlin-Lichtenberg" label="Lichtenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q721743" start="21329" end="21353" title="Congressional Gold Medal" label="Congressional Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="21367" end="21384" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="21411" end="21425" title="postage stamps" label="postage stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116386" start="21509" end="21526" title="Oakville, Alabama" label="Oakville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21542" end="21578" title="Jesse Owens Memorial Park and Museum" label="Jesse Owens Memorial Park and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="21618" end="21631" title="Olympic Torch" label="Olympic Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="21717" end="21736" title="Wall Street Journal" label="Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078014" start="21824" end="21838" title="Charles Ghigna" label="Charles Ghigna"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="22006" end="22010" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22063" end="22096" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Century#Sports Personality of the Century Award" label="Sports Personality of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="22105" end="22126" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186725" start="22137" end="22165" title="Jesse Owens Memorial Stadium" label="Jesse Owens Memorial Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512329" start="22556" end="22574" title="Molefi Kete Asante" label="Molefi Kete Asante"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546133" start="22603" end="22633" title="100 Greatest African Americans" label="100 Greatest African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q152772" start="22649" end="22682" title="2009 World Championships in Athletics" label="2009 World Athletic Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349886" start="22870" end="22893" title="Ohio Historical Society" label="Ohio Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q993553" start="22962" end="22975" title="Statuary Hall" label="Statuary Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="22983" end="23004" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493255" start="23111" end="23124" title="Public Square, Cleveland" label="Public Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q168545" start="23297" end="23341" title="2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony" label="London 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626855" start="23358" end="23374" title="2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics cauldron" label="Olympic cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="23393" end="23402" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197074" start="23508" end="23522" title="Cuyahoga County Courthouse" label="old Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="23525" end="23541" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="23647" end="23653" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="23781" end="23810" title="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23811" end="23837" title="Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum#&amp;quot;Court of Honor&amp;quot; plaques" label="&amp;quot;Court of Honor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q69319" start="23905" end="23916" title="John Kasich" label="John Kasich"/>
<link wikidata="Q464092" start="23988" end="23991" title="American Electric Power" label="AEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="24076" end="24086" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="24108" end="24123" title="TV movie" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743138" start="24152" end="24173" title="The Jesse Owens Story" label="The Jesse Owens Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244995" start="24199" end="24214" title="Dorian Harewood" label="Dorian Harewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q819101" start="24246" end="24260" title="The Book Thief" label="The Book Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q61522" start="24270" end="24282" title="Markus Zusak" label="Markus Zusak"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515125" start="24387" end="24391" title="Race (2016 film)" label="Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235476" start="24415" end="24428" title="Stephan James (actor)" label="Stephan James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371986" start="24474" end="24486" title="Jordan Peele" label="Jordan Peele"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136235" start="24507" end="24514" title="Get Out" label="Get Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q54862508" start="24731" end="24742" title="Jojo Rabbit" label="Jojo Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388576" start="24762" end="24775" title="Taika Waititi" label="Taika Waititi"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="24795" end="24807" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q111528279" start="24909" end="24929" title="The Boys in the Boat (film)" label="The Boys in the Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q81050" start="25004" end="25016" title="Eight (rowing)" label="Eight rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q301839" start="25213" end="25233" title="Wanda Diamond League" label="Wanda Diamond League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238387" start="25481" end="25538" title="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games" label="List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="25708" end="25727" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q708784" start="25797" end="25810" title="Ralph Edwards" label="Ralph Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="25829" end="25832" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375680" start="26054" end="26077" title="Encyclopedia of Alabama" label="Encyclopedia of Alabama"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46828" wikidata="Q14890574" url="?curid=46828" title="Fertilisation">
<text>Fertilisation or fertilization (see spelling differences), also known as generative fertilisation, syngamy and impregnation, is the fusion of gametes to give rise to a zygote and initiate its development into a new individual organism or offspring. While processes such as insemination or pollination, which happen before the fusion of gametes, are also sometimes informally referred to as fertilisation, these are technically separate processes. The cycle of fertilisation and development of new individuals is called sexual reproduction. During double fertilisation in angiosperms, the haploid male gamete combines with two haploid polar nuclei to form a triploid primary endosperm nucleus by the process of vegetative fertilisation.

==History==
In antiquity, Aristotle conceived the formation of new individuals through fusion of male and female fluids, with form and function emerging gradually, in a mode called by him as epigenetic.

In 1784, Spallanzani established the need of interaction between the female&#x27;s ovum and male&#x27;s sperm to form a zygote in frogs. In 1827, Karl Ernst von Baer observed a therian mammalian egg for the first time. Oscar Hertwig (1876), in Germany, described the fusion of nuclei of spermatozoa and of ova from sea urchin.

==Evolution==
The evolution of fertilisation is related to the origin of meiosis, as both are part of sexual reproduction, originated in eukaryotes. One hypothesis states that meiosis originated from mitosis.

==Fertilisation in plants==
The gametes that participate in fertilisation of plants are the sperm (male) and the egg (female) cell. Various plant groups have differing methods by which the gametes produced by the male and female gametophytes come together and are fertilised. In bryophytes and pteridophytic land plants, fertilisation of the sperm and egg takes place within the archegonium. In seed plants, the male gametophyte is formed within a pollen grain. After pollination, the pollen grain germinates, and a pollen tube grows and penetrates the ovule through a tiny pore called a micropyle. The sperm are transferred from the pollen through the pollen tube to the ovule where the egg is fertilised. In flowering plants, two sperm cells are released from the pollen tube, and a second fertilisation event occurs involving the second sperm cell and the central cell of the ovule, which is a second female gamete.

===Pollen tube growth===
Unlike animal sperm which is motile, the sperm of most seed plants is immotile and relies on the pollen tube to carry it to the ovule where the sperm is released. The pollen tube penetrates the stigma and elongates through the extracellular matrix of the style before reaching the ovary. Then near the receptacle, it breaks through the ovule through the micropyle (an opening in the ovule wall) and the pollen tube &quot;bursts&quot; into the embryo sac, releasing sperm. The growth of the pollen tube has been believed to depend on chemical cues from the pistil, however these mechanisms were poorly understood until 1995. Work done on tobacco plants revealed a family of glycoproteins called TTS proteins that enhanced growth of pollen tubes. Pollen tubes in a sugar free pollen germination medium and a medium with purified TTS proteins both grew. However, in the TTS medium, the tubes grew at a rate 3x that of the sugar-free medium. TTS proteins were also placed on various locations of semi in vivo pollinated pistils, and pollen tubes were observed to immediately extend toward the proteins. Transgenic plants lacking the ability to produce TTS proteins had slower pollen tube growth and reduced fertility.

===Rupture of pollen tube===
The rupture of the pollen tube to release sperm in &quot;Arabidopsis&quot; has been shown to depend on a signal from the female gametophyte. Specific proteins called FER protein kinases present in the ovule control the production of highly reactive derivatives of oxygen called reactive oxygen species (ROS). ROS levels have been shown via GFP to be at their highest during floral stages when the ovule is the most receptive to pollen tubes, and lowest during times of development and following fertilisation. High amounts of ROS activate Calcium ion channels in the pollen tube, causing these channels to take up Calcium ions in large amounts. This increased uptake of calcium causes the pollen tube to rupture, and release its sperm into the ovule. Pistil feeding assays in which plants were fed diphenyl iodonium chloride (DPI) suppressed ROS concentrations in &quot;Arabidopsis&quot;, which in turn prevented pollen tube rupture.

===Flowering plants===
After being fertilised, the ovary starts to swell and develop into the fruit. With multi-seeded fruits, multiple grains of pollen are necessary for syngamy with each ovule. The growth of the pollen tube is controlled by the vegetative (or tube) cytoplasm. Hydrolytic enzymes are secreted by the pollen tube that digest the female tissue as the tube grows down the stigma and style; the digested tissue is used as a nutrient source for the pollen tube as it grows. During pollen tube growth towards the ovary, the generative nucleus divides to produce two separate sperm nuclei (haploid number of chromosomes) – a growing pollen tube therefore contains three separate nuclei, two sperm and one tube. The sperms are interconnected and dimorphic, the large one, in a number of plants, is also linked to the tube nucleus and the interconnected sperm and the tube nucleus form the &quot;male germ unit&quot;.

Double fertilisation is the process in angiosperms (flowering plants) in which two sperm from each pollen tube fertilise two cells in a female gametophyte (sometimes called an embryo sac) that is inside an ovule. After the pollen tube enters the gametophyte, the pollen tube nucleus disintegrates and the two sperm cells are released; one of the two sperm cells &quot;fertilises&quot; the egg cell (at the bottom of the gametophyte near the micropyle), forming a diploid (2n) zygote. This is the point when fertilisation actually occurs; pollination and fertilisation are two separate processes. The nucleus of the other sperm cell fuses with two haploid polar nuclei (contained in the central cell) in the centre of the gametophyte. The resulting cell is triploid (3n). This triploid cell divides through mitosis and forms the endosperm, a nutrient-rich tissue, inside the seed. The two central-cell maternal nuclei (polar nuclei) that contribute to the endosperm arise by mitosis from the single meiotic product that also gave rise to the egg. Therefore, maternal contribution to the genetic constitution of the triploid endosperm is double that of the embryo.

One primitive species of flowering plant, &quot;Nuphar polysepala&quot;, has endosperm that is diploid, resulting from the fusion of a sperm with one, rather than two, maternal nuclei. It is believed that early in the development of angiosperm lineages, there was a duplication in this mode of reproduction, producing seven-celled/eight-nucleate female gametophytes, and triploid endosperms with a 2:1 maternal to paternal genome ratio.

In many plants, the development of the flesh of the fruit is proportional to the percentage of fertilised ovules. For example, with watermelon, about a thousand grains of pollen must be delivered and spread evenly on the three lobes of the stigma to make a normal sized and shaped fruit.

===Self-pollination and outcrossing===

Outcrossing, or cross-fertilisation, and self-fertilisation represent different strategies with differing benefits and costs. An estimated 48.7% of plant species are either dioecious or self-incompatible obligate outcrossers. It is also estimated that about 42% of flowering plants exhibit a mixed mating system in nature.

In the most common kind of mixed mating system, individual plants produce a single type of flower and fruits may contain self-fertilised, outcrossed or a mixture of progeny types. The transition from cross-fertilisation to self-fertilisation is the most common evolutionary transition in plants, and has occurred repeatedly in many independent lineages. About 10-15% of flowering plants are predominantly self-fertilising.

Under circumstances where pollinators or mates are rare, self-fertilisation offers the advantage of reproductive assurance. Self-fertilisation can therefore result in improved colonisation ability. In some species, self-fertilisation has persisted over many generations. &quot;Capsella rubella&quot; is a self-fertilising species that became self-compatible 50,000 to 100,000 years ago. &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot; is a predominantly self-fertilising plant with an out-crossing rate in the wild of less than 0.3%; a study suggested that self-fertilisation evolved roughly a million years ago or more in &quot;A. thaliana&quot;. In long-established self-fertilising plants, the masking of deleterious mutations and the production of genetic variability is infrequent and thus unlikely to provide a sufficient benefit over many generations to maintain the meiotic apparatus. Consequently, one might expect self-fertilisation to be replaced in nature by an ameiotic asexual form of reproduction that would be less costly. However the actual persistence of meiosis and self-fertilisation as a form of reproduction in long-established self-fertilising plants may be related to the immediate benefit of efficient recombinational repair of DNA damage during formation of germ cells provided by meiosis at each generation.

== Fertilisation in animals ==

The mechanics behind fertilisation has been studied extensively in sea urchins and mice. This research addresses the question of how the sperm and the appropriate egg find each other and the question of how only one sperm gets into the egg and delivers its contents. There are three steps to fertilisation that ensure species-specificity:

# Chemotaxis
# Sperm activation/acrosomal reaction
# Sperm/egg adhesion

=== Internal vs. external ===
Consideration as to whether an animal (more specifically a vertebrate) uses internal or external fertilisation is often dependent on the method of birth. Oviparous animals laying eggs with thick calcium shells, such as chickens, or thick leathery shells generally reproduce via internal fertilisation so that the sperm fertilises the egg without having to pass through the thick, protective, tertiary layer of the egg. Ovoviviparous and viviparous animals also use internal fertilisation. Although some organisms reproduce via amplexus, they may still use internal fertilisation, as with some salamanders. Advantages of internal fertilisation include minimal waste of gametes, greater chance of individual egg fertilisation, longer period of egg protection, and selective fertilisation. Many females have the ability to store sperm for extended periods of time and can fertilise their eggs at their own desire.

Oviparous animals producing eggs with thin tertiary membranes or no membranes at all, on the other hand, use external fertilisation methods. Such animals may be more precisely termed ovuliparous. External fertilisation is advantageous in that it minimises contact (which decreases the risk of disease transmission), and greater genetic variation.

=== Sea urchins ===
Sperm find the eggs via chemotaxis, a type of ligand/receptor interaction. Resact is a 14 amino acid peptide purified from the jelly coat of &quot;A. punctulata&quot; that attracts the migration of sperm.

After finding the egg, the sperm penetrates the jelly coat through a process called sperm activation. In another ligand/receptor interaction, an oligosaccharide component of the egg binds and activates a receptor on the sperm and causes the acrosomal reaction. The acrosomal vesicles of the sperm fuse with the plasma membrane and are released. In this process, molecules bound to the acrosomal vesicle membrane, such as bindin, are exposed on the surface of the sperm. These contents digest the jelly coat and eventually the vitelline membrane. In addition to the release of acrosomal vesicles, there is explosive polymerisation of actin to form a thin spike at the head of the sperm called the acrosomal process.

The sperm binds to the egg through another ligand reaction between receptors on the vitelline membrane. The sperm surface protein bindin, binds to a receptor on the vitelline membrane identified as EBR1.

Fusion of the plasma membranes of the sperm and egg are likely mediated by bindin. At the site of contact, fusion causes the formation of a fertilisation cone.

=== Mammals ===
Male mammals internally fertilise females and ejaculate semen through the penis during copulation. After ejaculation, many sperm move to the upper vagina (via contractions from the vagina) through the cervix and across the length of the uterus to meet the ovum. In cases where fertilisation occurs, the female usually ovulates during a period that extends from hours before copulation to a few days after; therefore, in most mammals, it is more common for ejaculation to precede ovulation than vice versa.

When sperm are deposited into the anterior vagina, they are not capable of fertilisation (i.e., non-capacitated) and are characterised by slow linear motility patterns. This motility, combined with muscular contractions enables sperm transport towards the uterus and oviducts. There is a pH gradient within the micro-environment of the female reproductive tract such that the pH near the vaginal opening is lower (approximately 5) than the oviducts (approximately 8). The sperm-specific pH-sensitive calcium transport protein called CatSper increases the sperm cell permeability to calcium as it moves further into the reproductive tract. Intracellular calcium influx contributes to sperm capacitation and hyperactivation, causing a more violent and rapid non-linear motility pattern as sperm approach the oocyte. The capacitated spermatozoon and the oocyte meet and interact in the &quot;ampulla&quot; of the fallopian tube. Rheotaxis, thermotaxis and chemotaxis are known mechanisms that guide sperm towards the egg during the final stage of sperm migration. Spermatozoa respond (see Sperm thermotaxis) to the temperature gradient of ~2 °C between the oviduct and the ampulla, and chemotactic gradients of progesterone have been confirmed as the signal emanating from the cumulus oophorus cells surrounding rabbit and human oocytes. Capacitated and hyperactivated sperm respond to these gradients by changing their behaviour and moving towards the cumulus-oocyte complex. Other chemotactic signals such as formyl Met-Leu-Phe (fMLF) may also guide spermatozoa.

The zona pellucida, a thick layer of extracellular matrix that surrounds the egg and is similar to the role of the vitelline membrane in sea urchins, binds the sperm. Unlike sea urchins, the sperm binds to the egg before the acrosomal reaction. ZP3, a glycoprotein in the zona pellucida, is responsible for egg/sperm adhesion in humans. The receptor galactosyltransferase (GalT) binds to the N-acetylglucosamine residues on the ZP3 and is important for binding with the sperm and activating the acrosome reaction. ZP3 is sufficient though unnecessary for sperm/egg binding. Two additional sperm receptors exist: a 250kD protein that binds to an oviduct secreted protein, and SED1, which independently binds to the zona. After the acrosome reaction, the sperm is believed to remain bound to the zona pellucida through exposed ZP2 receptors. These receptors are unknown in mice but have been identified in guinea pigs.

In mammals, the binding of the spermatozoon to the GalT initiates the acrosome reaction. This process releases the hyaluronidase that digests the matrix of hyaluronic acid in the vestments around the oocyte. Additionally, heparin-like glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) are released near the oocyte that promote the acrosome reaction. Fusion between the oocyte plasma membranes and sperm follows and allows the sperm nucleus, the typical centriole, and atypical centriole that is attached to the flagellum, but not the mitochondria, to enter the oocyte. The protein CD9 likely mediates this fusion in mice (the binding homolog). The egg &quot;activates&quot; itself upon fusing with a single sperm cell and thereby changes its cell membrane to prevent fusion with other sperm. Zinc atoms are released during this activation.

This process ultimately leads to the formation of a diploid cell called a zygote. The zygote divides to form a blastocyst and, upon entering the uterus, implants in the endometrium, beginning pregnancy. Embryonic implantation not in the uterine wall results in an ectopic pregnancy that can kill the mother.

In such animals as rabbits, coitus induces ovulation by stimulating the release of the pituitary hormone gonadotropin; this release greatly increases the likelihood of pregnancy.

==== Humans ====

Fertilisation in humans is the union of a human egg and sperm, usually occurring in the ampulla of the fallopian tube, producing a single celled zygote, the first stage of life in the development of a genetically unique organism, and initiating embryonic development. Scientists discovered the dynamics of human fertilisation in the nineteenth century.

The term &quot;conception&quot; commonly refers to &quot;the process of becoming pregnant involving fertilisation or implantation or both&quot;. Its use makes it a subject of semantic arguments about the beginning of pregnancy, typically in the context of the abortion debate.

Upon gastrulation, which occurs around 16 days after fertilisation, the implanted blastocyst develops three germ layers, the endoderm, the ectoderm and the mesoderm, and the genetic code of the father becomes fully involved in the development of the embryo; later twinning is impossible. Additionally, interspecies hybrids survive only until gastrulation and cannot further develop.
However, some human developmental biology literature refers to the &quot;conceptus&quot; and such medical literature refers to the &quot;products of conception&quot; as the post-implantation embryo and its surrounding membranes. The term &quot;conception&quot; is not usually used in scientific literature because of its variable definition and connotation.

=== Insects ===

Insects in different groups, including the Odonata (dragonflies and damselflies) and the Hymenoptera (ants, bees, and wasps) practise delayed fertilisation. Among the Odonata, females may mate with multiple males, and store sperm until the eggs are laid. The male may hover above the female during egg-laying (oviposition) to prevent her from mating with other males and replacing his sperm; in some groups such as the darters, the male continues to grasp the female with his claspers during egg-laying, the pair flying around in tandem. Among social Hymenoptera, honeybee queens mate only on mating flights, in a short period lasting some days; a queen may mate with eight or more drones. She then stores the sperm for the rest of her life, perhaps for five years or more.

==Fertilisation in fungi==

In many fungi (except chytrids), as in some protists, fertilisation is a two step process. First, the cytoplasms of the two gamete cells fuse (called plasmogamy), producing a dikaryotic or heterokaryotic cell with multiple nuclei. This cell may then divide to produce dikaryotic or heterokaryotic hyphae. The second step of fertilisation is karyogamy, the fusion of the nuclei to form a diploid zygote.

In chytrid fungi, fertilisation occurs in a single step with the fusion of gametes, as in animals and plants.

==Fertilisation in protists==

===Fertilisation in protozoa===
There are three types of fertilisation processes in protozoa:
* gametogamy;
* autogamy;
* gamontogamy.

===Fertilisation in algae===
Algae, like some land plants, undergo alternation of generations. Some algae are isomorphic, where both the sporophyte (2n) and gameteophyte (n) are the same morphologically. When algae reproduction is described as oogamous, the male and female gametes are different morphologically, where there is a large non-motile egg for female gametes, and the male gamete are uniflagellate (motile). Via the process of syngamy, these will form a new zygote, regenerating the sporophyte generation again.

== Fertilisation and genetic recombination ==
Meiosis results in a random segregation of the genes that each parent contributes. Each parent organism is usually identical save for a fraction of their genes; each gamete is therefore genetically unique. At fertilisation, parental chromosomes combine. In humans, (2²²)² = 17.6x1012 chromosomally different zygotes are possible for the non-sex chromosomes, even assuming no chromosomal crossover. If crossover occurs once, then on average (4²²)² = 309x1024 genetically different zygotes are possible for every couple, not considering that crossover events can take place at most points along each chromosome. The X and Y chromosomes undergo no crossover events and are therefore excluded from the calculation. The mitochondrial DNA is only inherited from the maternal parent.

== The sperm aster and zygote centrosomes ==
Shortly after the sperm fuse with the egg, the two sperm centrioles form the embryo first centrosome and microtubule aster. The sperm centriole, found near the male pronucleus, recruit egg Pericentriolar material proteins forming the zygote first centrosome. This centrosome nucleates microtubules in the shape of stars called astral microtubules. The microtubules span the whole valium of the egg, allowing the egg pronucleus to use the cables to get to the male pronucleus. As the male and female pronuclei approach each other, the single centrosome split into two centrosomes located in the interphase between the pronuclei. Then the centrosome via the astral microtubules polarises the genome inside the pronuclei.

==Parthenogenesis==

Organisms that normally reproduce sexually can also reproduce via parthenogenesis, wherein an unfertilised female gamete produces viable offspring. These offspring may be clones of the mother, or in some cases genetically differ from her but inherit only part of her DNA. Parthenogenesis occurs in many plants and animals and may be induced in others through a chemical or electrical stimulus to the egg cell. In 2004, Japanese researchers led by Tomohiro Kono succeeded after 457 attempts to merge the ova of two mice by blocking certain proteins that would normally prevent the possibility; the resulting embryo normally developed into a mouse.

==Allogamy and autogamy==
Allogamy, which is also known as cross-fertilisation, refers to the fertilisation of an egg cell from one individual with the male gamete of another.

Autogamy which is also known as self-fertilisation, occurs in such hermaphroditic organisms as plants and flatworms; therein, two gametes from one individual fuse.

==Other variants of bisexual reproduction==

Some relatively unusual forms of reproduction are:

Gynogenesis: A sperm stimulates the egg to develop without fertilisation or syngamy. The sperm may enter the egg.

Hybridogenesis: One genome is eliminated to produce haploid eggs.

Canina meiosis: (sometimes called &quot;permanent odd polyploidy&quot;) one genome is transmitted in the Mendelian fashion, others are transmitted clonally.

==Benefits of cross-fertilisation==

The major benefit of cross-fertilisation is generally thought to be the avoidance of inbreeding depression. Charles Darwin, in his 1876 book &quot;The Effects of Cross and Self Fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom&quot; (pages 466-467) summed up his findings in the following way.
&quot;It has been shown in the present volume that the offspring from the union of two distinct individuals, especially if their progenitors have been subjected to very different conditions, have an immense advantage in height, weight, constitutional vigour and fertility over the self-fertilised offspring from one of the same parents. And this fact is amply sufficient to account for the development of the sexual elements, that is, for the genesis of the two sexes.&quot;

In addition, it is thought by some, that a long-term advantage of out-crossing in nature is increased genetic variability that promotes adaptation or avoidance of extinction (see Genetic variability).

==See also==
* Cell fusion
* Conception cap
* Conception device
* Female sperm
* Fetal development
* In vitro fertilisation
* Kaguya (mouse)
* Parthenogenesis, a type of reproduction that does not involve fertilisation
* Pollination
* Pre-embryo
* Pronucleus
* Superfecundation
* Superfetation
* Symmetry breaking and cortical rotation
*Cortical reaction
*Polyspermy

==References==
==External links==
* Fertilisation (Conception) video</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="0" end="13" title="Fertilisation" label="Fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="17" end="30" title="Fertilisation" label="fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36" end="56" title="American and British English spelling differences#-ise, -ize (-isation, -ization)" label="spelling differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="73" end="97" title="Fertilisation" label="generative fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="99" end="106" title="Fertilisation" label="syngamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="111" end="123" title="Fertilisation" label="impregnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="142" end="149" title="gametes" label="gametes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="168" end="174" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379223" start="273" end="285" title="insemination" label="insemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="289" end="300" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="519" end="538" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q277657" start="547" end="567" title="double fertilisation" label="double fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="571" end="582" title="angiosperms" label="angiosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="588" end="595" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q277657" start="634" end="646" title="polar nuclei" label="polar nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="657" end="665" title="triploid" label="triploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="674" end="683" title="endosperm" label="endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="763" end="772" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10273301" start="928" end="938" title="Epigenesis (biology)" label="epigenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213351" start="950" end="961" title="Spallanzani" label="Spallanzani"/>
<link wikidata="Q57190" start="1087" end="1106" title="Karl Ernst von Baer" label="Karl Ernst von Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130942" start="1118" end="1124" title="theria" label="theria"/>
<link wikidata="Q68753" start="1160" end="1173" title="Oscar Hertwig" label="Oscar Hertwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="1256" end="1266" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102467" start="1332" end="1349" title="Origin and function of meiosis" label="origin of meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="1371" end="1390" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="1406" end="1415" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="1445" end="1452" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189951" start="1708" end="1719" title="gametophyte" label="gametophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q29993" start="1758" end="1767" title="bryophyte" label="bryophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q178249" start="1773" end="1786" title="pteridophyte" label="pteridophytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q850653" start="1858" end="1869" title="archegonium" label="archegonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q25814" start="1874" end="1884" title="seed plant" label="seed plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="1927" end="1933" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="1947" end="1958" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="1964" end="1970" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="1977" end="1987" title="Pollen germination" label="germinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429464" start="1995" end="2006" title="pollen tube" label="pollen tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="2032" end="2037" title="ovule" label="ovule"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="2067" end="2076" title="Ovule" label="micropyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="2189" end="2204" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q277657" start="2338" end="2350" title="central cell" label="central cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429464" start="2521" end="2532" title="pollen tube" label="pollen tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427245" start="2618" end="2624" title="Stigma (botany)" label="stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="2760" end="2765" title="ovule" label="ovule"/>
<link wikidata="Q851829" start="3061" end="3075" title="Nicotiana" label="tobacco plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q187126" start="3097" end="3109" title="glycoprotein" label="glycoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="3421" end="3428" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q157892" start="3725" end="3736" title="Arabidopsis" label="Arabidopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="3946" end="3969" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q272983" start="4008" end="4011" title="Green fluorescent protein" label="GFP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="4697" end="4702" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="4893" end="4900" title="enzymes" label="enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="5570" end="5581" title="angiosperms" label="angiosperms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="5614" end="5619" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="5656" end="5661" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q189951" start="5674" end="5685" title="gametophyte" label="gametophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="5994" end="6001" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="6007" end="6013" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q213410" start="6287" end="6295" title="triploid" label="triploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="6337" end="6344" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="6359" end="6368" title="endosperm" label="endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="6372" end="6380" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="6386" end="6392" title="tissue (biology)" label="tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="6405" end="6409" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q147685" start="6743" end="6760" title="Nuphar" label="Nuphar polysepala"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="7265" end="7275" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q779009" start="7462" end="7473" title="Outcrossing" label="Outcrossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8271738" start="7503" end="7521" title="Autogamy" label="self-fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="8236" end="8246" title="pollinator" label="pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q751093" start="8310" end="8332" title="Reproductive success" label="reproductive assurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15537225" start="8487" end="8503" title="Capsella rubella" label="Capsella rubella"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="8603" end="8623" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455087" start="8680" end="8692" title="Allogamy" label="out-crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="8915" end="8923" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9422" end="9444" title="DNA repair#Double-strand breaks" label="recombinational repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="9700" end="9705" title="spermatozoon" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266977" start="10082" end="10090" title="Internal fertilization" label="internal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198400" start="10094" end="10116" title="external fertilization" label="external fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="10160" end="10169" title="Oviparity" label="Oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="10225" end="10233" title="chickens" label="chickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q192805" start="10425" end="10438" title="Ovoviviparity" label="Ovoviviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="10443" end="10453" title="viviparity" label="viviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q477209" start="10533" end="10541" title="amplexus" label="amplexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q658145" start="11310" end="11320" title="chemotaxis" label="chemotaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389500" start="11540" end="11550" title="egg jelly" label="jelly coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q163261" start="11733" end="11751" title="acrosomal reaction" label="acrosomal reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q185269" start="12125" end="12130" title="actin" label="actin"/>
<link wikidata="Q421111" start="12188" end="12205" title="acrosomal process" label="acrosomal process"/>
<link wikidata="Q22328101" start="12292" end="12310" title="vitelline membrane" label="vitelline membrane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12553" end="12571" title="fertilization cone" label="fertilisation cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="12595" end="12601" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="12636" end="12645" title="ejaculation" label="ejaculate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="12646" end="12651" title="semen" label="semen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58" start="12664" end="12669" title="penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600878" start="12677" end="12687" title="copulation (zoology)" label="copulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="12791" end="12797" title="cervix" label="cervix"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="12827" end="12833" title="uterus" label="uterus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187082" start="12908" end="12916" title="ovulation" label="ovulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q36857" start="13364" end="13371" title="oviduct" label="oviduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728362" start="13915" end="13926" title="capacitation" label="capacitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233836" start="14007" end="14021" title="fallopian tube" label="fallopian tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q25091413" start="14183" end="14200" title="Sperm thermotaxis" label="Sperm thermotaxis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14280" end="14291" title="Chemotaxis#Eukaryotic chemotaxis" label="chemotactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963" start="14305" end="14317" title="progesterone" label="progesterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194195" start="14371" end="14387" title="cumulus oophorus" label="cumulus oophorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q219841" start="14664" end="14678" title="zona pellucida" label="zona pellucida"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911876" start="14905" end="14908" title="ZP3" label="ZP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517847" start="15010" end="15031" title="galactosyltransferase" label="galactosyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q163261" start="15648" end="15665" title="acrosome reaction" label="acrosome reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q904015" start="15693" end="15706" title="hyaluronidase" label="hyaluronidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q337231" start="15734" end="15749" title="hyaluronic acid" label="hyaluronic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="15930" end="15945" title="plasma membrane" label="plasma membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="15986" end="15993" title="cell nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178355" start="16007" end="16016" title="centriole" label="centriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q178355" start="16031" end="16040" title="centriole" label="centriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="16065" end="16074" title="flagellum" label="flagellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="16088" end="16100" title="mitochondrion" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058190" start="16135" end="16138" title="CD9" label="CD9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095247" start="16212" end="16221" title="egg activation" label="activates"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="16346" end="16350" title="Zinc" label="Zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="16447" end="16454" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="16469" end="16475" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q227717" start="16506" end="16516" title="blastocyst" label="blastocyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q266500" start="16548" end="16555" title="Implantation (human embryo)" label="implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="16587" end="16596" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9612" start="16632" end="16639" title="uterus" label="uterine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207087" start="16659" end="16676" title="ectopic pregnancy" label="ectopic pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="16950" end="16953" title="ovum" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="16958" end="16963" title="spermatozoon" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233836" start="16990" end="17019" title="ampulla of the fallopian tube" label="ampulla of the fallopian tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="17047" end="17053" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q964797" start="17147" end="17168" title="Human embryonic development" label="embryonic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666904" start="17208" end="17227" title="human fertilisation" label="human fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880500" start="17431" end="17482" title="beginning of pregnancy controversy" label="semantic arguments about the beginning of pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="17516" end="17524" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141026" start="17539" end="17551" title="gastrulation" label="gastrulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158447" start="17990" end="17999" title="conceptus" label="conceptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25375" start="18336" end="18343" title="Odonata" label="Odonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q80066" start="18345" end="18356" title="dragonflies" label="dragonflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q230502" start="18361" end="18372" title="damselflies" label="damselflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22651" start="18382" end="18393" title="Hymenoptera" label="Hymenoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="18395" end="18398" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="18401" end="18404" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458574" start="18411" end="18415" title="wasp" label="wasp"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="18857" end="18865" title="honeybee" label="honeybee"/>
<link wikidata="Q650665" start="18975" end="18981" title="drone (bee)" label="drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="19104" end="19109" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q473747" start="19118" end="19125" title="chytrid" label="chytrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q592140" start="19246" end="19256" title="plasmogamy" label="plasmogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923203" start="19271" end="19281" title="dikaryon" label="dikaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q441313" start="19285" end="19299" title="Heterokaryon" label="heterokaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193129" start="19393" end="19399" title="hyphae" label="hyphae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454719" start="19437" end="19446" title="karyogamy" label="karyogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q473747" start="19503" end="19510" title="chytrid" label="chytrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q725951" start="19845" end="19871" title="alternation of generations" label="alternation of generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="20348" end="20355" title="Meiosis" label="Meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="20514" end="20520" title="gamete" label="gamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="20581" end="20591" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="20605" end="20610" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="20656" end="20662" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="20723" end="20744" title="chromosomal crossover" label="chromosomal crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="21063" end="21080" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q178355" start="21228" end="21237" title="centriole" label="centriole"/>
<link wikidata="Q190769" start="21261" end="21271" title="centrosome" label="centrosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868390" start="21288" end="21293" title="Aster (cell biology)" label="aster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168391" start="21360" end="21383" title="Pericentriolar material" label="Pericentriolar material"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="21978" end="21993" title="parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22359" end="22372" title="Tomohiro Kono" label="Tomohiro Kono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="22415" end="22418" title="ovum" label="ova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455087" start="22586" end="22594" title="Allogamy" label="Allogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047531" start="22999" end="23010" title="Gynogenesis" label="Gynogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="23114" end="23128" title="Hybridogenesis" label="Hybridogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q146066" start="23181" end="23195" title="Canina meiosis" label="Canina meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481109" start="23461" end="23482" title="inbreeding depression" label="inbreeding depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="23484" end="23498" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731618" start="23523" end="23591" title="The Effects of Cross and Self Fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom" label="The Effects of Cross and Self Fertilisation in the Vegetable Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374271" start="24314" end="24333" title="Genetic variability" label="Genetic variability"/>
<link wikidata="Q56592403" start="24352" end="24363" title="Cell fusion" label="Cell fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158416" start="24366" end="24380" title="Conception cap" label="Conception cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158416" start="24383" end="24400" title="Conception device" label="Conception device"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442771" start="24403" end="24415" title="Female sperm" label="Female sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297155" start="24418" end="24435" title="Fetal development" label="Fetal development"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="24438" end="24460" title="In vitro fertilisation" label="In vitro fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670921" start="24463" end="24477" title="Kaguya (mouse)" label="Kaguya (mouse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="24480" end="24495" title="Parthenogenesis" label="Parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="24558" end="24569" title="Pollination" label="Pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q11200326" start="24572" end="24582" title="Pre-embryo" label="Pre-embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614103" start="24585" end="24595" title="Pronucleus" label="Pronucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q333428" start="24598" end="24614" title="Superfecundation" label="Superfecundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q581100" start="24617" end="24630" title="Superfetation" label="Superfetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661335" start="24633" end="24672" title="Symmetry breaking and cortical rotation" label="Symmetry breaking and cortical rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917070" start="24674" end="24691" title="Cortical reaction" label="Cortical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759519" start="24693" end="24703" title="Polyspermy" label="Polyspermy"/>
</links>
</doc>
