<doc id="50450" wikidata="Q2677" url="?curid=50450" title="Wilhelm II">
<text>Wilhelm II (Friedrich Wilhelm Viktor Albert; 27 January 18594 June 1941) was the last German Emperor and King of Prussia from 1888 until his abdication in 1918, which marked the end of the German Empire as well as the Hohenzollern dynasty&#x27;s 300-year rule of Prussia.

Born during the reign of his granduncle Frederick William IV of Prussia, Wilhelm was the son of Prince Frederick William and Victoria, Princess Royal. Through his mother, he was the eldest of the 42 grandchildren of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom. In March 1888, Wilhelm&#x27;s father, Frederick William, ascended the German and Prussian thrones as Frederick III. Frederick died just 99 days later, and his son succeeded him as Wilhelm II.

In March 1890, the young Kaiser dismissed longtime Chancellor Otto von Bismarck and assumed direct control over his nation&#x27;s policies, embarking on a bellicose &quot;New Course&quot; to cement Germany&#x27;s status as a leading world power. Over the course of his reign, the German colonial empire acquired new territories in China and the Pacific (such as Jiaozhou Bay, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Caroline Islands) and became Europe&#x27;s largest manufacturer. However, Wilhelm often undermined such progress by making tactless and threatening statements towards other countries without first consulting his ministers. Likewise, his regime did much to alienate itself from other great powers by initiating a massive naval build-up, contesting French control of Morocco, and building a railway through Baghdad that challenged Britain&#x27;s dominion in the Persian Gulf. By the second decade of the 20th century, Germany could rely only on significantly weaker nations such as Austria-Hungary and the declining Ottoman Empire as allies.

Despite strengthening Germany&#x27;s position as a great power by building a powerful navy as well as promoting scientific innovation within its borders, Wilhelm&#x27;s public statements and erratic foreign policy greatly antagonized the international community and are considered by many to have substantially contributed to the fall of the German Empire. In 1914, his diplomatic brinksmanship culminated in Germany&#x27;s guarantee of military support to Austria-Hungary during the July Crisis which plunged all of Europe into World War I. A lax wartime leader, Wilhelm left virtually all decision-making regarding strategy and organisation of the war effort to the German Supreme Army Command. By August 1916, this broad delegation of power gave rise to a &quot;de facto&quot; military dictatorship that dominated the country&#x27;s policies for the rest of the conflict. Despite emerging victorious over Russia and obtaining significant territorial gains in Eastern Europe, Germany was forced to relinquish all its conquests after a decisive defeat on the Western Front in the autumn of 1918.

Losing the support of his country&#x27;s military and many of his subjects, Wilhelm was forced to abdicate during the German Revolution of 1918–1919 which converted Germany into an unstable democratic state known as the Weimar Republic. Wilhelm subsequently fled to exile in the Netherlands, where he remained during its occupation by Nazi Germany in 1940 before dying there in 1941.

==Early life==

Wilhelm was born in Berlin on 27 January 1859—at the Crown Prince&#x27;s Palace—to Victoria, Princess Royal (&quot;Vicky&quot;) and Prince Frederick William of Prussia (&quot;Fritz&quot;, the future Frederick III). His mother, Vicky, was the eldest child of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom. At the time of Wilhelm&#x27;s birth, his granduncle Frederick William IV was king of Prussia. Frederick William IV had been left permanently incapacitated by a series of strokes, and his younger brother Wilhelm, the young prince&#x27;s grandfather, was acting as regent. Prince Wilhelm was the oldest of the 42 grandchildren of his maternal grandparents (Queen Victoria and Prince Albert). Upon the death of Frederick William IV in January 1861, Wilhelm&#x27;s namesake grandfather became king, and the two-year-old Wilhelm became second in the line of succession to the Prussian throne. After 1871, Wilhelm also became second in the line to the newly created German Empire, which, according to the constitution of the German Empire, was ruled by the Prussian king. At the time of his birth, he was also sixth in the line of succession to the British throne, after his maternal uncles and his mother.

===Traumatic birth===
Shortly before midnight on 26 January 1859, Princess Vicky experienced labour pains, followed by her water breaking, after which August Wegner, the family&#x27;s personal physician, was summoned. Upon examining Vicky, Wegner realised the infant was in the breech position; gynaecologist Eduard Arnold Martin was then sent for, arriving at the palace at 10 am on 27 January. After administering ipecac and prescribing a mild dose of chloroform, which was administered by Vicky&#x27;s personal physician Sir James Clark, Martin advised Fritz the unborn child&#x27;s life was endangered. As mild anaesthesia did not alleviate her extreme labour pains, resulting in her &quot;horrible screams and wails&quot;, Clark finally administered full anaesthesia. Observing her contractions to be insufficiently strong, Martin administered a dose of ergot extract, and at 2:45 pm saw the infant&#x27;s buttocks emerging from the birth canal but noticed the pulse in the umbilical cord was weak and intermittent. Despite this dangerous sign, Martin ordered a further heavy dose of chloroform, so he could better manipulate the infant. Observing the infant&#x27;s legs to be raised upwards, and his left arm likewise raised upwards and behind his head, Martin &quot;carefully eased out the Prince&#x27;s legs&quot;. Due to the &quot;narrowness of the birth canal&quot;, he then forcibly pulled the left arm downwards, tearing the brachial plexus, then continued to grasp the left arm to rotate the infant&#x27;s trunk and free the right arm, likely exacerbating the injury. After completing the delivery, and despite realising the newborn prince was hypoxic, Martin turned his attention to the unconscious Vicky. Noticing after some minutes that the newborn remained silent, Martin and the midwife Fräulein Stahl worked frantically to revive the prince; finally, despite the disapproval of those present, Stahl spanked the newborn vigorously until &quot;a weak cry escaped his pale lips&quot;.

Modern medical assessments have concluded Wilhelm&#x27;s hypoxic state at birth, due to the breech delivery and the heavy dosage of chloroform, left him with minimal to mild brain damage, which manifested itself in his subsequent hyperactive and erratic behaviour, limited attention span and impaired social abilities. The brachial plexus injury resulted in Erb&#x27;s palsy, which left Wilhelm with a withered left arm about shorter than his right. He tried with some success to conceal this; many photographs show him holding a pair of white gloves in his left hand to make the arm seem longer. In others, he holds his left hand with his right, has his disabled arm on the hilt of a sword, or holds a cane to give the illusion of a useful limb posed at a dignified angle. Historians have suggested that this disability affected his emotional development.

===Early years===

In 1863, Wilhelm was taken to England to be present at the wedding of his uncle Bertie and Princess Alexandra of Denmark (later King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra). Wilhelm attended the ceremony in a Highland costume, complete with a small toy dirk. During the ceremony, the four-year-old became restless. His 18-year-old uncle Prince Alfred, charged with keeping an eye on him, told him to be quiet, but Wilhelm drew his dirk and threatened Alfred. When Alfred attempted to subdue him by force, Wilhelm bit him on the leg. His grandmother, Queen Victoria, missed seeing the fracas; to her Wilhelm remained &quot;a clever, dear, good little child, the great favourite of my beloved Vicky&quot;.

Vicky was obsessed with her son&#x27;s damaged arm, blaming herself for the child&#x27;s handicap, and insisted that he become a good rider. The thought that Wilhelm, as heir to the throne, should not be able to ride was intolerable to her. Riding lessons began when Wilhelm was eight and were a matter of endurance for him. Over and over, the weeping prince was set on his horse and compelled to go through the paces. He fell off time after time but, despite his tears, was set on its back again. After weeks of this, he was finally able to maintain his balance.

Wilhelm, from six years of age, was tutored and heavily influenced by the 39-year-old teacher Georg Ernst Hinzpeter. &quot;Hinzpeter&quot;, he later wrote, &quot;was really a good fellow. Whether he was the right tutor for me, I dare not decide. The torments inflicted on me, in this pony riding, must be attributed to my mother.&quot;

As a teenager, Wilhelm was educated at Kassel at the Friedrichsgymnasium. In January 1877, Wilhelm finished high school and on his eighteenth birthday received as a present from his grandmother the Order of the Garter. After Kassel, he spent four terms at the University of Bonn, studying law and politics. He became a member of the exclusive &quot;Corps Borussia Bonn&quot;. Wilhelm possessed a quick intelligence, but this was often overshadowed by a cantankerous temper.

As a scion of the royal house of Hohenzollern, Wilhelm was exposed from an early age to the military society of the Prussian aristocracy. This had a major impact on him, and in maturity Wilhelm was seldom seen out of uniform. The hyper-masculine military culture of Prussia in this period did much to frame his political ideals and personal relationships.

Wilhelm was in awe of his father, whose status as a hero of the wars of unification was largely responsible for the young Wilhelm&#x27;s attitude, as were the circumstances in which he was raised; close emotional contact between father and son was not encouraged. Later, as he came into contact with the Crown Prince&#x27;s political opponents, Wilhelm came to adopt more ambivalent feelings toward his father, perceiving the influence of Wilhelm&#x27;s mother over a figure who should have been possessed of masculine independence and strength. Wilhelm also idolised his grandfather, Wilhelm I, and he was instrumental in later attempts to foster a cult of the first German Emperor as &quot;Wilhelm the Great&quot;. However, he had a distant relationship with his mother.

Wilhelm resisted attempts by his parents, especially his mother, to educate him in a spirit of British liberalism. Instead, he agreed with his tutors&#x27; support of autocratic rule, and gradually became thoroughly &#x27;Prussianized&#x27; under their influence. He thus became alienated from his parents, suspecting them of putting Britain&#x27;s interests first. The German Emperor, Wilhelm I, watched as his grandson, guided principally by the Crown Princess Victoria, grew to manhood. When Wilhelm was nearing 21, the Emperor decided it was time his grandson should begin the military phase of his preparation for the throne. He was assigned as a lieutenant to the First Regiment of Foot Guards, stationed at Potsdam. &quot;In the Guards,&quot; Wilhelm said, &quot;I really found my family, my friends, my interests—everything of which I had up to that time had to do without.&quot; As a boy and a student, his manner had been polite and agreeable; as an officer, he began to strut and speak brusquely in the tone he deemed appropriate for a Prussian officer.

When Wilhelm was in his early twenties, Chancellor Otto von Bismarck tried to separate him from his parents, who opposed Bismarck and his policies, with some success. Bismarck planned to use the young prince as a weapon against his parents in order to retain his own political dominance. Wilhelm thus developed a dysfunctional relationship with his parents, but especially with his English mother. In an outburst in April 1889, Wilhelm angrily implied that &quot;an English doctor killed my father, and an English doctor crippled my arm—which is the fault of my mother&quot;, who allowed no German physicians to attend to herself or her immediate family.

As a young man, Wilhelm fell in love with one of his maternal first cousins, Princess Elisabeth of Hesse-Darmstadt. She turned him down, and in time, married into the Russian imperial family. In 1880 Wilhelm became engaged to Princess Augusta Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein, known as &quot;Dona&quot;. The couple married on 27 February 1881, and their marriage lasted 40 years until her death in 1921. Between 1882 and 1892, Augusta bore Wilhelm seven children, six sons and a daughter.

Beginning in 1884, Bismarck began advocating that Kaiser Wilhelm send his grandson on diplomatic missions, a privilege denied to the Crown Prince. That year, Prince Wilhelm was sent to the court of Tsar Alexander III of Russia in St. Petersburg to attend the coming-of-age ceremony of the 16-year-old Tsarevich Nicholas. Wilhelm&#x27;s behaviour did little to ingratiate himself to the tsar. Two years later, Kaiser Wilhelm I took Prince Wilhelm on a trip to meet with Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria-Hungary. In 1886, also, thanks to Herbert von Bismarck, the son of the Chancellor, Prince Wilhelm began to be trained twice a week at the Foreign Ministry.

==Accession==
Kaiser Wilhelm I died in Berlin on 9 March 1888, and Prince Wilhelm&#x27;s father ascended the throne as Frederick III. He was already experiencing an incurable throat cancer and spent all 99 days of his reign fighting the disease before dying. On 15 June of that same year, his 29-year-old son succeeded him as German Emperor and King of Prussia.

Although in his youth he had been a great admirer of Otto von Bismarck, Wilhelm&#x27;s characteristic impatience soon brought him into conflict with the &quot;Iron Chancellor&quot;, the dominant figure in the foundation of his empire. The new Emperor opposed Bismarck&#x27;s careful foreign policy, preferring vigorous and rapid expansion to protect Germany&#x27;s &quot;place in the sun&quot;. Furthermore, the young Emperor had come to the throne, unlike his grandfather, determined to rule as well as reign. While the imperial constitution vested executive power in the monarch, Wilhelm I had been content to leave day-to-day administration to Bismarck. Early conflicts between Wilhelm II and his chancellor soon poisoned the relationship between the two men. Bismarck had believed that Wilhelm was a lightweight who could be dominated, and he showed escalating disrespect for Wilhelm&#x27;s favored policy objectives in the late 1880s. The final split between monarch and statesman occurred soon after an attempt by Bismarck to implement far-reaching anti-Socialist laws in early 1890.

==The dismissal of Bismarck==
According to adherents of the &quot;Bismarck myth&quot;, the young Kaiser rejected the Iron Chancellor&#x27;s allegedly &quot;peaceful foreign policy&quot; and instead plotted with senior generals to work &quot;in favour of a war of aggression&quot;. Bismarck himself once complained to an aide, &quot;That young man wants war with Russia, and would like to draw his sword straight away if he could. I shall not be a party to it.&quot;

But the origin of Bismarck&#x27;s dismissal lies in home affairs. After gaining an absolute majority in the Reichstag he formed the &quot;Kartell&quot;, a coalition government of the German Conservative Party and the National Liberal Party. They favoured making the anti-Socialist laws permanent, with one exception: giving the German police the power, similarly to the Tsarist Okhrana, to expel alleged Socialist agitators from their homes by decree and into internal exile. Even Old Liberal statesman Eugen Richter, the author of the famous 1891 dystopian novel &quot;Pictures of the Socialistic Future&quot;, opposed banning the Social Democratic Party outright and said: &quot;I fear Social Democracy more under this law than without it&quot;. The &quot;Kartell&quot; split over this issue and the law was not passed.

As the debate continued, Wilhelm became more and more interested in the social problems being exploited in the propaganda of the Socialists, especially the treatment of mine workers who went on strike in 1889. He routinely disagreed with Bismarck during Cabinet meetings. Bismarck, in turn, sharply disagreed with Wilhelm&#x27;s pro-labor union policies and worked to circumvent them. Bismarck, feeling unappreciated by the young Emperor and by his ambitious advisors, once refused to co-sign a proclamation regarding the protection of industrial workers, as was required by the German Constitution, and prevented it from being made law. While Bismarck had previously sponsored landmark social security legislation, by 1889–90, he had become violently opposed to the rise of organized labor. In particular, he was opposed to wage increases, improving working conditions, and regulating labour relations.

The final break between the Iron Chancellor and the Kaiser came when Bismarck initiated discussions with the opposition to form a new parliamentary majority without consulting with Wilhelm first. The &quot;Kartell&quot;, the shifting coalition government that Bismarck had been able to maintain since 1867, had finally lost its majority of seats in the Reichstag due to the Anti-Socialist Laws fiasco. The remaining powers in the Reichstag were the Catholic Centre Party and the Conservative Party.

In most parliamentary systems, the head of government depends upon the confidence of the parliamentary majority and has the right to form coalitions to maintain a majority of supporters. In a constitutional monarchy, however, the Chancellor is required to meet regularly with the monarch to explain his or her policies and intentions within the Government. A Chancellor in a constitutional monarchy also cannot afford to make an enemy of the monarch, who represents the only real check and balance against a Chancellor&#x27;s otherwise absolute power. This is because a constitutional monarch has plenty of means at his or her disposal of quietly blocking a Chancellor&#x27;s policy objectives and is one of the only people who can forcibly remove an overly ambitious Chancellor from power. For these reasons, the last Kaiser believed that he had every right to be informed &quot;before&quot; Bismarck began coalition talks with the Opposition.

In a deeply ironic moment, a mere decade after demonizing all members of the Catholic Church in Germany as (, &quot;traitors to the Empire&quot;) during the &quot;Kulturkampf&quot;, Bismarck decided to start coalition talks with the all-Catholic Centre Party. He invited that party&#x27;s leader in the Reichstag, Baron Ludwig von Windthorst, to meet with him and begin the negotiations. The Kaiser, who always had a warm relationship with Baron von Windthorst, whose decades long defence of German Catholics, Poles, Jews, and other minorities against the Iron Chancellor have since attracted comparisons to Irish nationalist statesmen Daniel O&#x27;Connell and Charles Stewart Parnell, was furious to hear about Bismarck&#x27;s plans for coalition talks with the Centre Party only after they had already begun.

After a heated argument at Bismarck&#x27;s estate over the latter&#x27;s alleged disrespect for the Imperial Family, Wilhelm stormed out. Bismarck, forced for the first time in his career into a crisis that he could not twist to his own advantage, wrote a blistering letter of resignation, decrying the Monarchy&#x27;s involvement in both foreign and domestic policy. The letter was published only after Bismarck&#x27;s death.

In later years, Bismarck created the &quot;Bismarck myth&quot;; the view (which some historians have argued was confirmed by subsequent events) that Wilhelm II&#x27;s successful demand for Bismarck&#x27;s resignation destroyed any chance Imperial Germany ever had of stable government and international peace. According to this view, what Wilhelm termed &quot;The New Course&quot; is characterised as Germany&#x27;s ship of state going dangerously off course, leading directly to the carnage of the First and Second World Wars.

According to Bismarck apologists, in foreign policy the Iron Chancellor had achieved a fragile balance of interests between Germany, France and Russia. Peace was allegedly at hand and Bismarck tried to keep it that way despite growing popular sentiment against Britain (regarding the German colonial empire) and especially against Russia. With Bismarck&#x27;s dismissal, the Russians allegedly expected a reversal of policy in Berlin, so they quickly negotiated a military alliance with the Third French Republic, beginning a process that by 1914 largely isolated Germany.
In contrast, historian Modris Eksteins has argued that Bismarck&#x27;s dismissal was actually &quot;long overdue&quot;. According to Eksteins, the Iron Chancellor, in his need for a scapegoat, had demonized Classical Liberals in the 1860s, Roman Catholics in the 1870s, and Socialists in the 1880s with the highly successful and often repeated refrain, &quot;The Reich is in danger.&quot; Therefore, in order to divide and rule, Bismarck ultimately left the German people even more divided in 1890 than they had ever been before 1871.

In interviews with C.L. Sulzberger for the book &quot;The Fall of Eagles&quot;, Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia, grandson and heir of Kaiser Wilhelm II, further commented, &quot;Bismarck was certainly our greatest statesman, but he had very bad manners and he became increasingly overbearing with age. Frankly, I don&#x27;t think his dismissal by my grandfather was a great tragedy. Russia was already on the other side because of the Berlin Congress of 1878. Had Bismarck stayed he would not have helped. He already wanted to abolish all the reforms that had been introduced. He was aspiring to establish a kind of Shogunate and hoped to treat our family in the same way the Japanese shoguns treated the Japanese emperors isolated in Kyoto. My grandfather had no choice but to dismiss him.&quot;

==Wilhelm in control==
===The New Course===
Bismarck was succeeded as Chancellor of Germany and Minister-President of Prussia by Leo von Caprivi. At the opening of the Reichstag on 6 May 1890, the Kaiser stated that the most pressing issue was &quot;the further enlargement of the bill concerning the protection of the labourer.&quot; In 1891, the Reichstag passed the Workers Protection Acts, which improved working conditions, protected women and children and regulated labour relations.

Caprivi in turn was replaced by Chlodwig von Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst in 1894. Following the dismissal of Hohenlohe in 1900, Wilhelm appointed the man whom he regarded as &quot;his own Bismarck&quot;, Bernhard von Bülow.

In appointing Caprivi and then Hohenlohe, Wilhelm was embarking upon what is known to history as &quot;the New Course&quot;, in which he hoped to exert decisive influence in the government of the empire. There is debate amongst historians as to the precise degree to which Wilhelm succeeded in implementing &quot;personal rule&quot; in this era, but what is clear is the very different dynamic which existed between the Crown and its chief political servant (the Chancellor) in the &quot;Wilhelmine Era&quot;. These chancellors were senior civil servants and not seasoned politician-statesmen like Bismarck. Wilhelm wanted to preclude the emergence of another Iron Chancellor, whom he ultimately detested as being &quot;a boorish old killjoy&quot; who had not permitted any minister to see the Emperor except in his presence, keeping a stranglehold on effective political power. Upon his enforced retirement and until his dying day, Bismarck became a bitter critic of Wilhelm&#x27;s policies, but without gaining the support of a majority within the Reichstag there was little chance of Bismarck exerting a decisive influence on policy.

In the early twentieth century, Wilhelm began to concentrate upon his real agenda: the creation of a German Navy that would rival that of Britain and enable Germany to declare itself a world power. The last Kaiser ordered the high command of the armed forces to read United States Navy Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan&#x27;s book, &quot;The Influence of Sea Power upon History&quot;, and spent hours drawing sketches of the ships that he dreamed of having built. Bülow and Bethmann Hollweg, his loyal chancellors, looked after domestic affairs, while Wilhelm obliviously began to spread alarm in the chancelleries of Europe with his increasingly eccentric and ill-advised statements on foreign affairs.

===Promoter of arts and sciences===
Wilhelm enthusiastically promoted the arts and sciences, as well as public education and social welfare. He sponsored the Kaiser Wilhelm Society for the promotion of scientific research; it was funded by wealthy private donors and by the state and comprised a number of research institutes in both pure and applied sciences. The Prussian Academy of Sciences was unable to avoid the Kaiser&#x27;s pressure and lost some of its autonomy when it was forced to incorporate new programs in engineering, and award new fellowships in engineering sciences as a result of a gift from the Kaiser in 1900.

Wilhelm supported the modernisers as they tried to reform the Prussian system of secondary education, which was rigidly traditional, elitist, politically authoritarian, and unchanged by the progress in the natural sciences. As hereditary Protector of the Order of Saint John, he offered encouragement to the Christian order&#x27;s attempts to place German medicine at the forefront of modern medical practice through its system of hospitals, nursing sisterhood and nursing schools, and nursing homes throughout the German Empire. Wilhelm continued as Protector of the Order even after 1918, as the position was in essence attached to the head of the House of Hohenzollern.

==Personality==
Historians have frequently stressed the role of Wilhelm&#x27;s personality in shaping his reign. Thus, Thomas Nipperdey concludes he was:
Historian David Fromkin states that Wilhelm had a love–hate relationship with Britain. According to Fromkin,
&quot;From the outset, the half-German side of him was at war with the half-English side. He was wildly jealous of the British, desiring to be British and to be better at being British than the British were, while at the same time hating them and resenting them because he never could be fully accepted by them&quot;.

Langer et al. (1968) emphasise the negative international consequences of Wilhelm&#x27;s erratic personality:
&quot;He believed in force, and the &#x27;survival of the fittest&#x27; in domestic as well as foreign politics ... William was not lacking in intelligence, but he did lack stability, disguising his deep insecurities by swagger and tough talk. He frequently fell into depressions and hysterics ... William&#x27;s personal instability was reflected in vacillations of policy. His actions, at home as well as abroad, lacked guidance, and therefore often bewildered or infuriated public opinion. He was not so much concerned with gaining specific objectives, as had been the case with Bismarck, as with asserting his will. This trait in the ruler of the leading Continental power was one of the main causes of the uneasiness prevailing in Europe at the turn-of-the-century&quot;.

===Relationships with foreign relatives===

As a grandchild of Queen Victoria, Wilhelm was a first cousin of King George V of the United Kingdom, as well as of queens Marie of Romania, Maud of Norway, Victoria Eugenie of Spain and Empress Alexandra of Russia. In 1889, Wilhelm&#x27;s younger sister Sophia married Constantine, Crown Prince of Greece. Wilhelm was infuriated by his sister&#x27;s conversion from Lutheranism to Greek Orthodoxy; upon her marriage, he attempted to ban her from entering Germany.

Wilhelm&#x27;s most contentious relationships were with his British relations. He craved the acceptance of his grandmother, Queen Victoria, and of the rest of her family. Despite the fact that his grandmother treated him with courtesy and tact, his other relatives largely denied him acceptance. He had an especially bad relationship with his uncle Bertie (later Edward VII). Between 1888 and 1901, Wilhelm resented Bertie, who despite being the heir apparent to the British throne, treated Wilhelm not as a reigning monarch, but merely as another nephew. In turn, Wilhelm often snubbed his uncle, whom he referred to as &quot;the old peacock&quot; and lorded his position as emperor over him. Beginning in the 1890s, Wilhelm made visits to England for Cowes Week on the Isle of Wight and often competed against his uncle in the yacht races. Bertie&#x27;s wife, Alexandra, also disliked Wilhelm. Even though Wilhelm had not been on the throne at the time, Alexandra felt anger over the Prussian seizure of Schleswig-Holstein from her native Denmark in the 1860s, and was also annoyed over Wilhelm&#x27;s treatment of his mother. Despite his poor relations with his English relatives, when he received news that Queen Victoria was dying at Osborne House in January 1901, Wilhelm travelled to England and was at her bedside when she died, and he remained for the funeral. He also was present at the funeral of King Edward VII in 1910.

In 1913, Wilhelm hosted a lavish wedding in Berlin for his only daughter, Victoria Louise. Among the guests at the wedding were his cousins Tsar Nicholas II of Russia and King George V of the United Kingdom, and George&#x27;s wife, Queen Mary.

==Foreign affairs==
German foreign policy under Wilhelm II was faced with a number of significant problems. Perhaps the most apparent was that Wilhelm was an impatient man, subjective in his reactions and affected strongly by sentiment and impulse. He was personally ill-equipped to steer German foreign policy along a rational course. There were a number of examples, such as the Kruger telegram of 1896 in which Wilhelm congratulated President Paul Kruger for preventing the Transvaal Republic from being annexed by the British Empire during the Jameson Raid.

British public opinion had been quite favourable towards the Kaiser in his first twelve years on the throne, but it turned sour in the late 1890s. During the First World War, he became the central target of British anti-German propaganda and the personification of a hated enemy.

Wilhelm exploited fears of a yellow peril trying to interest other European rulers in the perils they faced by invading China; few other leaders paid attention. Wilhelm also used the Japanese victory in the Russo-Japanese War to try to incite fear in the west of the yellow peril that they faced by a resurgent Imperial Japan, which Wilhelm claimed would ally with China to overrun the conventional European Powers. Wilhelm also invested in strengthening the German colonial empire in Africa and the Pacific, but few became profitable and all were lost during the First World War. In South West Africa (now Namibia), a native revolt against German rule led to the Herero and Nama genocide, although Wilhelm eventually ordered it to be stopped and recalled its mastermind General Lothar von Trotha.

One of the few times when Wilhelm succeeded in personal diplomacy was when in 1900, he supported the morganatic marriage of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria to Countess Sophie Chotek, and helped negotiate an end to the opposition to the wedding by Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria.

A domestic triumph for Wilhelm was when his daughter Victoria Louise married the Duke of Brunswick in 1913; this helped heal the rift between the House of Hanover and the House of Hohenzollern that had followed Bismarck&#x27;s invasion and annexation of the Kingdom of Hanover in 1866.

===Political visits to the Ottoman Empire===
In his first visit to Constantinople in 1889, Wilhelm secured the sale of German-made rifles to the Ottoman Army. Later on, he had his second political visit to the Ottoman Empire as a guest of Sultan Abdulhamid II. The Kaiser started his journey to the Ottoman Eyalets with Constantinople on 16 October 1898; then he went by yacht to Haifa on 25 October. After visiting Jerusalem and Bethlehem, the Kaiser went back to Jaffa to embark to Beirut, where he took the train passing Aley and Zahlé to reach Damascus on 7 November. While visiting the Mausoleum of Saladin the following day, the Kaiser made a speech:

On 10 November, Wilhelm went to visit Baalbek before heading to Beirut to board his ship back home on 12 November. In his second visit, Wilhelm secured a promise for German companies to construct the Berlin–Baghdad railway, and had the German Fountain constructed in Constantinople to commemorate his journey.

His third visit was on 15 October 1917, as the guest of Sultan Mehmed V.

===Hun speech of 1900===

The Boxer Rebellion, an anti-foreign uprising in China, was put down in 1900 by an international force known as the Eight-Nation Alliance. The Kaiser&#x27;s farewell address to departing German soldiers commanded them, in the spirit of the Huns, to be merciless in battle. Wilhelm&#x27;s fiery rhetoric clearly expressed his vision for Germany as one of the great powers. There were two versions of the speech. The German Foreign Office issued an edited version, making sure to omit one particularly incendiary paragraph that they regarded as diplomatically embarrassing. The edited version was this:

The official version omitted the following passage from which the speech derives its name:

The term &quot;Hun&quot; later became the favoured epithet of Allied anti-German war propaganda during the First World War.

=== Assassination attempt ===
On 6 March 1901, during a visit to Bremen, in an apparent assassination attempt Wilhelm was struck in the face by a sharp iron object thrown at him. The assailant, identified as Johann-Dietrich Weiland, was adjudged to be insane. The Kaiser was riding in a coach to the railway station when the incident happened at 10:10 pm, and the object thrown &quot;afterward proved to be a fishplate&quot;. The German Emperor was left with a deep wound, an inch and a half long, below his left eye; the Chief of the Naval Ministry would note later, &quot;On the temple or in the eye the blow could have been devastating. The wonder of it is that our All-Gracious Lord felt neither the object flying at him nor, in the rain, the copiously flowing blood; it was those around him who drew his attention to it at first.&quot; Despite rumors in the press that the Kaiser had sunk into a depression, he would say in a speech at the end of the month, &quot;nothing is more false than to pretend that my sanity has suffered in some way. I am exactly the same as I was; I have become neither elegiac nor melancholic... everything stays the same.&quot;

===Eulenberg Scandal===
In the years 1906–1909, Socialist journalist Maximilian Harden published accusations of homosexual activity involving ministers, courtiers, army officers, and Wilhelm&#x27;s closest friend and advisor, Prince Philipp zu Eulenberg. According to Robert K. Massie:

The result was years of highly publicized scandals, trials, resignations, and suicides. Harden, like some in the upper echelons of the military and Foreign Office, resented Eulenberg&#x27;s approval of the Anglo-French Entente, and also his encouragement of Wilhelm to rule personally. The scandal led to Wilhelm experiencing a nervous breakdown, and the removal of Eulenberg and others of his circle from the court. The view that Wilhelm was a deeply repressed homosexual is increasingly supported by scholars: certainly, he never came to terms with his feelings for Eulenberg. Historians have linked the Eulenberg scandal to a fundamental shift in German policy that heightened its military aggressiveness and ultimately contributed to World War I.

===Moroccan Crisis===
One of Wilhelm&#x27;s diplomatic blunders sparked the Moroccan Crisis of 1905. He made a spectacular visit to Tangier, in Morocco on 31 March 1905. He conferred with representatives of Sultan Abdelaziz of Morocco. The Kaiser proceeded to tour the city on the back of a white horse. The Kaiser declared he had come to support the sovereignty of the Sultan—a statement which amounted to a provocative challenge to French influence in Morocco. The Sultan subsequently rejected a set of French-proposed governmental reforms and invited major world powers to a conference that advised him on necessary reforms.

The Kaiser&#x27;s presence was seen as an assertion of German interests in Morocco, in opposition to those of France. In his speech, he even made remarks in favour of Moroccan independence, and this led to friction with France, which was expanding its colonial interests in Morocco, and to the Algeciras Conference, which served largely to further isolate Germany in Europe.

===&quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; Affair===
&quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; Affair of 1908 involved the publication in Germany of an article from the British newspaper that included a series of wild statements and diplomatically damaging remarks. Wilhelm had viewed the article, which was based on discussions he had had with Colonel Edward Stuart-Wortley in 1907, as an opportunity to promote his views on Anglo-German friendship, but due to the content and emotional tone of many of his statements, he ended up further alienating not only the British but also the French, Russians and Japanese. He was quoted as saying that he was among the minority of Germans friendly to Britain; that during the Second Boer War, he had rebuffed the French and Russians when they asked Germany to help them &quot;not only to save the Boer Republics, but also to humiliate England to the dust&quot;&quot;&quot;; and that the German naval buildup was targeted against the Japanese, not Britain. One especially memorable quotation from the article was, &quot;You English are mad, mad, mad as March hares&quot; because they refused to see his friendly intentions. The effect in Germany was quite significant, with serious calls to modify the constitution to limit the emperor&#x27;s powers. The &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; crisis deeply wounded Wilhelm&#x27;s previously unimpaired self-confidence, and he experienced a severe bout of depression. He kept a low profile for many months after the scandal broke, although in July 1909 he took the opportunity to force the resignation of the chancellor, Prince von Bülow, whose defence of him in the Reichstag had been aimed primarily at shifting blame from himself for not stopping the publication of the article. As a result of the scandal, Wilhelm had less influence in domestic and foreign policy for the remainder of his reign than he had previously exercised.

===Naval arms race with Britain===

Nothing Wilhelm did in the international arena was of more influence than his decision to pursue a policy of massive naval construction. A powerful navy was Wilhelm&#x27;s pet project. He had inherited from his mother a love of the British Royal Navy, which was at that time the world&#x27;s largest. He once confided to his uncle, the Prince of Wales, that his dream was to have a &quot;fleet of my own some day&quot;. Wilhelm&#x27;s frustration over his fleet&#x27;s poor showing at the Fleet Review at his grandmother&#x27;s Diamond Jubilee celebrations, combined with his inability to exert German influence in South Africa following the dispatch of the Kruger telegram, led to Wilhelm taking definitive steps toward the construction of a fleet to rival that of his British cousins. Wilhelm called on the services of the dynamic naval officer Alfred von Tirpitz, whom he appointed to the head of the Imperial Naval Office in 1897.

The new admiral had conceived of what came to be known as the &quot;Risk Theory&quot; or the Tirpitz Plan, by which Germany could force Britain to accede to German demands in the international arena through the threat posed by a powerful battlefleet concentrated in the North Sea. Tirpitz enjoyed Wilhelm&#x27;s full support in his advocacy of successive naval bills of 1897 and 1900, by which the German navy was built up to contend with that of the British Empire. Naval expansion under the Fleet Acts eventually led to severe financial strains in Germany by 1914, as by 1906 Wilhelm had committed his navy to construction of the much larger, more expensive dreadnought type of battleship. The British depended on naval superiority and its response was to make Germany its most feared enemy.

In addition to the expansion of the fleet, the Kiel Canal was opened in 1895, enabling faster movements between the North Sea and the Baltic Sea. In 1889 Wilhelm reorganised top-level control of the navy by creating a Naval Cabinet () equivalent to the German Imperial Military Cabinet which had previously functioned in the same capacity for both the army and navy. The Head of the Naval Cabinet was responsible for promotions, appointments, administration, and issuing orders to naval forces. Captain Gustav von Senden-Bibran was appointed as the first head and remained so until 1906. The existing Imperial admiralty was abolished, and its responsibilities divided between two organisations. A new position was created, equivalent to the supreme commander of the army: the Chief of the High Command of the Admiralty, or , was responsible for ship deployments, strategy and tactics. Vice-Admiral Max von der Goltz was appointed in 1889 and remained in post until 1895. Construction and maintenance of ships and obtaining supplies was the responsibility of the State Secretary of the Imperial Navy Office (Reichsmarineamt), responsible to the Imperial Chancellor and advising the on naval matters. The first appointee was Rear Admiral Karl Eduard Heusner, followed shortly by Rear Admiral Friedrich von Hollmann from 1890 to 1897. Each of these three heads of department reported separately to Wilhelm.

==World War I==

Historians typically argue that Wilhelm was largely confined to ceremonial duties during the war—there were innumerable parades to review and honours to award. &quot;The man who in peace had believed himself omnipotent became in war a &#x27;shadow Kaiser&#x27;, out of sight, neglected, and relegated to the sidelines.&quot;

===The Sarajevo crisis===
Wilhelm was a friend of Franz Ferdinand, and he was deeply shocked by his assassination on 28 June 1914. Wilhelm offered to support Austria-Hungary in crushing the Black Hand, the secret organisation that had plotted the killing, and even sanctioned the use of force by Austria against the perceived source of the movement—Serbia (this is often called &quot;the blank cheque&quot;). He wanted to remain in Berlin until the crisis was resolved, but his courtiers persuaded him instead to go on his annual cruise of the North Sea on 6 July 1914. Wilhelm made erratic attempts to stay on top of the crisis via telegram, and when the Austro-Hungarian ultimatum was delivered to Serbia, he hurried back to Berlin. He reached Berlin on 28 July, read a copy of the Serbian reply, and wrote on it:

Unknown to the Emperor, Austro-Hungarian ministers and generals had already convinced the 83-year-old Franz Joseph I to sign a declaration of war against Serbia. As a direct consequence, Russia began a general mobilisation to attack Austria in defence of Serbia.

===July 1914===


On the night of 30 July 1914, when handed a document stating that Russia would not cancel its mobilisation, Wilhelm wrote a lengthy commentary containing these observations:

More recent British authors state that Wilhelm II really declared, &quot;Ruthlessness and weakness will start the most terrifying war of the world, whose purpose is to destroy Germany. Because there can no longer be any doubts, England, France and Russia have conspired themselves together to fight an annihilation war against us&quot;.

When it became clear that Germany would experience a war on two fronts and that Britain would enter the war if Germany attacked France through neutral Belgium, the panic-stricken Wilhelm attempted to redirect the main attack against Russia. When Helmuth von Moltke (the younger) (who had chosen the old plan from 1905, made by General von Schlieffen for the possibility of German war on two fronts) told him that this was impossible, Wilhelm said: &quot;Your uncle would have given me a different answer!&quot; Wilhelm is also reported to have said, &quot;To think that George and Nicky should have played me false! If my grandmother had been alive, she would never have allowed it.&quot; In the original Schlieffen Plan, Germany would attack the (supposed) weaker enemy first, meaning France. The plan supposed that it would take a long time before Russia was ready for war. Defeating France had been easy for Prussia in the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. At the 1914 border between France and Germany, an attack at this more southern part of France could be stopped by the French fortress along the border. However, Wilhelm II stopped any invasion of the Netherlands.

=== Early War ===
On 1 August 1914 (Saturday), Wilhelm II made a war speech in front of a great crowd. On Monday, he motored back to Berlin from Potsdam and issued an imperial order to convene the Reichstag the next day.

On 19 August 1914, Wilhelm II predicted that Germany will win the war. He said, &quot;I am firmly confident that, with the help of God, the bravery of the German Army and Navy and the unquenchable unanimity of the German people during those hours of danger, victory will crown our cause.&quot;

===Shadow-Kaiser===
Wilhelm&#x27;s role in wartime was one of ever-decreasing power as he increasingly handled awards ceremonies and honorific duties. The high command continued with its strategy even when it was clear that the Schlieffen plan had failed. By 1916, the Empire had effectively become a military dictatorship under the control of Field Marshal Paul von Hindenburg and General Erich Ludendorff. Increasingly cut off from reality and the political decision-making process, Wilhelm vacillated between defeatism and dreams of victory, depending upon the fortunes of his armies. Nevertheless, Wilhelm still retained the ultimate authority in matters of political appointment, and it was only after his consent had been gained that major changes to the high command could be brought about. Wilhelm was in favour of the dismissal of Colonel General Helmuth von Moltke in September 1914 and his replacement by General Erich von Falkenhayn. In 1917, Hindenburg and Ludendorff decided that Bethman-Hollweg was no longer acceptable to them as Chancellor and called upon the Kaiser to appoint somebody else. When asked whom they would accept, Ludendorff recommended Georg Michaelis, a nonentity whom he barely knew. Despite this, the Kaiser accepted the suggestion. Upon hearing in July 1917 that his cousin George V had changed the name of the British royal house to Windsor, Wilhelm remarked that he planned to see Shakespeare&#x27;s play &quot;&quot;The Merry Wives of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha&quot;&quot;. The Kaiser&#x27;s support base collapsed completely in October–November 1918 in the military, the civilian government, and in German public opinion, as President Woodrow Wilson made it very clear that the monarchy must be overthrown before an end of the war could take place. That year also saw Wilhelm sickened during the worldwide Spanish flu outbreak, though he survived.

==Abdication and exile==

Wilhelm was at the Imperial Army headquarters in Spa, Belgium, when the uprisings in Berlin and other centres took him by surprise in late 1918. Mutiny among the ranks of his beloved Kaiserliche Marine, the imperial navy, profoundly shocked him. After the outbreak of the German Revolution, Wilhelm could not make up his mind whether to abdicate. Up to that point, he accepted that he would likely have to give up the imperial crown, but still hoped to retain the Prussian kingship. He believed that as ruler of two-thirds of Germany, he would still be a key player in any new system. However, this was impossible under the imperial constitution. Wilhelm thought he ruled as emperor in a personal union with Prussia. In truth, the constitution defined the empire as a confederation of states under the permanent presidency of Prussia. The imperial crown was thus tied to the Prussian crown, meaning that Wilhelm could not renounce one crown without renouncing the other.

Wilhelm&#x27;s hope of retaining at least one of his crowns was revealed as unrealistic when, in the hope of preserving the monarchy in the face of growing revolutionary unrest, Chancellor Prince Max of Baden announced Wilhelm&#x27;s abdication of both titles on 9 November 1918. Prince Max himself was forced to resign later the same day, when it became clear that only Friedrich Ebert, leader of the SPD, could effectively exert control. Later that day, one of Ebert&#x27;s secretaries of state (ministers), Social Democrat Philipp Scheidemann, proclaimed Germany a republic.

Wilhelm accepted this &quot;fait accompli&quot; only after Ludendorff&#x27;s replacement, General Wilhelm Groener, had informed him that the officers and men of the army would march back in good order under Hindenburg&#x27;s command, but would certainly not fight for Wilhelm&#x27;s throne. The monarchy&#x27;s last and strongest support had been broken, and finally even Hindenburg, himself a lifelong monarchist, was obliged, after polling his generals, to advise the Emperor to give up the crown. On 10 November, Wilhelm crossed the border by train and went into exile in the neutral Netherlands. Upon the conclusion of the Treaty of Versailles in early 1919, Article 227 expressly provided for the prosecution of Wilhelm &quot;for a supreme offence against international morality and the sanctity of treaties&quot;, but the Dutch government refused to extradite him. King George V wrote that he looked on his cousin as &quot;the greatest criminal in history&quot; but opposed Prime Minister David Lloyd George&#x27;s proposal to &quot;hang the Kaiser&quot;. There was little zeal in Britain to prosecute. On 1 January 1920, it was stated in official circles in London that Great Britain would &quot;welcome refusal by Holland to deliver the former kaiser for trial,&quot; and it was hinted that this had been conveyed to the Dutch government through diplomatic channels:

President Woodrow Wilson of the United States opposed extradition, arguing that prosecuting Wilhelm would destabilise international order and lose the peace.

Wilhelm first settled in Amerongen, where on 28 November he issued a belated statement of abdication from both the Prussian and imperial thrones, thus formally ending the Hohenzollerns&#x27; 500-year rule over Prussia and its predecessor state, Brandenburg. Finally accepting the reality that he had lost both of his crowns for good, he gave up his rights to &quot;the throne of Prussia and to the German Imperial throne connected therewith&quot;. He also released his soldiers and officials in both Prussia and the empire from their oath of loyalty to him. He purchased a country house in the municipality of Doorn, known as Huis Doorn, and moved in on 15 May 1920. This was to be his home for the remainder of his life. The Weimar Republic allowed Wilhelm to remove twenty-three railway wagons of furniture, twenty-seven containing packages of all sorts, one bearing a car and another a boat, from the New Palace at Potsdam.

==Life in exile==

In 1922, Wilhelm published the first volume of his memoirs—a very slim volume that insisted he was not guilty of initiating the Great War, and defended his conduct throughout his reign, especially in matters of foreign policy. For the remaining twenty years of his life, he entertained guests (often of some standing) and kept himself updated on events in Europe. He grew a beard and allowed his famous moustache to droop, adopting a style very similar to that of his cousins King George V and Tsar Nicholas II. He also learned the Dutch language. Wilhelm developed a penchant for archaeology while residing at the Corfu Achilleion, excavating at the site of the Temple of Artemis in Corfu, a passion he retained in his exile. He had bought the former Greek residence of Empress Elisabeth after her murder in 1898. He also sketched plans for grand buildings and battleships when he was bored. In exile, one of Wilhelm&#x27;s greatest passions was hunting, and he killed thousands of animals, both beast and bird. Much of his time was spent chopping wood and thousands of trees were chopped down during his stay at Doorn.

=== Wealth ===
Wilhelm II was seen as the richest man in Germany before 1914. After his abdication he retained substantial wealth. It was reported that at least 60 railway wagons were needed to carry his furniture, art, porcelain and silver from Germany to the Netherlands. The Kaiser retained substantial cash reserves as well as several palaces. After 1945, the Hohenzollerns&#x27; forests, farms, factories and palaces in what became East Germany were expropriated and thousands of artworks were subsumed into state-owned museums.

=== Views on Nazism ===
In the early 1930s, Wilhelm apparently hoped that the successes of the Nazi Party would stimulate interest in a restoration of the House of Hohenzollern, with his eldest grandson as the new Kaiser. His second wife, Hermine, actively petitioned the Nazi government on her husband&#x27;s behalf. However, Adolf Hitler, despite being a veteran of the Imperial German Army during the First World War, felt nothing but contempt for the man he blamed for Germany&#x27;s greatest defeat, and the petitions were ignored. Though he played host to Hermann Göring at Doorn on at least one occasion, Wilhelm learned to distrust Hitler. Hearing of the murder of the wife of former Chancellor Kurt von Schleicher during the Night of the Long Knives, Wilhelm said, &quot;We have ceased to live under the rule of law and everyone must be prepared for the possibility that the Nazis will push their way in and put them up against the wall!&quot;

Wilhelm was also appalled at the Kristallnacht of 9–10 November 1938, saying &quot;I have just made my views clear to Auwi [August Wilhelm, Wilhelm&#x27;s fourth son] in the presence of his brothers. He had the nerve to say that he agreed with the Jewish pogroms and understood why they had come about. When I told him that any decent man would describe these actions as gangsterisms, he appeared totally indifferent. He is completely lost to our family&quot;. Wilhelm also stated, &quot;For the first time, I am ashamed to be a German&quot;:

In the wake of the German victory over Poland in September 1939, Wilhelm&#x27;s adjutant, Wilhelm von Dommes, wrote on his behalf to Hitler, stating that the House of Hohenzollern &quot;remained loyal&quot; and noted that nine Prussian Princes (one son and eight grandchildren) were stationed at the front, concluding &quot;because of the special circumstances that require residence in a neutral foreign country, His Majesty must personally decline to make the aforementioned comment. The Emperor has therefore charged me with making a communication.&quot; Wilhelm greatly admired the success which the Wehrmacht was able to achieve in the opening months of the Second World War, and personally sent Hitler a congratulatory telegram when the Netherlands surrendered in May 1940: &quot;My Führer, I congratulate you and hope that under your marvellous leadership the German monarchy will be restored completely.&quot; Unimpressed, Hitler commented to Heinz Linge, his valet, &quot;What an idiot!&quot;

Upon the fall of Paris a month later, Wilhelm sent another telegram: &quot;Under the deeply moving impression of France&#x27;s capitulation I congratulate you and all the German armed forces on the God-given prodigious victory with the words of Kaiser Wilhelm the Great of the year 1870: &#x27;What a turn of events through God&#x27;s dispensation!&#x27; All German hearts are filled with the chorale of Leuthen, which the victors of Leuthen, the soldiers of the Great King sang: &#x27;Now thank we all our God!&#x27;&quot; In a letter to his daughter Victoria Louise, Duchess of Brunswick, he wrote triumphantly, &quot;Thus is the pernicious &quot;Entente Cordiale&quot; of Uncle Edward VII brought to nought.&quot; In a September 1940 letter to an American journalist, Wilhelm praised Germany&#x27;s rapid early conquests as &quot;a succession of miracles&quot;, but remarked also that &quot;the brilliant leading Generals in this war came from &quot;My&quot; school, they fought under my command in the World War as lieutenants, captains and young majors. Educated by Schlieffen they put the plans he had worked out under me into practice along the same lines as we did in 1914.&quot;

After the German conquest of the Netherlands in 1940, the aging Wilhelm retired completely from public life. In May 1940, Wilhelm declined an offer from Winston Churchill of asylum in Britain, preferring to die at Huis Doorn.

=== Anti-England, antisemitic, and anti-Freemason views ===
During his last year at Doorn, Wilhelm believed that Germany was still the land of monarchy and Christianity, while England was the land of classical liberalism and therefore of Satan and the Antichrist. He argued that the English nobility were &quot;Freemasons thoroughly infected by Juda&quot;. Wilhelm asserted that the &quot;British people must be &quot;liberated&quot; from &quot;Antichrist Juda&quot;. We must drive Juda out of England just as he has been chased out of the Continent.&quot;

He also believed a conspiracy theory that Anglo-American Freemasonry and the Jews had caused both world wars, and were aiming for a world empire financed by British and American gold, but that &quot;Juda&#x27;s plan has been smashed to pieces and they themselves swept out of the European Continent!&quot; Continental Europe was now, Wilhelm wrote, &quot;consolidating and closing itself off from British influences after the elimination of the British and the Jews!&quot; The result would be a &quot;U.S. of Europe!&quot; In a 1940 letter to his sister Princess Margaret, Wilhelm wrote: &quot;The hand of God is creating a new world &amp; working  ... We are becoming the U.S. of Europe under German leadership, a united European Continent.&quot; He added: &quot;The Jews [are] being thrust out of their nefarious positions in all countries, whom they have driven to hostility for centuries.&quot;

Also, in 1940 came what would have been his mother&#x27;s 100th birthday. Despite their very troubled relationship, Wilhelm wrote to a friend, &quot;Today the 100th birthday of my mother! No notice is taken of it at home! No &#x27;Memorial Service&#x27; or ... committee to remember her marvellous work for the ... welfare of our German people ... Nobody of the new generation knows anything about her.&quot;
==Death==
Wilhelm died of a pulmonary embolism in Doorn, Netherlands, on 4 June 1941, at the age of 82, just weeks before the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union. Despite his personal resentment and animosity toward the monarchy, Hitler wanted to bring the Kaiser&#x27;s body back to Berlin for a state funeral, as Hitler felt that such a funeral, with himself acting in the role of heir apparent to the throne, would be useful to exploit for propaganda. However, Wilhelm&#x27;s orders that his body was not to return to Germany unless the monarchy was first restored were then revealed and were grudgingly respected. The Nazi occupation authorities arranged for a small military funeral, with a few hundred people present. The mourners included Field Marshal August von Mackensen, fully dressed in his old Imperial Hussars uniform, former World War I Office of Naval Intelligence field agent Admiral Wilhelm Canaris, Colonel General Curt Haase, World War I flying ace turned &quot;Wehrmachtbefehlshaber&quot; for the Netherlands General Friedrich Christiansen, and &quot;Reichskommissar&quot; for the Netherlands Arthur Seyss-Inquart, along with a few other military advisers. However, Kaiser Wilhelm&#x27;s insistence that the swastika and Nazi Party regalia not be displayed at his funeral was ignored, as is seen in the photographs of the funeral taken by a Dutch photographer.

Wilhelm was buried in a mausoleum upon the grounds of Huis Doorn, which has since become a place of pilgrimage for German monarchists, who gather there every year on the anniversary of his death to pay their homage to the last German Emperor.

==Historiography==
Three trends have characterised the writing about Wilhelm. First, the court-inspired writers considered him a martyr and a hero, often uncritically accepting the justifications provided in the Kaiser&#x27;s own memoirs. Second, there came those who judged Wilhelm to be completely unable to handle the great responsibilities of his position, a ruler too reckless to deal with power. Third, after 1950, later scholars have sought to transcend the passions of the early 20th century and attempted an objective portrayal of Wilhelm and his rule.

On 8 June 1913, a year before the Great War began, &quot;The New York Times&quot; published a special supplement devoted to the 25th anniversary of the Kaiser&#x27;s accession. The banner headline read: &quot;Kaiser, 25 Years a Ruler, Hailed as Chief Peacemaker&quot;. The accompanying story called him &quot;the greatest factor for peace that our time can show&quot;, and credited Wilhelm with frequently rescuing Europe from the brink of war. Until the late 1950s, Germany under the last Kaiser was depicted by most historians as an almost absolute monarchy. Partly, however, this was a deliberate deception by German civil servants and elected officials. For example, former President Theodore Roosevelt believed the Kaiser was in control of German foreign policy because Hermann Speck von Sternburg, the German ambassador in Washington and a personal friend of Roosevelt, presented to the President messages from Chancellor von Bülow as though they were messages from the Kaiser. Later historians downplayed his role, arguing that senior officials regularly learned to work around the Kaiser&#x27;s back. More recently, historian John C. G. Röhl has portrayed Wilhelm as the key figure in understanding the recklessness and downfall of Imperial Germany. Thus, the argument is still made that the Kaiser played a major role in promoting the policies of both naval and colonialist expansion that caused the deterioration of Germany&#x27;s relations with Britain before 1914.

==Marriages and issue==

Wilhelm and his first wife, Augusta Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein, were married on 27 February 1881. They had seven children:

Empress Augusta, known affectionately as &quot;Dona&quot;, was a constant companion to Wilhelm, and her death on 11 April 1921 was a devastating blow. It also came less than a year after their son Joachim committed suicide.

===Remarriage===

The following January, Wilhelm received a birthday greeting from a son of the late Prince Johann George Ludwig Ferdinand August Wilhelm of Schönaich-Carolath. The 63-year-old Wilhelm invited the boy and his mother, Princess Hermine Reuss of Greiz, to Doorn. Wilhelm found 35-year-old Hermine very attractive, and greatly enjoyed her company. The couple were wed in Doorn on 5 November 1922 despite the objections of Wilhelm&#x27;s monarchist supporters and his children. Hermine&#x27;s daughter, Princess Henriette, married the late Prince Joachim&#x27;s son, Karl Franz Josef, in 1940, but divorced in 1946. Hermine remained a constant companion to the aging former emperor until his death.

==Religion==
===Own views===
In accordance with his role as the King of Prussia, Emperor Wilhelm II was a Lutheran member of the Evangelical State Church of Prussia&#x27;s older Provinces. It was a United Protestant denomination, bringing together Reformed and Lutheran believers.

===Attitude towards Islam===
Wilhelm II was on friendly terms with the Muslim world. He described himself as a &quot;friend&quot; to &quot;300 million Mohammedans&quot;. Following his trip to Constantinople (which he visited three times—an unbeaten record for any European monarch) in 1898, Wilhelm II wrote to Nicholas II that:

In response to the political competition between the Christian sects to build bigger and grander churches and monuments which made the sects appear idolatrous and turned Muslims away from the Christian message.

===Antisemitism===

Wilhelm&#x27;s biographer Lamar Cecil identified Wilhelm&#x27;s &quot;curious but well-developed anti-Semitism&quot;, noting that in 1888 a friend of Wilhelm &quot;declared that the young Kaiser&#x27;s dislike of his Hebrew subjects, one rooted in a perception that they possessed an overweening influence in Germany, was so strong that it could not be overcome&quot;.

Cecil concludes:

At the height of German military intervention against the Red Army during the Russian Civil War in 1918, Kaiser Wilhelm also suggested a similar campaign against the &quot;Jew-Bolsheviks&quot; who were slaughtering the Baltic German nobility in the Baltic states, citing the example of what Turks had done to the Ottoman Armenians just a few years earlier.

On 2 December 1919, Wilhelm wrote to Mackensen, denouncing the November Revolution of 1918 and his own forced abdication as the &quot;deepest, most disgusting shame ever perpetrated by a person in history, the Germans have done to themselves ... egged on and misled by the tribe of Judah ... Let no German ever forget this, nor rest until these parasites have been destroyed and exterminated from German soil!&quot; Wilhelm advocated a &quot;regular international all-worlds pogrom à la Russe&quot; as &quot;the best cure&quot; and further believed that Jews were a &quot;nuisance that humanity must get rid of some way or other. I believe the best thing would be gas!&quot;

==Documentaries and films==
* &quot;William II. – The last days of the German Monarchy&quot; (original title: &quot;Wilhelm II. – Die letzten Tage des Deutschen Kaiserreichs&quot;), about the abdication and flight of the last German Kaiser. Germany/Belgium, 2007. Produced by seelmannfilm and German Television. Written and directed by Christoph Weinert.
*&quot;Queen Victoria and the Crippled Kaiser&quot;, Channel 4, &quot;Secret History&quot; series 13; first broadcast 17 November 2013
* Barry Foster played the adult Wilhelm II in several episodes of the 1974 BBC TV series &quot;Fall of Eagles&quot;.
* Christopher Neame played Wilhelm II in the several episodes of the 1975 BBC TV series &quot;Edward the Seventh&quot;.
* Rupert Julian played Wilhelm II in the 1918 Hollywood propaganda film &quot;The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin&quot;.
* Alfred Struwe played Wilhelm in the 1987 Polish historical drama film &quot;Magnat&quot;.
* Robert Stadlober played a young crown prince Wilhelm and friend of Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria in the acclaimed 2006 film &quot;Kronprinz Rudolf&quot; (The Crown Prince).
* Ladislav Frej played the Kaiser in the 2008 film &quot;The Red Baron&quot;.
* Rainer Sellien played Wilhelm II in the 2014 BBC miniseries &quot;37 Days&quot;.
* Christopher Plummer played a depressed Wilhelm II living in exile at Huis Doorn in the 2016 romantic war drama &quot;The Exception&quot;.
* Sylvester Groth portrayed Wilhelm II during his last days as Emperor in the 2018 miniseries &quot;Kaisersturz&quot; (&quot;The Emperor&#x27;s Fall&quot;).
* Tom Hollander played Wilhelm II in the 2021 movie The King&#x27;s Man.

==Arms, Orders and decorations==

;German honours
;Foreign honours
==Ancestry==
==Notes==
==See also==
* Ålesund, a Norwegian city rebuilt by Wilhelm II after it had been almost completely destroyed by fire in 1904
* German entry into World War I
* Family tree of German monarchs
* Wilhelminism on society, politics, culture, art and architecture of Germany 1890–1918

==References==
==Sources==
* . online
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* , Archive.org.
* 
* .
* 
* 
* .
* , translated in 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* .
* .
* &quot;The interview of the Emperor Wilhelm II on October 28, 1908&quot;. &quot;London Daily Telegraph&quot; Online
==Further reading==

* Clark, Christopher M. &quot;Kaiser Wilhelm II&quot; (2000).
* Domeier, Norman. &quot;The Eulenburg Affair: A Cultural History of Politics in the German Empire&quot; (2015).
* Eley, Geoff. &quot;The View From The Throne: The Personal Rule of Kaiser Wilhelm II&quot;, &quot;Historical Journal,&quot; June 1985, Vol. 28 Issue 2, pp. 469–485.
* Haardt, Oliver FR. &quot;The Kaiser in the Federal State, 1871–1918&quot;. &quot;German History&quot; 34.4 (2016): 529–554, online.
* Kohut, Thomas A. &quot;Wilhelm II and the Germans: A Study in Leadership&quot;, New York: Oxford University Press, 1991. .
* Langer, William L. &quot;The Diplomacy of Imperialism, 1890–1902&quot; (1935) online.
* Mommsen, Wolfgang J. &quot;Kaiser Wilhelm II and German Politics&quot;. &quot;Journal of Contemporary History&quot; 1990 25(2–3): 289–316. (argues his irrationality and instability made worse the weaknesses in Germany&#x27;s constitutional and political systems).
* Otte, T.G., &quot;&#x27;The Winston of Germany&#x27;: The British Elite and the Last German Emperor&quot; &quot;Canadian Journal of History&quot; 36 (December 2001).
* Retallack, James. &quot;Germany in the Age of Kaiser Wilhelm II&quot; (St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 1996). .
* Rich, Norman. &quot;The Question of National Interest in Imperial German Foreign Policy: Bismarck, William II, and the Road to World War I&quot;. &quot;Naval War College Review&quot; (1973) 26#1: 28–41, online.
*Röhl, John C. G; Sombart, Nicolaus, eds. &quot;Kaiser Wilhelm II New Interpretations: The Corfu Papers&quot; (Cambridge UP, 1982).
* Van der Kiste, John. &quot;Kaiser Wilhelm II: Germany&#x27;s Last Emperor&quot;, Sutton Publishing, 1999. .
* Waite, Robert GL &quot;Kaiser and Führer: A Comparative Study of Personality and Politics&quot; (1998) (psychohistory comparing him to Adolf Hitler).
==External links==
* &quot;The German Emperor as shown in his public utterances&quot;
* , Google Books.
* &quot;The German emperor&#x27;s speeches: being a selection from the speeches, edicts, letters, and telegrams of the Emperor William II&quot;
* , mostly in German
* 
* Historical film documents on Wilhelm II from the time of World War I at European Film Gateway
* The 1922 book review of &quot;My Memoir&quot; from &quot;The Spectator&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="0" end="10" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q501503" start="86" end="100" title="German Emperor" label="German Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770786" start="105" end="120" title="King of Prussia" label="King of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187577" start="137" end="151" title="Abdication of Wilhelm II" label="his abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="189" end="202" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="218" end="238" title="House of Hohenzollern" label="Hohenzollern dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q57180" start="313" end="344" title="Frederick William IV of Prussia" label="Frederick William IV of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58600" start="369" end="393" title="Frederick III, German Emperor" label="Prince Frederick William"/>
<link wikidata="Q116728" start="398" end="422" title="Victoria, Princess Royal" label="Victoria, Princess Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585499" start="455" end="485" title="Descendants of Queen Victoria" label="eldest of the 42 grandchildren"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="489" end="503" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="782" end="799" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="1000" end="1022" title="German colonial empire" label="German colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q675321" start="1082" end="1094" title="Jiaozhou Bay Leased Territory" label="Jiaozhou Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1100" end="1124" title="Northern Mariana Islands#German possession and Japanese mandate" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="1134" end="1150" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1446" end="1468" title="Imperial German Navy#1888 to 1897, under Kaiser Wilhelm II" label="massive naval build-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q164771" start="1470" end="1506" title="Agadir Crisis" label="contesting French control of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q639128" start="1512" end="1546" title="Berlin–Baghdad railway" label="building a railway through Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="1594" end="1606" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1714" end="1729" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1748" end="1762" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="1826" end="1837" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2105" end="2130" title="German Empire#Revolt and demise" label="fall of the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q917519" start="2156" end="2169" title="brinksmanship" label="brinksmanship"/>
<link wikidata="Q917435" start="2259" end="2270" title="July Crisis" label="July Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2304" end="2315" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q641853" start="2450" end="2470" title="Oberste Heeresleitung" label="Supreme Army Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q641853" start="2555" end="2576" title="Oberste Heeresleitung" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="2835" end="2848" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="2991" end="3021" title="German Revolution of 1918–1919" label="German Revolution of 1918–1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="3093" end="3108" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q596214" start="3194" end="3220" title="Reichskommissariat Niederlande" label="occupation by Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="3294" end="3300" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q530930" start="3327" end="3353" title="Kronprinzenpalais" label="Crown Prince&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q116728" start="3357" end="3381" title="Victoria, Princess Royal" label="Victoria, Princess Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q58600" start="3406" end="3441" title="Frederick III, German Emperor" label="Prince Frederick William of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="3532" end="3546" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q57180" start="3622" end="3642" title="Frederick William IV" label="Frederick William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="3655" end="3662" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="3773" end="3780" title="William I, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="3833" end="3839" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585499" start="3878" end="3894" title="Descendants of Queen Victoria" label="42 grandchildren"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="3944" end="3957" title="Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572907" start="4115" end="4133" title="line of succession" label="line of succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="4230" end="4243" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q702349" start="4269" end="4302" title="constitution of the German Empire" label="constitution of the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832870" start="4395" end="4427" title="succession to the British throne" label="succession to the British throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q176918" start="4595" end="4609" title="water breaking" label="water breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q813687" start="4750" end="4765" title="breech position" label="breech position"/>
<link wikidata="Q91106" start="4781" end="4801" title="Eduard Arnold Martin" label="Eduard Arnold Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755412" start="4888" end="4894" title="ipecac" label="ipecac"/>
<link wikidata="Q172275" start="4926" end="4936" title="chloroform" label="chloroform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806500" start="4996" end="5011" title="Sir James Clark" label="Sir James Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445454" start="5331" end="5336" title="ergot" label="ergot"/>
<link wikidata="Q172563" start="5451" end="5465" title="umbilical cord" label="umbilical cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517861" start="5897" end="5924" title="Brachial plexus injury" label="tearing the brachial plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105688" start="6129" end="6136" title="Hypoxia (medical)" label="hypoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694437" start="6531" end="6553" title="Perinatal asphyxia" label="hypoxic state at birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736543" start="6832" end="6848" title="Erb&amp;#x27;s palsy" label="Erb&amp;#x27;s palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111954863" start="7421" end="7471" title="Wedding of Prince Albert Edward and Princess Alexandra" label="his uncle Bertie and Princess Alexandra of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="7484" end="7494" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="7499" end="7514" title="Queen Alexandra" label="Queen Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998487" start="7552" end="7568" title="Highland costume" label="Highland costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q946218" start="7596" end="7600" title="dirk" label="dirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q158143" start="7680" end="7693" title="Alfred, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Prince Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504149" start="8707" end="8728" title="Georg Ernst Hinzpeter" label="Georg Ernst Hinzpeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="8989" end="8995" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464247" start="9003" end="9022" title="Friedrichsgymnasium Kassel" label="Friedrichsgymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="9148" end="9167" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q152171" start="9210" end="9228" title="University of Bonn" label="University of Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q896332" start="9299" end="9318" title="Corps Borussia Bonn" label="Corps Borussia Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="9449" end="9470" title="house of Hohenzollern" label="house of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q170365" start="9541" end="9561" title="Prussian aristocracy" label="Prussian aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897846" start="9671" end="9698" title="Prussian virtues" label="military culture of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878520" start="11226" end="11255" title="Guards Corps (German Empire)" label="First Regiment of Foot Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="11270" end="11277" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="11673" end="11690" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280026" start="12088" end="12102" title="Morell Mackenzie" label="English doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q58063" start="12355" end="12392" title="Princess Elisabeth of Hesse and by Rhine (1864–1918)" label="Princess Elisabeth of Hesse-Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q161247" start="12504" end="12551" title="Princess Augusta Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein" label="Princess Augusta Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q120180" start="12964" end="12992" title="Tsar Alexander III of Russia" label="Tsar Alexander III of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="13067" end="13085" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Tsarevich Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51056" start="13243" end="13276" title="Franz Joseph I of Austria-Hungary" label="Franz Joseph I of Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q59904" start="13303" end="13323" title="Herbert von Bismarck" label="Herbert von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q698142" start="13699" end="13713" title="Year of the Three Emperors" label="that same year"/>
<link wikidata="Q160208" start="15455" end="15464" title="Reichstag (German Empire)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="15502" end="15522" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q458791" start="15530" end="15555" title="German Conservative Party" label="German Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q694299" start="15564" end="15586" title="National Liberal Party (Germany)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q138503" start="15725" end="15732" title="Okhrana" label="Okhrana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15807" end="15821" title="Exile#Internal exile" label="internal exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q442421" start="15828" end="15839" title="Old Liberals" label="Old Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q70962" start="15850" end="15863" title="Eugen Richter" label="Eugen Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="15895" end="15903" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="15979" end="16002" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="16035" end="16051" title="Social Democracy" label="Social Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="16356" end="16370" title="Strike action" label="went on strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="16749" end="16768" title="German Constitution" label="German Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="16945" end="16960" title="organized labor" label="organized labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="17309" end="17329" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q157537" start="17524" end="17545" title="Catholic Centre Party" label="Catholic Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="17583" end="17603" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="17767" end="17790" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="17805" end="17815" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="18111" end="18125" title="Autocracy" label="absolute power"/>
<link wikidata="Q570555" start="18598" end="18624" title="Catholic Church in Germany" label="Catholic Church in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q159879" start="18684" end="18695" title="Kulturkampf" label="Kulturkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338119" start="18835" end="18840" title="Freiherr" label="Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q533645" start="18841" end="18862" title="Ludwig Windthorst" label="Ludwig von Windthorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="19129" end="19146" title="Irish nationalist" label="Irish nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q314917" start="19157" end="19178" title="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q317436" start="19183" end="19206" title="Charles Stewart Parnell" label="Charles Stewart Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114635" start="20178" end="20191" title="ship of state" label="ship of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="20575" end="20597" title="German colonial empire" label="German colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127126" start="20755" end="20772" title="military alliance" label="military alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="20782" end="20803" title="Third French Republic" label="Third French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889608" start="20887" end="20902" title="Modris Eksteins" label="Modris Eksteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q245122" start="21046" end="21055" title="scapegoat" label="scapegoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="21071" end="21088" title="Classical Liberal" label="Classical Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q570555" start="21104" end="21118" title="Catholic Church in Germany" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="21138" end="21147" title="Marxism" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q68951" start="21276" end="21291" title="divide and rule" label="divide and rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="21322" end="21335" title="German people" label="German people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201118" start="21419" end="21434" title="C.L. Sulzberger" label="C.L. Sulzberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q311442" start="21480" end="21513" title="Louis Ferdinand, Prince of Prussia" label="Prince Louis Ferdinand of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151423" start="21837" end="21852" title="Berlin Congress" label="Berlin Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="22018" end="22024" title="Shogun" label="Shogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="22107" end="22123" title="Japanese emperor" label="Japanese emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="22137" end="22142" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873" start="22329" end="22344" title="Leo von Caprivi" label="Leo von Caprivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q77166" start="22723" end="22761" title="Chlodwig von Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst" label="Chlodwig von Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst"/>
<link wikidata="Q60113" start="22893" end="22911" title="Bernhard von Bülow" label="Bernhard von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q537340" start="23402" end="23416" title="Wilhelmism" label="Wilhelmine Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q156649" start="24153" end="24164" title="Imperial German Navy" label="German Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="24319" end="24337" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142988" start="24346" end="24365" title="Alfred Thayer Mahan" label="Alfred Thayer Mahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139846" start="24385" end="24424" title="The Influence of Sea Power upon History" label="The Influence of Sea Power upon History"/>
<link wikidata="Q77113" start="24521" end="24537" title="Bethmann Hollweg" label="Bethmann Hollweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q708038" start="24910" end="24932" title="Kaiser Wilhelm Society" label="Kaiser Wilhelm Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="25117" end="25145" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Prussian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4498889" start="25639" end="25658" title="Order of Saint John (Bailiwick of Brandenburg)" label="Order of Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q70462" start="26177" end="26193" title="Thomas Nipperdey" label="Thomas Nipperdey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528543" start="26222" end="26235" title="David Fromkin" label="David Fromkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030284" start="26262" end="26284" title="love–hate relationship" label="love–hate relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="27642" end="27650" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="27695" end="27711" title="Marie of Romania" label="Marie of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q154423" start="27713" end="27727" title="Maud of Norway" label="Maud of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q160001" start="27729" end="27754" title="Victoria Eugenie of Spain" label="Victoria Eugenie of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="27767" end="27786" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)" label="Alexandra of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155822" start="27827" end="27833" title="Sophia of Prussia" label="Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152099" start="27842" end="27877" title="Constantine I of Greece" label="Constantine, Crown Prince of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="27939" end="27950" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="27954" end="27969" title="Greek Orthodoxy" label="Greek Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="28401" end="28411" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138197" start="28791" end="28801" title="Cowes Week" label="Cowes Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="28809" end="28822" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="29044" end="29062" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q565155" start="29277" end="29290" title="Osborne House" label="Osborne House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509126" start="29435" end="29461" title="funeral of King Edward VII" label="funeral of King Edward VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q57529" start="29546" end="29561" title="Princess Victoria Louise of Prussia" label="Victoria Louise"/>
<link wikidata="Q76927" start="29704" end="29714" title="Mary of Teck" label="Queen Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q885199" start="30098" end="30113" title="Kruger telegram" label="Kruger telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q244407" start="30163" end="30174" title="Paul Kruger" label="Paul Kruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q550374" start="30194" end="30212" title="Transvaal Republic" label="Transvaal Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="30239" end="30253" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q916340" start="30265" end="30277" title="Jameson Raid" label="Jameson Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="30438" end="30453" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499276" start="30590" end="30602" title="yellow peril" label="yellow peril"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="30768" end="30786" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="30872" end="30886" title="Imperial Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q329618" start="31020" end="31042" title="German colonial empire" label="German colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="31145" end="31162" title="German South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="31168" end="31175" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312492" start="31225" end="31249" title="Herero and Nama genocide" label="Herero and Nama genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q65898" start="31340" end="31357" title="Lothar von Trotha" label="Lothar von Trotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q210761" start="31461" end="31480" title="morganatic marriage" label="morganatic marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="31484" end="31519" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q153099" start="31523" end="31545" title="Sophie, Duchess of Hohenberg" label="Countess Sophie Chotek"/>
<link wikidata="Q57672" start="31728" end="31745" title="Ernest Augustus, Duke of Brunswick" label="Duke of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="31793" end="31809" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="31905" end="31923" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Kingdom of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="32001" end="32015" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="32144" end="32158" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="32180" end="32193" title="Abdulhamid II" label="Abdulhamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q44565" start="32241" end="32247" title="Eyalet" label="Eyalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="32314" end="32319" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="32350" end="32359" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="32364" end="32373" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q180294" start="32399" end="32404" title="Jaffa" label="Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="32418" end="32424" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q26338" start="32458" end="32462" title="Aley" label="Aley"/>
<link wikidata="Q26569" start="32467" end="32472" title="Zahlé" label="Zahlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="32482" end="32490" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q257153" start="32525" end="32545" title="Mausoleum of Saladin" label="Mausoleum of Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178835" start="32630" end="32637" title="Baalbek" label="Baalbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q639128" start="32792" end="32814" title="Berlin–Baghdad railway" label="Berlin–Baghdad railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q322920" start="32828" end="32843" title="German Fountain" label="German Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q151494" start="32966" end="32974" title="Mehmed V" label="Mehmed V"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="33007" end="33022" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q320404" start="33119" end="33140" title="Eight-Nation Alliance" label="Eight-Nation Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="33243" end="33247" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q56034" start="33418" end="33439" title="German Foreign Office" label="German Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="33887" end="33893" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143500" start="34231" end="34240" title="fishplate" label="fishplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q63411" start="35054" end="35071" title="Maximilian Harden" label="Maximilian Harden"/>
<link wikidata="Q213964" start="35218" end="35238" title="Philipp zu Eulenberg" label="Philipp zu Eulenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343649" start="35253" end="35269" title="Robert K. Massie" label="Robert K. Massie"/>
<link wikidata="Q464399" start="35478" end="35498" title="Anglo-French Entente" label="Anglo-French Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="36010" end="36021" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q167455" start="36100" end="36115" title="First Moroccan Crisis" label="Moroccan Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="36156" end="36163" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q307132" start="36238" end="36258" title="Abdelaziz of Morocco" label="Abdelaziz of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q163573" start="36947" end="36967" title="Algeciras Conference" label="Algeciras Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="37076" end="37095" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048565" start="37360" end="37381" title="Edward Montagu-Stuart-Wortley" label="Edward Stuart-Wortley"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="37726" end="37741" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726081" start="38095" end="38113" title="Mad as a March hare" label="mad as March hares"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="39198" end="39208" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39447" end="39459" title="Fleet review#Queen Victoria" label="Fleet Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q107395117" start="39463" end="39514" title="Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria" label="his grandmother&amp;#x27;s Diamond Jubilee celebrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q155022" start="39805" end="39823" title="Alfred von Tirpitz" label="Alfred von Tirpitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q843809" start="39987" end="39999" title="Tirpitz Plan" label="Tirpitz Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="40164" end="40173" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q316702" start="40387" end="40397" title="Fleet Acts" label="Fleet Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="40554" end="40565" title="dreadnought" label="dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q144825" start="40736" end="40746" title="Kiel Canal" label="Kiel Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="40823" end="40833" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q881022" start="40907" end="40920" title="German Imperial Naval Cabinet" label="Naval Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935085" start="40942" end="40974" title="German Imperial Military Cabinet" label="German Imperial Military Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q96552" start="41192" end="41216" title="Gustav von Senden-Bibran" label="Gustav von Senden-Bibran"/>
<link wikidata="Q102602" start="41587" end="41604" title="Max von der Goltz" label="Max von der Goltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q879785" start="41796" end="41811" title="Reichsmarineamt" label="Reichsmarineamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q95310" start="41925" end="41944" title="Karl Eduard Heusner" label="Karl Eduard Heusner"/>
<link wikidata="Q91963" start="41979" end="42001" title="Friedrich von Hollmann" label="Friedrich von Hollmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q130877" start="42627" end="42637" title="Black Hand (Serbia)" label="Black Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="42786" end="42792" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q917435" start="43093" end="43119" title="July Crisis" label="Austro-Hungarian ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="44200" end="44207" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q57130" start="44295" end="44327" title="Helmuth von Moltke the Younger" label="Helmuth von Moltke (the younger)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28938" start="44384" end="44398" title="von Schlieffen" label="von Schlieffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44205" start="44508" end="44513" title="Helmuth von Moltke the Elder" label="uncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="44619" end="44625" title="George V" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="44630" end="44635" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q152468" start="44754" end="44769" title="Schlieffen Plan" label="Schlieffen Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152468" start="45963" end="45978" title="Schlieffen plan" label="Schlieffen plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="46093" end="46112" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58579" start="46125" end="46141" title="Erich Ludendorff" label="Erich Ludendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q57153" start="46659" end="46679" title="Erich von Falkenhayn" label="Erich von Falkenhayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q60115" start="46903" end="46918" title="Georg Michaelis" label="Georg Michaelis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81589" start="47105" end="47112" title="House of Windsor" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="47154" end="47165" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q844836" start="47184" end="47232" title="The Merry Wives of Windsor" label="&amp;quot;The Merry Wives of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="47402" end="47416" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="47573" end="47584" title="Spanish flu" label="Spanish flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q39865" start="47691" end="47703" title="Spa, Belgium" label="Spa, Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q702250" start="47787" end="47793" title="Wilhelmshaven mutiny" label="Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q156649" start="47825" end="47843" title="Kaiserliche Marine" label="Kaiserliche Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="47914" end="47931" title="German Revolution" label="German Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="48330" end="48344" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q76908" start="48803" end="48822" title="Prince Max of Baden" label="Prince Max of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646" start="48985" end="49000" title="Friedrich Ebert" label="Friedrich Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="49016" end="49019" title="SPD" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q70581" start="49140" end="49159" title="Philipp Scheidemann" label="Philipp Scheidemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q779851" start="49161" end="49190" title="Proclamation of the republic in Germany" label="proclaimed Germany a republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q57513" start="49291" end="49306" title="Wilhelm Groener" label="Wilhelm Groener"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="49780" end="49791" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="49820" end="49840" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="50188" end="50206" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q572269" start="50753" end="50762" title="Amerongen Castle" label="Amerongen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615161" start="51338" end="51343" title="Doorn" label="Doorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q559460" start="51354" end="51364" title="Huis Doorn" label="Huis Doorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="51454" end="51469" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q677383" start="51632" end="51642" title="New Palace (Potsdam)" label="New Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="52169" end="52185" title="Tsar Nicholas II" label="Tsar Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q56240051" start="52290" end="52306" title="Achilleion (Corfu)" label="Corfu Achilleion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654754" start="52338" end="52364" title="Temple of Artemis, Corfu" label="Temple of Artemis in Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q150782" start="52446" end="52463" title="Empress Elisabeth of Austria" label="Empress Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="53427" end="53437" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="53487" end="53508" title="House of Hohenzollern" label="House of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="53659" end="53671" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="53704" end="53724" title="Imperial German Army" label="Imperial German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="53736" end="53751" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="53894" end="53908" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q57133" start="54035" end="54054" title="Kurt von Schleicher" label="Kurt von Schleicher"/>
<link wikidata="Q130783" start="54066" end="54090" title="Night of the Long Knives" label="Night of the Long Knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="54319" end="54332" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q58777" start="54404" end="54408" title="Prince August Wilhelm of Prussia" label="Auwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="54541" end="54547" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="54849" end="54875" title="Invasion of Poland" label="German victory over Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="55434" end="55443" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="55493" end="55509" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q484079" start="55619" end="55625" title="Führer" label="Führer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58783" start="55781" end="55792" title="Heinz Linge" label="Heinz Linge"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="55842" end="55855" title="fall of Paris" label="fall of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="56078" end="56102" title="Kaiser Wilhelm I" label="Kaiser Wilhelm the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q313435" start="56267" end="56274" title="Battle of Leuthen" label="Leuthen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005051" start="56319" end="56343" title="Now thank we all our God" label="Now thank we all our God"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="57175" end="57192" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="57449" end="57469" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="57487" end="57492" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="57501" end="57511" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769470" start="57532" end="57548" title="English nobility" label="English nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="57560" end="57570" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="57826" end="57843" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763578" start="57849" end="57875" title="Anglo-American Freemasonry" label="Anglo-American Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="58308" end="58322" title="U.S. of Europe" label="U.S. of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q61338" start="58361" end="58378" title="Princess Margaret of Prussia" label="Princess Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="59144" end="59162" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="59242" end="59275" title="Axis invasion of the Soviet Union" label="Axis invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q76909" start="59874" end="59894" title="August von Mackensen" label="August von Mackensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711623" start="59966" end="59994" title="Nachrichten-Abteilung" label="Office of Naval Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446967" start="59995" end="60006" title="field agent" label="field agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q57129" start="60015" end="60030" title="Wilhelm Canaris" label="Wilhelm Canaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q63136" start="60048" end="60058" title="Curt Haase" label="Curt Haase"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="60072" end="60082" title="flying ace" label="flying ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554604" start="60096" end="60117" title="Wehrmachtbefehlshaber" label="Wehrmachtbefehlshaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q64534" start="60152" end="60174" title="Friedrich Christiansen" label="Friedrich Christiansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q695843" start="60186" end="60201" title="Reichskommissar" label="Reichskommissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q650219" start="60228" end="60248" title="Arthur Seyss-Inquart" label="Arthur Seyss-Inquart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934938" start="60273" end="60289" title="military adviser" label="military adviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="60343" end="60351" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="61361" end="61379" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="61846" end="61863" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="61992" end="62010" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214071" start="62079" end="62106" title="Hermann Speck von Sternburg" label="Hermann Speck von Sternburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q60113" start="62221" end="62241" title="Chancellor von Bülow" label="Chancellor von Bülow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699489" start="62438" end="62453" title="John C. G. Röhl" label="John C. G. Röhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q61448" start="63393" end="63424" title="Princess Hermine Reuss of Greiz" label="Princess Hermine Reuss of Greiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306331" start="63674" end="63692" title="Princess Henriette of Schönaich-Carolath" label="Princess Henriette"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="63977" end="63985" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q163202" start="64000" end="64058" title="Evangelical State Church of Prussia&amp;#x27;s older Provinces" label="Evangelical State Church of Prussia&amp;#x27;s older Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q966577" start="64069" end="64086" title="United Protestant" label="United Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="64119" end="64127" title="Reformed tradition" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="64224" end="64236" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367463" start="64304" end="64314" title="Mohammedan" label="Mohammedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="64345" end="64359" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480875" start="64741" end="64752" title="Lamar Cecil" label="Lamar Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="65161" end="65169" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="65181" end="65198" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q701198" start="65275" end="65289" title="Jewish Bolshevism" label="Jew-Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066912" start="65322" end="65344" title="Baltic German nobility" label="Baltic German nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="65352" end="65365" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q80034" start="65394" end="65408" title="Armenian genocide" label="Turks had done"/>
<link wikidata="Q891146" start="65416" end="65433" title="Ottoman Armenians" label="Ottoman Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="65524" end="65551" title="November Revolution of 1918" label="November Revolution of 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="65734" end="65748" title="German Jew" label="tribe of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="66545" end="66554" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444020" start="66556" end="66582" title="Secret History (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Secret History&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q291002" start="66629" end="66641" title="Barry Foster (actor)" label="Barry Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="66702" end="66708" title="BBC TV" label="BBC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008819" start="66722" end="66736" title="Fall of Eagles" label="Fall of Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q466789" start="66746" end="66763" title="Christopher Neame" label="Christopher Neame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048737" start="66838" end="66856" title="Edward the Seventh" label="Edward the Seventh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369749" start="66866" end="66879" title="Rupert Julian" label="Rupert Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743936" start="66942" end="66973" title="The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin" label="The Kaiser, the Beast of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q95262" start="66983" end="66996" title="Alfred Struwe" label="Alfred Struwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731319" start="67059" end="67065" title="Magnat (film)" label="Magnat"/>
<link wikidata="Q679794" start="67075" end="67091" title="Robert Stadlober" label="Robert Stadlober"/>
<link wikidata="Q152923" start="67142" end="67173" title="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria" label="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12032488" start="67252" end="67265" title="Ladislav Frej" label="Ladislav Frej"/>
<link wikidata="Q835581" start="67307" end="67320" title="The Red Baron (2008 film)" label="The Red Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737024" start="67396" end="67403" title="37 Days (TV series)" label="37 Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q190523" start="67413" end="67432" title="Christopher Plummer" label="Christopher Plummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q26720646" start="67530" end="67543" title="The Exception" label="The Exception"/>
<link wikidata="Q76187" start="67553" end="67568" title="Sylvester Groth" label="Sylvester Groth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67651" end="67662" title="Kaisersturz" label="Kaisersturz"/>
<link wikidata="Q312124" start="67710" end="67723" title="Tom Hollander" label="Tom Hollander"/>
<link wikidata="Q61633664" start="67760" end="67779" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Man" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67887" end="67894" title="Ålesund#History" label="Ålesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149826" start="67971" end="67996" title="Ålesund fire" label="destroyed by fire in 1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292084" start="67999" end="68028" title="German entry into World War I" label="German entry into World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433410" start="68031" end="68061" title="Family tree of German monarchs" label="Family tree of German monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q537340" start="68064" end="68076" title="Wilhelminism" label="Wilhelminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q764526" start="70233" end="70246" title="psychohistory" label="psychohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="70264" end="70276" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q10491427" start="70625" end="70646" title="European Film Gateway" label="European Film Gateway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50452" wikidata="Q612607" url="?curid=50452" title="Graeme Garden">
<text>David Graeme Garden OBE (born 18 February 1943) is a Scottish comedian, actor, author, artist and television presenter. He is best known as a member of the Goodies and a regular panellist on &quot;I&#x27;m Sorry I Haven&#x27;t a Clue&quot;.

==Early life and education==

Garden was born on 18 February 1943 in Aberdeen, Scotland, and raised in Preston, Lancashire, England, only son (with a daughter) of (1910–1982), an eminent orthopaedic surgeon who created the Garden classification of hip fractures, and his wife Janet Ann (née McHardy). R. S. Garden&#x27;s parents, John and Elizabeth, farmed at Macduff, Banff and Buchan, Aberdeenshire. Garden was educated at Repton School, and studied medicine at Emmanuel College, Cambridge, where he joined the Cambridge University Footlights Dramatic Club and served as its president in 1964, while also performing in the 1964 Footlights revue, &quot;Stuff What Dreams Are Made Of&quot; at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe.

Garden qualified in medicine but has never practised. Asked how he justified making jokes rather than saving lives, he answered:
==Career==

===Radio===

Garden was co-writer and performer in the classic BBC radio comedy sketch show, &quot;I&#x27;m Sorry, I&#x27;ll Read That Again&quot;, in the late 1960s. Garden was studying medicine during the first few series of the show, this commitment making cast membership difficult for him during the third series as he was following a midwifery course in Plymouth. However, he continued sending in scripts for the radio show by mail, and he rejoined the cast upon his return to his medical studies in London. On several occasions, his medical qualifications are lampooned in the show; in the 25th Anniversary Show, David Hatch asks him if he is still a writer. Garden: &quot;Here&#x27;s something I wrote this morning&quot;. Hatch: &quot;It&#x27;s a prescription&quot;. &quot;Yes,&quot; says Garden, &quot;but it&#x27;s a funny one...&quot;

Garden was a permanent panellist on the long-running BBC Radio improvisation show &quot;I&#x27;m Sorry I Haven&#x27;t a Clue&quot;, in a cast which included Tim Brooke-Taylor, for almost fifty years. He also starred in and co-wrote, with Barry Cryer, &quot;You&#x27;ll Have Had Your Tea&quot;, a direct spin-off of ISIHAC, and has contributed to several books from the series including guides to the game Mornington Crescent.

Garden wrote for and appeared with Barry Cryer and Alison Steadman in the 1989 BBC radio comedy sketch show &quot;The Long Hot Satsuma&quot;. Garden had a role in Paul B. Davies&#x27; 2000 radio play &quot;Spy Nozy and the Poets&quot;. In 2001 and 2002, Garden wrote for and appeared in the BBC radio comedy sketch show &quot;The Right Time&quot;, along with Eleanor Bron, Paula Wilcox, Clive Swift, Roger Blake and Neil Innes. He was also script editor for &quot;The Hudson and Pepperdine Show&quot;.

Garden is chair of the spoof radio game show &quot;Beat the Kids&quot;. He has also appeared on the UK version of the improvisation television series &quot;Whose Line Is It Anyway?&quot;, which has a similar format. He was a co-writer of the BBC Radio 4 comedy &quot;Giles Wemmbley-Hogg Goes Off&quot;, and in 2006, Garden co-devised and appeared on the BBC Radio 4 comedy quiz show, &quot;The Unbelievable Truth&quot;.

In 2003, Garden wrote the Radio 4 sitcom &quot;About a Dog&quot;, based on an original idea by Debbie Barham, with a second series in 2007.

Garden has appeared in several of Big Finish&#x27;s &quot;Doctor Who&quot; audio dramas. In &quot;Bang-Bang-a-Boom!&quot; he plays Professor Fassbinder, a parody of Victor Bergman in &quot;&quot;. In &quot;Max Warp&quot; he plays TV presenter Geoffrey Vantage, parodying &quot;Top Gear&quot; presenter Jeremy Clarkson. He also plays Abbot Thelonious (an alias of the Meddling Monk) in the Eighth Doctor audio play &quot;The Book of Kells&quot; in 2010, and subsequently returns as a recurring antagonist to the Eighth Doctor as the Monk (a role previously played on television by Peter Butterworth).

===Television===
Garden&#x27;s best known television work is freeform sitcom &quot;The Goodies&quot;, which he wrote and performed along with Tim Brooke-Taylor and Bill Oddie from 1970 to 1982. The three appeared in the Amnesty International show &quot;A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick)&quot; (during which they sang their hit song &quot;Funky Gibbon&quot;). Garden and Bill Oddie co-wrote many episodes of the television sitcom &quot;Doctor in the House&quot;, including most of the first series episodes, and all of the second series episodes - as well as co-writing episodes of the subsequent &quot;Doctor at Large&quot; and &quot;Doctor in Charge&quot; series. Garden was co-writer and performer in the sketch show &quot;Twice a Fortnight&quot; with Bill Oddie, Terry Jones, Michael Palin and Jonathan Lynn, and also sketch show &quot;Broaden Your Mind&quot; with Tim Brooke-Taylor, with Bill Oddie joining the cast for the second series.

In 1982 Garden and Oddie wrote, but did not perform in, a six-part science fiction sitcom called &quot;Astronauts&quot; for Central which was shown on ITV. The show was set in an international space station in the near future.

Garden was the voice of the title character in &quot;Bananaman&quot; (1983), in addition to General Blight and Maurice of the Heavy Mob in the children&#x27;s animated television comedy series, which also featured the rest of the Goodies team. The series parodied comic book super-heroes. Later, Garden wrote for the sitcom &quot;Surgical Spirit&quot; (1994). Graeme Garden has also presented three series of the BBC&#x27;s health magazine &quot;Bodymatters&quot;.

Garden appeared in the political sitcom &quot;Yes Minister&quot;, in the role of Commander Forrest of the Special Branch in the episode &quot;The Death List&quot;. He also appeared as a television presenter in the &quot;Doctor in the House&quot; episode, &quot;Doctor on the Box&quot;.

He was a regular team captain on the political satire game show &quot;If I Ruled the World&quot;. Brooke-Taylor appeared as a guest in one episode and during the game &quot;I Couldn&#x27;t Disagree More&quot; he proposed that it was high time &quot;The Goodies&quot; episodes were repeated. Garden was obliged by the rules of the game to refute this statement, and replied, &quot;I couldn&#x27;t disagree more... it was time to repeat them ten, fifteen years ago.&quot;

In 2004, Garden and Brooke-Taylor were co-presenters of Channel 4&#x27;s daytime game show &quot;Beat the Nation&quot;, in which they indulged in usual game show &quot;banter&quot;, but took the quiz itself seriously. It was notable for its use of a &quot;laugh track&quot; instead of a studio audience. Garden has hosted the quiz game &quot;Tell the Truth&quot; and presented a series of history programmes, &quot;A Sense of the Past&quot; for Yorkshire Television.

Garden writes and directs for the corporate video company Video Arts, famous for its training films starring John Cleese.

===Stage appearances===

Garden has a successful stage career, and has acted in several National Theatre productions, as well as London&#x27;s West End. He has also acted in several BBC Radio 4 comedy drama series, and television drama including &quot;Peak Practice&quot; and &quot;Holby City&quot;. Garden appeared with Tim Brooke-Taylor in the theatre production &quot;The Unvarnished Truth&quot;.

He wrote several pantomimes for The Theatre Chipping Norton during the 1980s. 

In 1986 he appeared in a production of &quot;An Inspector Calls&quot; by J B Priestley at the Royal Exchange, Manchester.

Garden wrote a play called &quot;The Pocket Orchestra&quot; which ran in London in 2006. In August 2006, Garden and Brooke-Taylor joined up to perform at the Edinburgh Fringe in a show which looked back with some nostalgia to their work with the Goodies and in light entertainment.

== Personal life ==
Garden lives in Oxfordshire with his wife Emma, with whom he has a son, Tom. Garden also has a daughter, Sally, and a son, John, from his previous marriage to Mary Elizabeth Wheatley Grice. His son John &quot;JJ&quot; Garden is the occasional keyboardist for the music group Scissor Sisters, and shares songwriting credit on the song &quot;The Other Side&quot; from their 2006 album &quot;Ta-Dah&quot;.

In 2002, Garden suffered an episode of the condition known as Bell&#x27;s palsy, where the muscles on one side of the face become paralysed. He was able to continue his work commitments and eventually made a full recovery after some months.

Garden was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2011 Birthday Honours for services to light entertainment alongside his late comedy partner Tim Brooke-Taylor.

Garden is a patron of the disability charity ENRYCH – formerly Ryder-Cheshire Volunteers. The charity works to enable adults with a physical disability to enjoy culture, leisure, learning and sporting opportunities through partnership with a volunteer.

==Bibliography==

An incomplete list includes:
* &quot;The Best Medicine: Graeme Garden&#x27;s Book of Medical Humour&quot; compiled and illustrated by Graeme Garden, published by Robson Books Ltd., London (1984), 
* &quot;The Skylighters&quot;
* &quot;The Seventh Man&quot;
* &quot;Graeme Garden&#x27;s Compendium of Very Silly Games&quot;
* &quot;Stovold&#x27;s Mornington Crescent Almanac&quot;

Co-written with the other members of The Goodies:
* &quot;The Goodies File&quot;
* &quot;The Goodies Book of Criminal Records&quot;
* &quot;The Making of The Goodies Disaster Movie&quot;

Poetry:

==References==
==External links==

* &quot;I&#x27;m Sorry I Haven&#x27;t a Clue&quot; homepage at BBC.co.uk
* Graeme Garden – BBC Guide to Comedy
* Graeme Garden – Comedy Zone
* Graeme Garden interview
* Graeme Garden – The Gazetteer for Scotland
* ISIHAC interviews with Tim Brooke-Taylor, Graeme Garden, and Barry Cryer at BBC.co.uk
* Graeme Garden Interview Web Wombat Theatre
* The Origin of Monty Python – mentions Graeme and ISIRTA
* &quot;Stuff What Dreams Are Made Of&quot; – the 1964 Cambridge Footlights Club revue during the time when Graeme Garden was President of the Footlights, as well as being a member of the revue cast
* OBEs all round – Goodies pair honoured
* Graeme Garden thought that OBE letter was a bill
* Birthday Honours List 2011 in pictures
* Goodies pair &quot;thrilled&quot; with OBEs
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q612607" start="0" end="19" title="Graeme Garden" label="David Graeme Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="20" end="23" title="Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987325" start="152" end="163" title="the Goodies" label="the Goodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q689735" start="197" end="233" title="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry I Haven&amp;#x27;t a Clue" label="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry I Haven&amp;#x27;t a Clue"/>
<link wikidata="Q36405" start="311" end="319" title="Aberdeen" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="345" end="352" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="354" end="364" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343448" start="465" end="486" title="Garden classification" label="Garden classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778940" start="602" end="609" title="Macduff, Aberdeenshire" label="Macduff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854873" start="611" end="627" title="Banff and Buchan" label="Banff and Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933220" start="667" end="680" title="Repton School" label="Repton School"/>
<link wikidata="Q797892" start="706" end="733" title="Emmanuel College, Cambridge" label="Emmanuel College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q857679" start="755" end="800" title="Footlights" label="Cambridge University Footlights Dramatic Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q368176" start="939" end="964" title="Edinburgh Festival Fringe" label="Edinburgh Festival Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748941" start="1175" end="1187" title="radio comedy" label="radio comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966774" start="1207" end="1248" title="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry, I&amp;#x27;ll Read That Again" label="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry, I&amp;#x27;ll Read That Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q20862341" start="1448" end="1457" title="midwifery" label="midwifery"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="1468" end="1476" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q689735" start="2043" end="2079" title="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry I Haven&amp;#x27;t a Clue" label="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry I Haven&amp;#x27;t a Clue"/>
<link wikidata="Q914201" start="2112" end="2129" title="Tim Brooke-Taylor" label="Tim Brooke-Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q809024" start="2193" end="2204" title="Barry Cryer" label="Barry Cryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645409" start="2212" end="2241" title="Hamish and Dougal" label="You&amp;#x27;ll Have Had Your Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314567" start="2360" end="2379" title="Mornington Crescent (game)" label="Mornington Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q809024" start="2417" end="2428" title="Barry Cryer" label="Barry Cryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q440728" start="2433" end="2448" title="Alison Steadman" label="Alison Steadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748219" start="2496" end="2516" title="The Long Hot Satsuma" label="The Long Hot Satsuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149150" start="2545" end="2559" title="Paul B. Davies" label="Paul B. Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q468811" start="2741" end="2753" title="Eleanor Bron" label="Eleanor Bron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296482" start="2755" end="2767" title="Paula Wilcox" label="Paula Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q776860" start="2769" end="2780" title="Clive Swift" label="Clive Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q918538" start="2798" end="2808" title="Neil Innes" label="Neil Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740795" start="2846" end="2876" title="The Hudson and Pepperdine Show" label="The Hudson and Pepperdine Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q922713" start="3041" end="3065" title="Whose Line Is It Anyway? (UK TV series)" label="Whose Line Is It Anyway?"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561729" start="3152" end="3180" title="Giles Wemmbley-Hogg Goes Off" label="Giles Wemmbley-Hogg Goes Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="3239" end="3250" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868912" start="3275" end="3297" title="The Unbelievable Truth (radio show)" label="The Unbelievable Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668595" start="3353" end="3364" title="About a Dog" label="About a Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078781" start="3401" end="3414" title="Debbie Barham" label="Debbie Barham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905688" start="3481" end="3491" title="Big Finish Productions" label="Big Finish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="3505" end="3515" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q23043159" start="3545" end="3562" title="Bang-Bang-a-Boom!" label="Bang-Bang-a-Boom!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045743" start="3612" end="3626" title="Victor Bergman" label="Victor Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23032482" start="3653" end="3661" title="Max Warp" label="Max Warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q33162" start="3724" end="3732" title="Top Gear (2002 TV series)" label="Top Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q216160" start="3749" end="3764" title="Jeremy Clarkson" label="Jeremy Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079169" start="3814" end="3827" title="Meddling Monk" label="Meddling Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q945808" start="3836" end="3849" title="Eighth Doctor" label="Eighth Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q23032482" start="3867" end="3884" title="The Book of Kells (Doctor Who audio)" label="The Book of Kells"/>
<link wikidata="Q925902" start="4027" end="4044" title="Peter Butterworth" label="Peter Butterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987329" start="4131" end="4142" title="The Goodies (TV series)" label="The Goodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q914201" start="4190" end="4207" title="Tim Brooke-Taylor" label="Tim Brooke-Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407976" start="4212" end="4222" title="Bill Oddie" label="Bill Oddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658943" start="4301" end="4339" title="A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick)" label="A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837987" start="4391" end="4403" title="Funky Gibbon" label="Funky Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407976" start="4423" end="4433" title="Bill Oddie" label="Bill Oddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714540" start="4488" end="4507" title="Doctor in the House (TV series)" label="Doctor in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833363" start="4655" end="4670" title="Doctor at Large (TV series)" label="Doctor at Large"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287488" start="4687" end="4703" title="Doctor in Charge" label="Doctor in Charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001039" start="4778" end="4795" title="Twice a Fortnight" label="Twice a Fortnight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407976" start="4807" end="4817" title="Bill Oddie" label="Bill Oddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="4819" end="4830" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q223985" start="4832" end="4845" title="Michael Palin" label="Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q524711" start="4850" end="4863" title="Jonathan Lynn" label="Jonathan Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972166" start="4892" end="4909" title="Broaden Your Mind" label="Broaden Your Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q914201" start="4921" end="4938" title="Tim Brooke-Taylor" label="Tim Brooke-Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407976" start="4945" end="4955" title="Bill Oddie" label="Bill Oddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811623" start="5100" end="5110" title="Astronauts (television)" label="Astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10444865" start="5121" end="5128" title="Central Independent Television" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="5148" end="5151" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="5190" end="5203" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853889" start="5278" end="5287" title="Bananaman (TV series)" label="Bananaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="5384" end="5392" title="animated" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646208" start="5555" end="5570" title="Surgical Spirit (TV series)" label="Surgical Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5638" end="5641" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q732383" start="5737" end="5749" title="Yes Minister" label="Yes Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714540" start="5911" end="5930" title="Doctor in the House (TV series)" label="Doctor in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990513" start="6048" end="6068" title="If I Ruled the World (game show)" label="If I Ruled the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="6505" end="6514" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022218" start="6791" end="6805" title="Tell the Truth (British game show)" label="Tell the Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117103" start="6894" end="6914" title="Yorkshire Television" label="Yorkshire Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927805" start="6975" end="6985" title="Video Arts" label="Video Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="7026" end="7037" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="7128" end="7144" title="Royal National Theatre" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="7183" end="7191" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="7222" end="7233" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610941" start="7322" end="7332" title="Holby City" label="Holby City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771753" start="7411" end="7432" title="The Unvarnished Truth" label="The Unvarnished Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23305631" start="7473" end="7500" title="The Theatre Chipping Norton" label="The Theatre Chipping Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q375090" start="7566" end="7584" title="An Inspector Calls" label="An Inspector Calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q443528" start="7594" end="7607" title="J B Priestley" label="J B Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="7615" end="7641" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="Royal Exchange, Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757555" start="7677" end="7697" title="The Pocket Orchestra" label="The Pocket Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q368176" start="7802" end="7818" title="Edinburgh Fringe" label="Edinburgh Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="7963" end="7974" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8222" end="8237" title="Scissor Sisters#Line-up" label="Scissor Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q526910" start="8336" end="8342" title="Ta-Dah" label="Ta-Dah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135338" start="8413" end="8430" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s palsy" label="Bell&amp;#x27;s palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="8614" end="8656" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620529" start="8670" end="8691" title="2011 Birthday Honours" label="2011 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q914201" start="8762" end="8779" title="Tim Brooke-Taylor" label="Tim Brooke-Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987325" start="9472" end="9483" title="The Goodies" label="The Goodies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50455" wikidata="Q510381" url="?curid=50455" title="The Song Remains the Same (film)">
<text>The Song Remains the Same is a 1976 concert film featuring the English rock band Led Zeppelin. The filming took place during the summer of 1973, during three nights of concerts at Madison Square Garden in New York City, with additional footage shot at Shepperton Studios. The film premiered three years later on 20 October 1976 at Cinema I in New York, on 21 October 1976 at Fox Wilshire in Beverly Hills, and at Warner West End Cinema in London two weeks later. It was accompanied by a soundtrack album of the same name.

Promotional materials stated that the film was &quot;the band&#x27;s special way of giving their millions of friends what they had been clamouring for – a personal and private tour of Led Zeppelin. For the first time the world has a front row seat on Led Zeppelin.&quot;

Fans drove up ticket sales, but many reviewers–and two band members–disliked the film at the time of its initial release (1976), although in subsequent years critics warmed to movie and it now receives mostly favorable ratings from the public.

A standard DVD of the film was released on 31 December 1999. A reissue of the film, including previously unreleased footage as a bonus, was released on DVD, HD DVD, and Blu-ray Disc on 20 November 2007, by Warner Home Video.

==Background==
Since late 1969, Led Zeppelin had been planning on filming one of their live performances for a projected movie documentary of the band. The group&#x27;s manager, Peter Grant, believed that they would be better served by the big screen than by television, because he regarded the sound quality of the latter as unsatisfactory. In 1970, Grant arranged for the 9 January Royal Albert Hall performance to be filmed by &quot;In Concert&quot; and &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; producer and director Stanley Dorfman, and Peter Whitehead, for a proposed hour-long special for TV distribution, which was reported by &quot;Record Mirror&quot; in late January had been sold to American TV. However the band supplied a pulse feed off their mixing desk for the editing purposes but were not sufficiently happy with their performance to release the full soundtrack for use in the film. It was agreed with Dorfman that the concert would form part of a larger documentary project including the band&#x27;s performance at the Bath Festival on 28 June, which was filmed by Whitehead. However, Whitehead filmed the entire Zeppelin set in Bath at the incorrect exposure and it was unusable, so the project was shelved.&quot; The Royal Albert Hall footage was later remastered and featured on the 2003 release &quot;Led Zeppelin DVD&quot;.

On the morning of 20 July 1973, during the band&#x27;s concert tour of the US, Peter Grant made contact with American-born director Joe Massot. Massot was already known to Grant as he and his wife had moved into a house in Berkshire in 1970, where they made friends with their neighbours, Led Zeppelin guitarist Jimmy Page and his girlfriend Charlotte Martin. Grant had previously turned down offers by Massot to make a film of the band, but with the huge success of the band&#x27;s current tour, Grant changed his mind and offered him the job of director. As Grant recalled:

It all started in the Sheraton Hotel, Boston. We&#x27;d talked about a film for years and Jimmy had known Joe Massot was interested – so we called them and over they came. It was all very quickly arranged.

Massot hurriedly assembled a crew in time for Led Zeppelin&#x27;s last leg of the tour starting on 23 July 1973, in Baltimore. He subsequently filmed the group&#x27;s three concert performances at Madison Square Garden on the nights of 27, 28, and 29 July 1973. The film was entirely financed by the band and shot on 35mm with a 24-track quadraphonic sound recording.

==Original filming==
The plans to film the shows at Madison Square Garden were threatened when the local trades union tried to block the British film crew from working. After the band&#x27;s attorneys negotiated with the union, the crew was allowed to film the concerts.

The footage of the band arriving at the airport in their private jet airliner, &quot;The Starship&quot;, and travelling in the motorcade to the concert was filmed in Pittsburgh, before their show at Three Rivers Stadium on 24 July 1973.

For the band&#x27;s three New York performances, two band members, Robert Plant and John Bonham, wore the same clothes to facilitate seamless editing of the film, but John Paul Jones and Jimmy Page wore different sets of attire on some of the nights, which created continuity problems. Page is seen wearing a different dragon suit in &quot;Rock and Roll&quot; and the &quot;Celebration Day&quot; remaster which was not an editing error; Page wore a new outfit for those shows which came with a heavy jacket, and he took it off after three songs. In an interview from 1997, Jones said that the reason he did not wear the same stage clothes was that he asked the crew if they would be filming on those nights and was told no. &quot;I&#x27;d think &#x27;not to worry, I&#x27;ll save the shirt I wore the previous night for the next filming&#x27;. Then what would happen is that I&#x27;d get onstage and see the cameras ready to roll.&quot; Grant stated &quot;It turned out to be traumatic to say the least. They filmed three nights at the Garden and never got one complete take of &#x27;Whole Lotta Love&#x27;.&quot; 

As Led Zeppelin&#x27;s popularity soared throughout the 1970s, Peter Grant became increasingly notorious for being brutally protective of his band and their finances; &quot;The Song Remains the Same&quot; captures one such exchange between him and a concert promoter. When Warner Bros. approved the film, they did so with the proviso that expletives would be &#x27;bleeped&#x27; out. Peter Clifton took the optical print and removed the words, and the film was given an appropriate rating. However, on every other print, the words were retained and were fully audible.

In the scene where Peter Grant is driven to the police station to be questioned about the theft from the safe deposit box at the Drake Hotel, he has his arm outside the police car. According to an interview conducted in 1989, he explained the reason he was not handcuffed was that the policeman driving the car used to be a drummer in a semi-professional band which had supported the Yardbirds on one of its US college tours in the late-1960s. Grant had at the time been manager of the Yardbirds. The money stolen from the safe deposit box at the Drake Hotel was never recovered, and while no one has ever been charged, it is alleged that a staff member of the hotel quit their job and fled to Jamaica soon after the theft. Scenes of young fans attempting to buy tickets, an unruly fan being ejected by security, and Grant berating the promoter for receiving kickbacks were all shot at the Baltimore Civic Center on 23 July 1973. Grant purportedly recommended the &quot;Dazed and Confused&quot; sequence wherein the camera zooms into Page&#x27;s eyes and cuts to the scene. Some unused backstage shots filmed at Baltimore and at Pittsburgh later found their way into the promotional video for &quot;Travelling Riverside Blues&quot;, released in 1990.

==Subsequent filming and release==
Dissatisfied with the progress of the film, Grant had Massot removed from the project and Australian director Peter Clifton was hired in his place in early 1974. Massot was offered a few thousand pounds in compensation. Peter Grant later sent someone to Massot&#x27;s house to collect the film. However, Massot had hidden the film elsewhere and so instead an expensive editing machine owned by Massot was taken as collateral. Massot served a writ, leading to a period of stalemate which was finally broken when Grant and Led Zeppelin&#x27;s lawyer Steve Weiss agreed to pay Massot the money he was owed, after which he delivered the film to the band. Massot was not invited to attend the premiere of the film at New York but he attended anyway, buying a ticket from a ticket tout outside the theatre.

Clifton, realising that there were crucial holes in the concert footage, suggested that the entire show be recreated at Shepperton Studios in August 1974, on a mock-up of the Madison Square Garden stage. Gerry Harrison, who worked with Peter Clifton at the Shepperton Studios film shoot stated that &quot;the band mimed only the missing parts of the film.&quot;

When it was agreed that the band would meet at Shepperton Studios for filming, Jones had recently had his hair cut short, so he had to wear a wig.

In the May 2008 issue of &quot;Uncut&quot;, Page recalled the events surrounding the shooting of additional footage at Shepperton Studios:
A plan to shoot additional footage on the band&#x27;s Autumn 1975 U.S. tour was abandoned due to Plant&#x27;s car crash in Rhodes, Greece.

In 1976 a midnight screening of the film was organised by Atlantic Records before its release, at which label president Ahmet Ertegun reportedly fell asleep.

&quot;The Song Remains the Same&quot; was finally completed by early 1976, 18 months behind schedule and over-budget. Peter Grant later quipped &quot;It was the most expensive home movie ever made&quot;. It grossed $200,000 in its first week at the box office.

==Critical reaction and popularity==
For its New York premiere, Cinema I was equipped with a quadrophonic sound system hired from Showco in Dallas. For the West Coast premieres, no such audio boosting was employed. These premieres, along with the London premiere, were attended by the members of the band.

The film performed well at the box office, grossing an estimated $10 million by 1977. Despite this, the film was reviewed negatively by critics for its perceived amateurish production and self-indulgent content, with the fantasy sequences in particular receiving some of the harshest criticism. The film was particularly unsuccessful in the UK, where the band had not performed live for over two years as a result of being in tax exile. The band were thus unable to promote themselves at home, leaving them out of the public spotlight.

However, among fans the film has retained its popularity. Until the release of &quot;Led Zeppelin DVD&quot; in 2003, &quot;The Song Remains the Same&quot; was the only official live visual document that was accessible to followers of the band. It became a cult favourite at late-night movie houses, and its subsequent release on video and then DVD has ensured a growing base of fans.

Some members of the band regard the performances filmed at Madison Square Garden as merely average for the time, coming as they did at the end of a long and exhausting tour, but nonetheless representative of the generally high standard of the band&#x27;s live performances during this era. In an interview he gave with &quot;New Musical Express&quot; in November 1976, Page stated:
Page made good on his promise. When reviewing material for &quot;Led Zeppelin DVD&quot; in 2003, he decided to include footage from this same series of concerts.

However, other members of the band were less charitable, with Jones later admitting that the film was &quot;a massive compromise&quot; and Plant denouncing it as &quot;a load of bollocks.&quot;

For all of its technical faults, many today view the film as an interesting historical document that captured the band at a particular point in time when their popularity was near its peak, and, on a more general level, as an accurate representation of the excesses of the music and show business industries in the 1970s. In a review published in &quot;Mojo&quot; magazine following the film&#x27;s 2007 reissue, James McNair gave the film four out of five stars and wrote:
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a 38% rating based on 34 reviews with the consensus: &quot;While its concert segments are presented with a whole lotta love, &quot;The Song Remains the Same&quot; gets trampled underfoot with its dull fantasy segments and middling insights into the band.&quot;

==DVD scene listing==
# Mob Rubout
# Mob Town Credits
# Country Life (&quot;Autumn Lake&quot;)
# &quot;Bron-Yr-Aur&quot;
# &quot;Rock and Roll&quot;
# &quot;Black Dog&quot;
# &quot;Since I&#x27;ve Been Loving You&quot;
# &quot;No Quarter&quot;
# Who&#x27;s Responsible?
# &quot;The Song Remains the Same&quot;
# &quot;The Rain Song&quot;
# Fire and Sword
# Capturing the Castle
# Not Quite Backstage Pass
# &quot;Dazed and Confused&quot;
# Strung Out
# Magic in the Night
# Gate Crasher
# No Comment
# &quot;Stairway to Heaven&quot;
# &quot;Moby Dick&quot;
# Country Squire Bonham
# &quot;Heartbreaker&quot;
# Grand Theft
# &quot;Whole Lotta Love&quot;
# End Credits (w/ &quot;Stairway to Heaven&quot;)

==Chart positions==

===DVD===
==Certifications==


==Cast==
* John Bonham
* Richard Cole
* Peter Grant
*Roy Harper
* John Paul Jones
* Jimmy Page
* Robert Plant
* Colin Rigdon
* Derek Skilton

==Personnel==
Led Zeppelin
* John Bonham – drums, percussion
* John Paul Jones – bass guitar, keyboards
* Jimmy Page – guitars, theremin, backing vocals, production, sound editing, mixing
* Robert Plant – vocals, tambourine

Additional personnel
==2007 reissue==

On 20 November 2007, Warner Home Video released a new DVD edition of &quot;The Song Remains The Same&quot; for the first time with all fifteen songs from the original Madison Square Garden concerts.
This coincided with the reissue of the accompanying soundtrack to the film, available on CD. The DVD features newly remixed and fully remastered sound, 5.1 Dolby Digital and DTS surround sound from original master tracks, and includes more than 40 minutes of added bonus material, including never-before-released performance footage of &quot;Over the Hills and Far Away&quot; and &quot;Celebration Day&quot;, plus performances of &quot;Misty Mountain Hop&quot; and &quot;The Ocean&quot;, a rare 1976 BBC interview with Robert Plant and Peter Grant, vintage TV footage from the Drake Hotel robbery during the New York concert stand, and a Cameron Crowe radio show. This version was released on standard DVDs as well as Blu-ray and HD DVD.

A Collector&#x27;s Edition box set including a T-shirt with the original album cover, placards from the New York shows, and several glossy photographs was released as well.

Due to legal complications, the band decided not to change the video portion of the original movie for the rerelease. Instead, sound engineer Kevin Shirley created an entirely new mix of the three 1973 Madison Square Garden concerts so that the audio portion of the film would better match the on-screen visuals. The audio on the new CD release is nearly identical to the soundtrack of the new DVD release. One difference is that the songs included on the CDs that were not featured in the original movie are included as bonus tracks on the DVD.

==References==
==External links==
* The Garden Tapes - a study of sources of the live material and the edits for release on this film.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q430525" start="36" end="48" title="concert film" label="concert film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="81" end="93" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="180" end="201" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278256" start="252" end="270" title="Shepperton Studios" label="Shepperton Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q847678" start="485" end="520" title="The Song Remains the Same (album)" label="a soundtrack album of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="1246" end="1263" title="Warner Home Video" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q433123" start="1444" end="1455" title="Peter Grant (music manager)" label="Peter Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q119716921" start="1702" end="1712" title="BBC In Concert (Television Series)" label="In Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="1729" end="1744" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599567" start="1773" end="1788" title="Stanley Dorfman" label="Stanley Dorfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648971" start="1794" end="1809" title="Peter Whitehead (filmmaker)" label="Peter Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q844480" start="1893" end="1906" title="Record Mirror" label="Record Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091508" start="2575" end="2591" title="Led Zeppelin (DVD)" label="Led Zeppelin DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211149" start="2732" end="2742" title="Joe Massot" label="Joe Massot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="2823" end="2832" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="2912" end="2922" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="3581" end="3602" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766355" start="4110" end="4122" title="The Starship" label="The Starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189339" start="4224" end="4244" title="Three Rivers Stadium" label="Three Rivers Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="4330" end="4342" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="4347" end="4358" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="4430" end="4445" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331674" start="4603" end="4616" title="Rock and Roll (Led Zeppelin song)" label="Rock and Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986763" start="4637" end="4652" title="Celebration Day" label="Celebration Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="5652" end="5664" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q4925942" start="5744" end="5751" title="Bleep censor" label="bleeped"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173307" start="5763" end="5776" title="Peter Clifton" label="Peter Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305604" start="6078" end="6089" title="Drake Hotel (New York City)" label="Drake Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q192725" start="6329" end="6342" title="the Yardbirds" label="the Yardbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739940" start="6839" end="6861" title="Baltimore Civic Center" label="Baltimore Civic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836081" start="7148" end="7174" title="Travelling Riverside Blues" label="Travelling Riverside Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173307" start="7346" end="7359" title="Peter Clifton" label="Peter Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278256" start="8158" end="8176" title="Shepperton Studios" label="Shepperton Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q795422" start="8580" end="8585" title="Uncut (magazine)" label="Uncut"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="8811" end="8817" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="8886" end="8902" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q352760" start="8948" end="8961" title="Ahmet Ertegun" label="Ahmet Ertegun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503179" start="9379" end="9385" title="Showco" label="Showco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315524" start="9982" end="9991" title="tax exile" label="tax exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091508" start="10178" end="10194" title="Led Zeppelin DVD" label="Led Zeppelin DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="10803" end="10822" title="New Musical Express" label="New Musical Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q261633" start="11571" end="11575" title="Mojo (magazine)" label="Mojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="11695" end="11710" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210809" start="12090" end="12101" title="Bron-Yr-Aur (instrumental)" label="Bron-Yr-Aur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331674" start="12116" end="12129" title="Rock and Roll (Led Zeppelin song)" label="Rock and Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764403" start="12144" end="12153" title="Black Dog (Led Zeppelin song)" label="Black Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272693" start="12168" end="12199" title="Since I&amp;#x27;ve Been Loving You" label="Since I&amp;#x27;ve Been Loving You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727272" start="12214" end="12224" title="No Quarter (song)" label="No Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q152753" start="12265" end="12290" title="The Song Remains the Same (song)" label="The Song Remains the Same"/>
<link wikidata="Q642014" start="12305" end="12318" title="The Rain Song" label="The Rain Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q636563" start="12400" end="12418" title="Dazed and Confused (Jake Holmes song)" label="Dazed and Confused"/>
<link wikidata="Q192023" start="12495" end="12513" title="Stairway to Heaven" label="Stairway to Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095561" start="12528" end="12537" title="Moby Dick (instrumental)" label="Moby Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q392695" start="12576" end="12588" title="Heartbreaker (Led Zeppelin song)" label="Heartbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q643423" start="12617" end="12633" title="Whole Lotta Love" label="Whole Lotta Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="12754" end="12765" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082122" start="12768" end="12780" title="Richard Cole" label="Richard Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q433123" start="12783" end="12794" title="Peter Grant (music manager)" label="Peter Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q365670" start="12796" end="12806" title="Roy Harper (singer)" label="Roy Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="12809" end="12824" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="12827" end="12837" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="12840" end="12852" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="12914" end="12925" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="12948" end="12963" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="12991" end="13001" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="13075" end="13087" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335831" start="13690" end="13717" title="Over the Hills and Far Away (Led Zeppelin song)" label="Over the Hills and Far Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986763" start="13734" end="13749" title="Celebration Day" label="Celebration Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q267363" start="13784" end="13802" title="Misty Mountain Hop" label="Misty Mountain Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267979" start="13819" end="13828" title="The Ocean (Led Zeppelin song)" label="The Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="13848" end="13851" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305604" start="13925" end="13936" title="The Drake Hotel, New York" label="Drake Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q318287" start="13986" end="13999" title="Cameron Crowe" label="Cameron Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="14066" end="14073" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q178990" start="14078" end="14084" title="HD DVD" label="HD DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q968489" start="14403" end="14416" title="Kevin Shirley" label="Kevin Shirley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50458" wikidata="Q678221" url="?curid=50458" title="Coda (Led Zeppelin album)">
<text>Coda is the ninth and final studio album, as well as the first compilation album by English rock band Led Zeppelin. It is a collection of rejected and live tracks from various sessions during the band&#x27;s twelve-year career. The album was released on 26 November 1982, almost two years after the group had officially disbanded following the death of drummer John Bonham. In 2015, a remastered version of the entire album with two discs of additional material was released.

==Background==
The fifth Swan Song Records album for the band, &quot;Coda&quot; was released to honour contractual commitments to Atlantic Records and also to cover tax demands on previous monies earned. It cleared away nearly all of the leftover tracks from the various studio sessions of the 1960s and 1970s. The album was a collection of eight tracks spanning the length of Zeppelin&#x27;s twelve-year history. Atlantic counted the release as a studio album, as Swan Song had owed the label a final studio album from the band. According to Martin Popoff, &quot;there&#x27;s conjecture that Jimmy [Page] called &#x27;We&#x27;re Gonna Groove&#x27; a studio track and &#x27;I Can&#x27;t Quit You Baby&#x27; a rehearsal track because Swan Song owed Atlantic one more studio album specifically.&quot;

Guitarist Jimmy Page explained that part of the reasoning for the album&#x27;s release related to the popularity of unofficial Led Zeppelin recordings, which continued to be circulated by fans: &quot;&quot;Coda&quot; was released, basically, because there was so much bootleg stuff out. We thought, &quot;Well, if there&#x27;s that much interest, then we may as well put the rest of our studio stuff out&quot;. As John Paul Jones recalled: &quot;Basically there wasn&#x27;t a lot of Zeppelin tracks that didn&#x27;t go out. We used everything.&quot;

The word &quot;coda&quot;, meaning a passage that ends a musical piece following the main body, was therefore chosen as the title.

==Songs==
Side one

&quot;We&#x27;re Gonna Groove&quot; is a Ben E. King cover that opens the album. Most of the track was recorded live at a concert held at the Royal Albert Hall in January, 1970 while Page added new guitar parts to the recording. The unedited version can be heard in the complete recording of the original Royal Albert Hall concert of 9 January 1970. The original album notes incorrectly state that the track was recorded at Morgan Studios in June, 1969. This song was used to open a number of concerts on the band&#x27;s early 1970 tours and was originally intended to be recorded for inclusion on &quot;Led Zeppelin II&quot;.

&quot;Poor Tom&quot; is an outtake from &quot;Led Zeppelin III&quot;, having been recorded at sessions held at Olympic Studios in June, 1970.

&quot;Walter&#x27;s Walk&quot;, a reject from &quot;Houses of the Holy&quot;, was recorded at sessions during April and May, 1972.

&quot;I Can&#x27;t Quit You Baby&quot; is taken from the same January, 1970 concert as &quot;We&#x27;re Gonna Groove&quot; but was listed as a taped rehearsal in the original liner notes. The recording was edited to remove the crowd noise as well as the beginning and ending of the song. The crowd sounds were muted on the multi-track mixdown, as was done with &quot;We&#x27;re Gonna Groove&quot;.

Side two

Side two contains three outtakes from the band&#x27;s previous album &quot;In Through the Out Door&quot;, plus a Bonham drum solo.

The uptempo &quot;Ozone Baby&quot; and the rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll styled &quot;Darlene&quot; were recorded at that album&#x27;s sessions at Polar Studios, Stockholm in November, 1978.

&quot;Bonzo&#x27;s Montreux&quot; was recorded at Mountain Studios, Montreux, Switzerland in September, 1976. The track was conceived as a showcase for Bonham&#x27;s drumming, to which Page added various electronic effects, including a harmonizer.

&quot;Wearing and Tearing&quot; was recorded at Polar in November, 1978. It was written as a reaction to punk, and to show that Led Zeppelin could compete with new bands. The track was scheduled to be issued as a promotional single for the audience at the 1979 Knebworth Festival, headlined by Led Zeppelin, but the record was cancelled at the last minute. The song was first performed live at the 1990 Silver Clef Awards Festival at Knebworth by Plant&#x27;s band with Page guesting.

Other tracks

The 1993 compact disc edition has four additional tracks from the box sets, &quot;Led Zeppelin Boxed Set&quot; (1990) and &quot;Led Zeppelin Boxed Set 2&quot; (1993), the previously unreleased &quot;Travelling Riverside Blues&quot;, &quot;White Summer/Black Mountain Side&quot; and the &quot;Immigrant Song&quot; b-side &quot;Hey, Hey, What Can I Do&quot; from the former and the previously unreleased &quot;Baby Come On Home&quot; from the latter.

In 2015, a remastered version of the entire album with two discs of additional material appeared.

==Cover==
The album cover was designed by Hipgnosis, the fifth album cover the design group designed for Led Zeppelin. It was also the last album cover Hipgnosis designed before disbanding in 1983. The main four letters CODA are from an alphabet typeface design called &quot;Neon Slim&quot; designed by Bernard Allum in 1978.

== Critical reception ==

Reviewing for &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; in 1983, Kurt Loder hailed &quot;Coda&quot; as &quot;a resounding farewell&quot; and a &quot;marvel of compression, deftly tracing the Zeppelin decade with eight powerful, previously unreleased tracks, and no unnecessary elaboration&quot;. Robert Christgau wrote in his &quot;Consumer Guide&quot; column for &quot;The Village Voice&quot;:

According to Julian Marszalek of &quot;The Quietus&quot;, however, &quot;&quot;Coda&quot; has always been regarded as the band&#x27;s weakest release. Made up of eight tracks that spanned Led Zeppelin&#x27;s lifetime, it refused to flow as an album. Devoid of a coherent narrative, it felt tossed together to make up for contractual obligations.&quot; In a retrospective review for AllMusic, Stephen Thomas Erlewine said while it did not include all of the band&#x27;s notable non-album recordings, it offered &quot;a good snapshot of much of what made Led Zeppelin a great band&quot; and featured mostly &quot;hard-charging rock &amp; roll&quot;, including &quot;Ozone Baby&quot;, &quot;Darlene&quot;, and &quot;Wearing and Tearing&quot;: &quot;rockers that alternately cut loose, groove, and menace&quot;.

Led Zeppelin vocalist Robert Plant reflected on the album as follows: &quot;When Coda was discussed, I really had—I don&#x27;t know, I&#x27;d just kind of had enough of the whole thing. If you start playing for something other than just kudos and money, then that should be part of the motive all the way through. And when Bonzo died, it&#x27;s the only reason to start staying actively involved with Led Zeppelin.&quot;

==2015 reissue==

A remastered version of &quot;Coda&quot;, along with &quot;Presence&quot; and &quot;In Through the Out Door,&quot; was reissued on 31 July 2015. The reissue comes in six formats: a standard CD edition, a deluxe three-CD edition, a standard LP version, a deluxe three-LP version, a super deluxe three-CD plus three-LP version with a hardback book, and as high resolution 24-bit/96k digital downloads. The deluxe and super deluxe editions feature bonus material containing alternative takes and previously unreleased songs, &quot;If It Keeps On Raining&quot;, &quot;Sugar Mama&quot;, &quot;Four Hands&quot;, &quot;St. Tristan&#x27;s Sword&quot;, and &quot;Desire&quot;. The reissue was released with an altered colour version of the original album&#x27;s artwork as its bonus disc&#x27;s cover.

The reissue was met with generally positive reviews. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 78, based on 8 reviews. In &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, David Fricke said it is &quot;the unlikely closing triumph in Page&#x27;s series of deluxe Zeppelin reissues: a dynamic pocket history in rarities, across three discs with 15 bonus tracks, of his band&#x27;s epic-blues achievement&quot;. &quot;Pitchfork&quot; journalist Mark Richardson was less impressed by the bonus disc, believing &quot;there is nothing particularly noteworthy about the &#x27;Bombay Orchestra&#x27; tracks&quot;.
==Track listing==
===Original release===
All tracks written by Jimmy Page and Robert Plant, except where noted.
All tracks produced by Jimmy Page, except for &quot;Travelling Riverside Blues&quot;, produced by John Walters, and &quot;White Summer&quot;/&quot;Black Mountain Side&quot; produced by Jeff Griffin.


* The CD edition with bonus tracks was also included in the career-spanning boxed set &quot;Complete Studio Recordings&quot; (disc ten), and the subsequent &quot;Led Zeppelin Definitive Collection&quot; (disc twelve).

===Deluxe edition bonus discs===


The CD edition mistakenly lists the running time of &quot;Bring It On Home&quot; (rough mix) as 4:19, which matches the duration of the finished version on &quot;Led Zeppelin II&quot;, not the intended time for the rough mix.

==Personnel==
Led Zeppelin

*John Bonham – drums, percussion
*John Paul Jones – bass guitar, piano, keyboards
*Jimmy Page – acoustic and electric guitars, electronic treatments, production
*Robert Plant – vocals, harmonica

Production

*Assorted Images – design
*Barry Diament – mastering (original 1988 CD release)
*Stuart Epps – engineering
*Peter Grant – executive production
*Jeff Griffin – producer on &quot;White Summer/Black Mountain Side&quot;
*Hipgnosis – design
*Andy Johns – engineering
*Eddie Kramer – engineering
*Vic Maile – engineering
*George Marino – remastering (1994 edition)
*Leif Mases – engineering
*John Timperley – engineering
*John Walters – producer on &quot;Travelling Riverside Blues&quot;

==Charts==


==Certifications==

==References==
References
Sources
* 
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="28" end="40" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="63" end="80" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="84" end="91" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="92" end="96" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="102" end="114" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="361" end="372" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q632992" start="502" end="519" title="Swan Song Records" label="Swan Song Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="607" end="623" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454899" start="1020" end="1033" title="Martin Popoff" label="Martin Popoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="1287" end="1297" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030125" start="1393" end="1427" title="Led Zeppelin bootleg recordings" label="unofficial Led Zeppelin recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="1691" end="1706" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="1843" end="1847" title="Coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977109" start="1986" end="2009" title="We&amp;#x27;re Gonna Groove" label="We&amp;#x27;re Gonna Groove"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="2122" end="2139" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296666" start="2404" end="2418" title="Morgan Studios" label="Morgan Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q209539" start="2584" end="2599" title="Led Zeppelin II" label="Led Zeppelin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q207438" start="2654" end="2670" title="Led Zeppelin III" label="Led Zeppelin III"/>
<link wikidata="Q943742" start="2719" end="2734" title="Olympic Studios" label="Olympic Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q211413" start="2803" end="2821" title="Houses of the Holy" label="Houses of the Holy"/>
<link wikidata="Q898499" start="2889" end="2915" title="I Can&amp;#x27;t Quit You Baby" label="I Can&amp;#x27;t Quit You Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q432609" start="3367" end="3390" title="In Through the Out Door" label="In Through the Out Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036925" start="3565" end="3578" title="Polar Studios" label="Polar Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="3580" end="3589" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942709" start="3616" end="3637" title="Bonzo&amp;#x27;s Montreux" label="Bonzo&amp;#x27;s Montreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q69354" start="3678" end="3686" title="Montreux" label="Montreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="3688" end="3699" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60630" start="3846" end="3856" title="harmonizer" label="harmonizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978155" start="3865" end="3884" title="Wearing and Tearing" label="Wearing and Tearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110388" start="4115" end="4138" title="Knebworth Festival 1979" label="1979 Knebworth Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483987" start="4262" end="4279" title="Silver Clef Award" label="Silver Clef Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q394970" start="4425" end="4432" title="box set" label="box set"/>
<link wikidata="Q526447" start="4441" end="4463" title="Led Zeppelin Boxed Set" label="Led Zeppelin Boxed Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q966033" start="4487" end="4511" title="Led Zeppelin Boxed Set 2" label="Led Zeppelin Boxed Set 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4558" end="4584" title="Travelling Riverside Blues#Led Zeppelin version" label="Travelling Riverside Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995451" start="4598" end="4610" title="White Summer" label="White Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q804233" start="4611" end="4630" title="Black Mountain Side" label="Black Mountain Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783363" start="4651" end="4665" title="Immigrant Song" label="Immigrant Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="4672" end="4678" title="b-side" label="b-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304321" start="4685" end="4708" title="Hey, Hey, What Can I Do" label="Hey, Hey, What Can I Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838242" start="4767" end="4784" title="Baby Come On Home" label="Baby Come On Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q846392" start="4950" end="4959" title="Hipgnosis" label="Hipgnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="5281" end="5294" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446871" start="5310" end="5320" title="Kurt Loder" label="Kurt Loder"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="5541" end="5557" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="5615" end="5632" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759110" start="5680" end="5691" title="The Quietus" label="The Quietus"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="6023" end="6031" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="6033" end="6056" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6949" end="6957" title="Presence (album)#2015 reissue" label="Presence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6974" end="6997" title="In Through the Out Door#2015 reissue" label="In Through the Out Door"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7418" end="7440" title="When the Levee Breaks#Led Zeppelin version" label="If It Keeps On Raining"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026040" start="7454" end="7464" title="Sugar Mama (Led Zeppelin song)" label="Sugar Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552100" start="7478" end="7488" title="Four Sticks" label="Four Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508188" start="7502" end="7526" title="St. Tristan&amp;#x27;s Sword" label="St. Tristan&amp;#x27;s Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757076" start="7544" end="7550" title="The Wanton Song" label="Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="7740" end="7750" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050272" start="7768" end="7778" title="standard score" label="normalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="7860" end="7867" title="weighted arithmetic mean" label="average"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492894" start="7931" end="7943" title="David Fricke" label="David Fricke"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="8175" end="8184" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="8429" end="8439" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="8444" end="8456" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262932" start="8576" end="8588" title="John Walters (broadcaster)" label="John Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q747917" start="8771" end="8797" title="The Complete Studio Recordings (Led Zeppelin album)" label="Complete Studio Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021222" start="8841" end="8875" title="Led Zeppelin Definitive Collection" label="Led Zeppelin Definitive Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q209539" start="9095" end="9110" title="Led Zeppelin II" label="Led Zeppelin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="9189" end="9200" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="9210" end="9220" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="9222" end="9237" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="9271" end="9281" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563510" start="9284" end="9292" title="Steel-string guitar" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="9338" end="9348" title="record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="9350" end="9362" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="9439" end="9448" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626506" start="9477" end="9488" title="Stuart Epps" label="Stuart Epps"/>
<link wikidata="Q433123" start="9504" end="9515" title="Peter Grant (music manager)" label="Peter Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053574" start="9518" end="9538" title="executive producer" label="executive production"/>
<link wikidata="Q846392" start="9613" end="9622" title="Hipgnosis" label="Hipgnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760857" start="9633" end="9643" title="Andy Johns" label="Andy Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q644381" start="9659" end="9671" title="Eddie Kramer" label="Eddie Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924852" start="9687" end="9696" title="Vic Maile" label="Vic Maile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971087" start="9728" end="9736" title="remaster" label="remaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262932" start="9812" end="9824" title="John Walters (broadcaster)" label="John Walters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50460" wikidata="Q1059517" url="?curid=50460" title="Winchester College">
<text>Winchester College is an English public school (a long-established fee-charging boarding school for pupils aged 13–18) with some provision for day attendees, in Winchester, Hampshire, England. It was founded by William of Wykeham in 1382 as a feeder school for New College, Oxford, and has existed in its present location ever since. It is the oldest of the nine schools considered by the Clarendon Commission. The school has begun a transition to become co-educational, and has accepted male and female day pupils from September 2022, having previously been a boys&#x27; boarding school for over 600 years.

The school was founded to provide an education for 70 scholars. Gradually numbers rose, a choir of 16 &quot;quiristers&quot; being added alongside paying pupils known as &quot;commoners&quot;. Numbers expanded greatly in the 1860s with the addition of ten boarding houses. The scholars continue to live in the school&#x27;s medieval buildings, which consist of two courtyards, a chapel, and a cloisters. A Wren-style classroom building named &quot;School&quot; was added in the 17th century. An art school (&quot;museum&quot;), science school, and music school were added at the turn of the 20th century. A war cloister was built as a memorial in 1924.

The school has maintained traditions including its mascot, the Trusty Servant; a set of &quot;notions&quot; forming a sort of private language; and a school song, &quot;Domum&quot;. Its headmasters have included the bishops William Waynflete in the 15th century and George Ridding in the 19th century. Former pupils are known as Old Wykehamists.

== History ==
=== Foundation and early years ===

Winchester College was founded in 1382 by William of Wykeham, Bishop of Winchester and Chancellor to both Edward III and Richard II, in part because of the lack of trained priests following the Black Death. Winchester was to act as a feeder school to New College, also founded by Wykeham. According to its 1382 charter and final statutes (1400), the school is called in Latin (&quot;St Mary&#x27;s College, near Winchester&quot;), or (&quot;The College of the Blessed Mary of Winchester, near Winchester&quot;). The first 70 &quot;poor scholars&quot; entered the school in 1394. In the early 15th century the specific requirement was that scholars come from families where the income was less than five marks sterling (£3 6s 8d) &quot;per annum&quot;; in comparison, the contemporary reasonable living for a yeoman was £5 &quot;per annum&quot;.

Other innovations at Winchester included enforcing discipline through the pupils themselves, using prefects. Discipline was in any case meant to be less harsh than was common in medieval schools, at least as the statutes read. Winchester was also unusual in giving education to boys aged 12–18, as universities would accept students within this age range. These features, including the double foundation, formed the model for Eton College and King&#x27;s College, Cambridge, some 50 years later. Eton and Winchester formed a close partnership at that time. At first only a small number of pupils other than scholars were admitted; by the 15th century the school had around 100 pupils in total, nominally the 70 scholars, 16 choirboys known as &quot;quiristers&quot;, and the rest &quot;commoners&quot;. Demand for places for commoners was high, and though at first restricted, numbers gradually rose.

=== Early modern period ===

As the college was a religious as well as educational establishment, it was threatened with closure during Henry VIII&#x27;s reign. A statute to this effect was drawn up in 1545, which was only halted by his death. Edward VI swiftly reversed direction. Edward made provision for worship and Bible readings to be made in English rather than Latin. In the early modern period, under Henry, Edward, Elizabeth and James, royal visits were accompanied by presentations of Latin and a small amount of Greek occasional poetry, composed by the pupils. Elizabeth also granted an exemption to allow Winchester, Eton and elsewhere to conduct their religious services in Latin, to help pupils to improve their skills in the language.

=== Victorian era to present ===

From the 1860s, ten boarding houses, each for up to sixty pupils, were added, greatly increasing the school&#x27;s capacity. By 2020, the number of pupils had risen to 690. From 2022, the school has accepted day pupils in the Sixth Form, including girls.

== Buildings ==
The college consists of an assemblage of buildings from medieval times to the present day. There are 94 listed buildings, set in grounds of some 250 acres, of which 100 acres are water meadows, 52 acres are playing fields, and 11 acres are formal gardens; the area includes St Catherine&#x27;s Hill. The medieval buildings, representing most of the original foundation from the school&#x27;s opening in 1394, include Outer Gate and Outer Court, Chamber Court, the chapel, and the Cloisters. These are built in flint with limestone facings and slate roofs. The chapel retains its original wooden fan-vaulted ceiling, designed by Hugh Herland, carpenter to Richard II. Little of the original medieval glass, designed by Thomas Glazier, survives, as it was scattered in the 1820s, but some is now housed in Thurburn&#x27;s Chantry, at the back of the chapel, and in Fromond&#x27;s Chantry, inside the Cloisters. The &quot;School&quot; building was constructed in 1683–1687 in Wren style, with a statue of the founder above the door by C. G. Cibber. The school was greatly extended in the 19th century with the addition of boarding houses for &quot;commoners&quot;, paying pupils, as opposed to the scholars who continued to live in the medieval College. At the turn of the 20th century, a Music School, &quot;Museum&quot; (art school), and Science School, all architect-designed, were added. A hall big enough for the enlarged school, New Hall, was opened in 1961, accommodating the oak panelling removed from the Chapel in the 1874 refurbishment. In 1924, a War Cloister was constructed; it now serves as a memorial of the Wykehamists killed in the two World Wars. Visitors may tour areas such as Chamber Court, the chapel, College Hall, the Cloisters, School and Museum, for a fee.

== Accommodation ==

=== College ===

The seventy scholars live in the original buildings, known as &quot;College&quot;. The scholars are known as &quot;Collegemen&quot;, and the schoolmaster in charge of them is called the Master in College. Collegemen wear black gowns, following the founding traditions of the school. Collegemen enjoy certain privileges compared to the Commoners, such as having open fires and being allowed to walk across Meads, the walled sports field outside School.

=== Boarding houses ===

Every pupil at Winchester, apart from the Scholars, lives in a boarding house, chosen or allocated when applying to Winchester. It is here that he studies, eats and sleeps. Each house is presided over by a housemaster (who takes on the role in addition to teaching duties), assisted by house tutors. Houses compete against each other in school sports. Each house has an official name, usually based on the family name of the first housemaster, which is used mainly as a postal address. Each house also has an informal name, usually based on the name or nickname of an early housemaster. Each house also has a letter, in the order of their founding, to act as an abbreviation, especially on laundry tags. A member of a house is described by the informal name of the house with &quot;-ite&quot; suffixed, as &quot;a Furleyite&quot;, &quot;a Toyeite&quot;, &quot;a Cookite&quot; and so on. College does not have an informal name, although the abbreviation &quot;Coll&quot; is sometimes used; &quot;X&quot; (meaning, not one of the boarding houses) was originally used only on laundry tags.

== Academic ==

=== Admission ===

Winchester is considered one of the most prestigious schools in the world. It has its own entrance examination, and does not use Common Entrance like other major public schools. Those wishing to enter a Commoner House make their arrangements with the relevant housemaster some two years before sitting the exam, usually sitting a test set by the housemaster and an interview. Those applying to College do not take the normal entrance examination but instead sit a separate, harder, exam called &quot;Election&quot;: successful candidates may obtain, according to their performance, a scholarship, an exhibition or a Headmaster&#x27;s nomination to join a Commoner House. Admission to College was historically coupled to remission of fees, but this has ceased; instead, means-tested bursaries ranging from 5% to 100% of the school fee are provided, according to need. From 2022, Winchester admitted girls into the 6th form (year 12) as day pupils, with girls boarding from 2024. For 2023/24, the fee is £49,152 per annum (£16,384 per term) for boarding pupils and £36,369 per annum (£12,123 per term) for day pupils.

=== Structure ===

In addition to normal lessons, all boys throughout the school are required to attend a class called Division (known as &quot;Div&quot;) which explores parts of history, literature, and politics that do not lead to external examinations; its purpose is to ensure a broad education.

From year 9, pupils study for at least nine GCSE and IGCSEs. Every pupil studies English, mathematics, Latin, French or German, and at least two sciences at this level, as well as &quot;Div&quot;. Pupils then study three A-levels, &quot;Div&quot;, and an Extended Project Qualification.

=== Results ===
Winchester College is particularly known for its academic rigour. 

In 2023 at A-Level, 79.6% of student results were graded A*-A, with 42.4% at A*. At GCSE, 88.4% of results were graded 7 or higher, with 73.1% of grades being 8 or 9, and 50.5% of all grades achieving the top grade of 9. In the same year, 17% of pupils secured places at Oxbridge, while notable US destinations included Harvard, Columbia, UPenn, and Chicago.
Between 2010 and 2018, an average of 33% of leavers obtained places at Oxford or Cambridge.

== Activities ==

=== Sport ===


Winchester College has its own game, Winchester College football (also known as &quot;Win: Co: Fo:&quot; or &quot;Winkies&quot;), played only at Winchester. It is played in the spring term with a competition between the school&#x27;s houses; it is largely managed by the boys.

A distinctive Winchester version of fives resembles Rugby fives but with a buttress on the court. The buttress enables a skilful player to cause the ball to ricochet in an unexpected direction.

The school has an active rowing club called the Winchester College Boat Club which is based on the River Itchen. The club is affiliated to British Rowing (boat code WIN) and was twice winner of the Princess Elizabeth Challenge Cup (in 1949 and 1954) at the Henley Royal Regatta.

Rivalry — particularly sporting — between Winchester and Eton has existed for centuries.

=== Combined Cadet Force ===

Pupils of the school in their second year are currently required to serve in the college&#x27;s Combined Cadet Force.

The organisation was founded in 1860 as &quot;The Winchester College Rifle Volunteer Corps&quot; by various boys in their top year as a result of the perceived threat of Napoleon III after the Orsini plot, and remained entirely autonomous until it was taken over by the Second Master in 1868. It was enrolled as a Cadet Corps in the 1st Hants Volunteer Battalion. In 1908, the Officer Training Corps was established, and by 1914, through the request of the War Office that Senior Cadets be given appropriate training for the war effort, almost every student became involved in the Corps, though it was never explicitly compulsory. In the Second World War, it was renamed as &quot;The Junior Training Corps&quot;, though its function was still to prepare boys for Officer responsibilities. Montgomery remarked on inspecting the Corps in 1946 that there was &quot;latent leadership in all ranks&quot;. In 1948, the &quot;Junior Training Corps&quot; became known as the &quot;Combined Cadet Force&quot; (CCF) which incorporated RAF and RN sections. In 1963, &quot;Alternative Service Activities&quot; were introduced for boys who did not want to join the CCF. Pupils were made eligible to opt out of the CCF at the end of their second year after starting at the beginning of the year: this is still the school&#x27;s policy.

=== Music ===

Winchester offers extensive opportunities for musical development, with two-thirds of pupils playing at least one instrument. The school has a music school and numerous practice rooms, and a variety of choirs, ensembles, and orchestras. The chapel choir has existed since the school&#x27;s foundation. Music and choral scholarships fund free tuition for candidates proficient in multiple instruments at grade 6 level or above.

== Traditions ==

=== &quot;The Trusty Servant&quot;: the school mascot ===

The Trusty Servant is an emblematic figure in a painting at Winchester College, that serves as the school&#x27;s unofficial mascot and the name of its alumni magazine. A painting of &quot;The Trusty Servant&quot; and accompanying verses both devised by the poet John Hoskins in 1579 hangs outside the college kitchen. The current version was painted by William Cave the Younger in 1809. The painting depicts a mythical creature with the body of a man, the head of a pig, with its snout closed with a padlock, the ears of an ass, the feet of a stag, and tools in his left hand. The verses are on the virtues that pupils of the college were supposed to have. The college arms are shown in the background of the painting.

=== &quot;Notions&quot;: the school language ===
A &quot;notion&quot; is a specialised term peculiar to Winchester College. The word notion is also used to describe traditions unique to the school. An example of a notion is &quot;toytime&quot;, meaning homework, from the notion &quot;toys&quot;, a wooden cubicle that serves as a pupil&#x27;s workspace in a communal room, known as &quot;mugging hall&quot; in Commoner Houses or a &quot;chamber&quot; in College.

=== &quot;Manners makyth man&quot;: the school motto ===
Since the foundation, Winchester College has had numerous words and phrases directly associated with it, including its motto, its graces, and a prayer. A grace is read before and after every lunch and formal meal in College Hall. Two separate graces are traditionally sung during Election, the scholarship process.

&quot;Manners makyth man&quot;
– Motto of Winchester College, New College, Oxford, and the founder of the two colleges, William of Wykeham

The Latin grace before meals in College goes:

The Latin grace after meals in College goes:

=== &quot;Domum&quot;: the school song ===

The school song is entitled &quot;Domum&quot; and is sung at the end of the summer term, known as Cloister Time. The origin of the song is unknown; it was described as &quot;an old tradition&quot; in the 1773 &quot;History and Antiquities of Winchester&quot;. 
The traditional tune was composed by John Reading. A new tune, by Malcolm Archer, was officially adopted by the school in about 2007.

According to legend, the text was written in the 17th century by a pupil who was confined for misconduct during the Whitsun holidays. (In one account, he was tied to a pillar.) It is said that he carved the words on the bark of a tree, which was thereafter called &quot;Domum Tree&quot;, and cast himself into Logie (the river running through the school grounds). There is still a &quot;Domum Cottage&quot; in that area. The author of the text apparently wrongly treated &quot;domum&quot; as a neuter noun.

A &quot;Domum Dinner&quot; is held at the end of the summer term for leavers. It was formerly restricted to those former scholars of Winchester who were also scholars of New College, and distinguished guests. Until the reforms of the 19th century, there were three successive Election Dinners held during Election Week, culminating in a Domum Ball. Originally these festivities occurred around Whitsun, as suggested by references in the song to early summer such as &quot;See the year, the meadow, smiling&quot; and &quot;Now the swallow seeks her dwelling&quot;.

== Influence ==

Winchester&#x27;s approach to education was influential on later schools. It was unusual in the medieval period in giving education to boys aged 12–18, as universities would accept students within this age range. The age range, the double foundation with New College, Oxford, and the approach to discipline formed the model for Eton College and King&#x27;s College, Cambridge, some 50 years later.

Pupils of the school have appeared in many works of fiction: the school itself rather less often. The figure of Sir Humphrey Appleby in the TV series &quot;Yes Minister&quot; is among the best-known Old Wykehamists in fiction.

As with other prominent public schools, a locomotive of the Southern Railway V Class was named after Winchester College. The second of the class, No. 901 &quot;Winchester&quot; was constructed by Southern at the nearby Eastleigh Works; it entered service in 1930.

== Headmasters ==

The headmasters of Winchester College from the 14th century onwards are:

== Former pupils ==

Current pupils of Winchester College are known as Wykehamists, in memory of the school&#x27;s founder, William of Wykeham; former pupils are known as Old Wykehamists, or amongst themselves as Old Woks. 
Fictional Old Wykehamists appear in over 50 novels, starting with Tobias Smollett&#x27;s eponymous &quot;Peregrine Pickle&quot; in 1751.

== Controversy ==

In 1872, under the headmaster George Ridding, &quot;tunding&quot;, beatings given by a prefect (a senior pupil), using a ground-ash across the shoulders, were still permitted. The matter became a national scandal, known as &quot;the Tunding Row&quot;, when &quot;an overzealous Senior Commoner Prefect&quot; beat a pupil for refusing to attend a notions test. Ridding made matters worse by trying to defend the action. He eventually limited the prefects&#x27; power to beat, and forbade notions tests as a &quot;disgraceful innovation&quot;.

In the 1970s and 80s, the college allowed a Christian Forum to operate on college grounds which was later described as &quot;cult-like&quot;, and which gave access to pupils to a man who carried out sadomasochistic abuse on several of them. The perpetrator, John Smyth, was a leader of the evangelical Christian Iwerne camps where abuse was also reported to have taken place. He was assisted in this by former Winchester pupil Simon Doggart. The college and the Iwerne Trust became aware of these allegations in 1982, but neither reported them to the police. Smyth was warned off and moved to Zimbabwe and then South Africa where abuse continued. An independent review into the abuse, commissioned by the college, was published in January 2022, alongside the Makin Review by the Church of England and a review by the Titus Trust (which succeeded the Iwerne Trust). On 12 November 2024, following publication of the Makin Review, Justin Welby announced his intention to resign as Archbishop of Canterbury; this report was critical of the Church&#x27;s handling of allegations of abuse committed by the barrister John Smyth, aided by Doggart, and was also critical of Welby&#x27;s failure to investigate the allegations.

In 2005, Winchester College was one of fifty of the country&#x27;s leading independent schools found guilty of running an unlawful price-fixing cartel by the Office of Fair Trading. As a penalty, the schools paid for a trust fund to benefit the affected pupils. Winchester College, like Eton, received a fifty per cent reduction in its penalty in return for its full cooperation.

In 2017 Winchester College suspended its Head of Art History for providing students with information about questions on an upcoming public exam. The headmaster of Winchester confirmed that the school had treated the matter &quot;very seriously&quot; and that no boy was responsible for the &quot;exam irregularity&quot;. The information was widely distributed, resulting in their papers being disallowed.

==See also==
* List of the oldest schools in the United Kingdom

==References==
== Further reading ==
* 
* Custance, Roger, (ed.), &quot;Winchester College: Sixth Centenary Essays&quot;, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982 
* Dilke, Christopher, &quot;Dr Moberly&#x27;s Mint-Mark: A Study of Winchester College&quot;, London: Heinemann, 1965
* Fearon, William A., &quot;The Passing of Old Winchester&quot;: Winchester: Winchester College, 1924
* Firth, J. D&#x27;E., &quot;Winchester College&quot;, Winchester: Winchester Publications, 1949
* Kirby, T. F., &quot;Annals of Winchester College&quot;, London and Winchester: Henry Frowde, 1892
* (Review)
* Mansfield, Robert, &quot;School Life at Winchester College&quot;, London: John Camden Hotten, 1866
* Rich, Edward J. G. H., &quot;Recollections of the Two St. Mary Winton Colleges&quot;, Walsall and London: Edward Rich, 1883
* Stevens, Charles, &quot;Winchester Notions: The English Dialect of Winchester College&quot;, London: Athlone Press, 1998
* Tuckwell, William, &quot;The Ancient Ways: Winchester Fifty Years Ago&quot;, London: Macmillan, 1893
* Walcott, Mackenzie E. C., &quot;William of Wykeham and his Colleges&quot;, London: David Nutt, 1852 
* Wordsworth, Charles, &quot;The College of St Mary Winton near Winchester&quot;, Oxford and London: J. H. Parker, 1848

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="0" end="18" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="33" end="46" title="Public school (United Kingdom)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q269770" start="80" end="95" title="boarding school" label="boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493752" start="143" end="146" title="day school" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="161" end="171" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="173" end="182" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q723451" start="211" end="229" title="William of Wykeham" label="William of Wykeham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="261" end="280" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126857" start="389" end="409" title="Clarendon Commission" label="Clarendon Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q541394" start="455" end="469" title="co-educational" label="co-educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075597" start="561" end="571" title="Single-sex education" label="boys&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="1015" end="1019" title="Christopher Wren" label="Wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q26387800" start="1216" end="1228" title="Winchester College War Cloister" label="war cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740306" start="1322" end="1340" title="the Trusty Servant" label="the Trusty Servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063054" start="1357" end="1364" title="Notions (Winchester College)" label="notions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581024" start="1487" end="1504" title="William Waynflete" label="William Waynflete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543876" start="1529" end="1543" title="George Ridding" label="George Ridding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592865" start="1592" end="1607" title="Old Wykehamists" label="Old Wykehamists"/>
<link wikidata="Q723451" start="1702" end="1720" title="William of Wykeham" label="William of Wykeham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271558" start="1722" end="1742" title="Bishop of Winchester" label="Bishop of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="1766" end="1776" title="Edward III" label="Edward III"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="1781" end="1791" title="Richard II" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="1854" end="1865" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="1911" end="1922" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2030" end="2035" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="2468" end="2474" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q371909" start="2605" end="2613" title="prefects" label="prefects"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="2932" end="2944" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="2949" end="2979" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="3652" end="3661" title="Edward VI" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="4570" end="4585" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587432" start="4740" end="4764" title="St Catherine&amp;#x27;s Hill, Hampshire" label="St Catherine&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="5121" end="5131" title="Richard II" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790061" start="5184" end="5198" title="Thomas Glazier" label="Thomas Glazier"/>
<link wikidata="Q170373" start="5439" end="5449" title="Christopher Wren" label="Wren style"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649966" start="5498" end="5510" title="C. G. Cibber" label="C. G. Cibber"/>
<link wikidata="Q26387800" start="6022" end="6034" title="Winchester College War Cloister" label="War Cloister"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="6298" end="6306" title="Scholarship" label="scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558858" start="6827" end="6841" title="boarding house" label="boarding house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153344" start="8016" end="8031" title="Common Entrance" label="Common Entrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972829" start="8049" end="8063" title="Public school (UK)" label="public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420210" start="8487" end="8497" title="Exhibition (scholarship)" label="exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3357620" start="8656" end="8668" title="means-tested" label="means-tested"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501560" start="9349" end="9353" title="GCSE" label="GCSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242586" start="9358" end="9363" title="IGCSE" label="IGCSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="9526" end="9533" title="A-level" label="A-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421841" start="9560" end="9590" title="Extended Project Qualification" label="Extended Project Qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="10107" end="10113" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="10117" end="10126" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310686" start="10200" end="10227" title="Winchester College football" label="Winchester College football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421910" start="10477" end="10482" title="fives" label="fives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378174" start="10493" end="10504" title="Rugby fives" label="Rugby fives"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="10661" end="10667" title="Rowing (sport)" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337528" start="10735" end="10747" title="River Itchen, Hampshire" label="River Itchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970979" start="10775" end="10789" title="British Rowing" label="British Rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244610" start="10834" end="10866" title="Princess Elizabeth Challenge Cup" label="Princess Elizabeth Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543109" start="10893" end="10913" title="Henley Royal Regatta" label="Henley Royal Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="10973" end="10977" title="Eton College" label="Eton"/>
<link wikidata="Q731977" start="11132" end="11152" title="Combined Cadet Force" label="Combined Cadet Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="11325" end="11337" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104138" start="11348" end="11359" title="Orsini plot" label="Orsini plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="11612" end="11622" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="11944" end="11954" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="12180" end="12183" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12188" end="12190" title="Royal Navy" label="RN"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023788" start="12730" end="12746" title="Winchester College Chapel Choir" label="The chapel choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239946" start="13260" end="13272" title="John Hoskins (poet)" label="John Hoskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376987" start="14618" end="14637" title="New College, Oxford" label="New College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q723451" start="14676" end="14694" title="William of Wykeham" label="William of Wykeham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254393" start="15131" end="15143" title="John Reading (composer and organist)" label="John Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q255384" start="15160" end="15174" title="Malcolm Archer" label="Malcolm Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446130" start="15345" end="15352" title="Whitsun" label="Whitsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="16647" end="16659" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q924289" start="16664" end="16694" title="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="King&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q115824311" start="16756" end="16777" title="Winchester College in fiction" label="many works of fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915764" start="16834" end="16850" title="Humphrey Appleby" label="Humphrey Appleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q732383" start="16874" end="16886" title="Yes Minister" label="Yes Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q741266" start="17006" end="17022" title="Southern Railway (UK)" label="Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392909" start="17023" end="17030" title="SR V Schools class" label="V Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330761" start="17165" end="17180" title="Eastleigh Works" label="Eastleigh Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592865" start="17475" end="17490" title="Old Wykehamists" label="Old Wykehamists"/>
<link wikidata="Q115824311" start="17528" end="17553" title="Fictional Old Wykehamists" label="Fictional Old Wykehamists"/>
<link wikidata="Q356283" start="17594" end="17609" title="Tobias Smollett" label="Tobias Smollett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712607" start="17633" end="17649" title="Peregrine Pickle" label="Peregrine Pickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543876" start="17715" end="17729" title="George Ridding" label="George Ridding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17914" end="17929" title="Notions (Winchester College)#Tunding" label="the Tunding Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q28607735" start="18486" end="18496" title="John Smyth (barrister)" label="John Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="18518" end="18539" title="evangelical Christian" label="evangelical Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q125030414" start="18540" end="18552" title="Iwerne camps" label="Iwerne camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518632" start="18655" end="18668" title="Simon Doggart" label="Simon Doggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q131375004" start="18987" end="18999" title="Makin Review" label="Makin Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="19007" end="19024" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q56278416" start="19045" end="19056" title="Titus Trust" label="Titus Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q26419" start="19157" end="19169" title="Justin Welby" label="Justin Welby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200230" start="19579" end="19591" title="price-fixing" label="price-fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079218" start="19606" end="19628" title="Office of Fair Trading" label="Office of Fair Trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643193" start="20250" end="20298" title="List of the oldest schools in the United Kingdom" label="List of the oldest schools in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="20430" end="20453" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112222" start="20463" end="20481" title="Dilke, Christopher" label="Dilke, Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066653" start="20581" end="20599" title="William Fearon (priest)" label="Fearon, William A."/>
<link wikidata="Q6233203" start="20683" end="20702" title="John Firth (cricketer)" label="Firth, J. D&amp;#x27;E."/>
<link wikidata="Q4036513" start="21219" end="21232" title="Athlone Press" label="Athlone Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083718" start="21447" end="21466" title="Wordsworth, Charles" label="Wordsworth, Charles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50461" wikidata="Q931415" url="?curid=50461" title="Led Zeppelin Remasters">
<text>Led Zeppelin Remasters is a three-LP (or two-cassette or two-CD) compilation album of digitally remastered material by English rock band Led Zeppelin. Containing songs from the band&#x27;s eight studio albums, it was initially released in the UK and Japan by Atlantic Records on 15 October 1990. The album is essentially a scaled-down version of the four-CD &quot;Led Zeppelin Boxed Set&quot;, although, unlike the larger collection, it includes &quot;Good Times Bad Times.&quot;

==Track listing==


:&quot;Misty Mountain Hop&quot; and &quot;The Rain Song&quot; were not included on the LP edition of the album.

==Personnel==
Led Zeppelin
*John Bonham – drums, percussion
*John Paul Jones – bass guitar, keyboards, mandolin
*Jimmy Page – acoustic and electric guitars, production, remastering, digital remastering
*Robert Plant – vocals, harmonica

Additional musicians
*Sandy Denny – vocals on &quot;The Battle of Evermore&quot;
*Ian Stewart – piano on &quot;Rock and Roll&quot;

Production
*Yves Beauvais – producer
*Perry Cooper – executive producer
*Bob Defrin – art direction
*Larry Fremantle – design
*Peter Grant – executive producer
*Bob Gruen – photography
*Richard &quot;Hutch&quot; Hutchison – design co-ordinator
*John Kubick – digital editing and transfers
*George Marino – digital remastering
*Jennifer Moore – photography and imaging
*Aubrey Powell – photography
*Jodi Rovin – design
*Rhonda Schoen – digital editing and transfers
*Chris Wroe – photography and imaging

==Chart performance==
==Certifications and sales==






==Release history==
==&quot;Led Zeppelin Remasters&quot; (Bonus Disc edition)==

&quot;Led Zeppelin Remasters&quot; (Bonus Disc edition) is a three-CD and three-cassette compilation album long-case digipak of remastered material by English rock group Led Zeppelin. The discs came in a multicolour dayglo label reflected on the box set cover. It was released in the US by Atlantic Records on 21 February 1992. This release includes a bonus CD featuring promotional interviews with Jimmy Page, Robert Plant and John Paul Jones, included in a sleeve pouch with liner notes from the original &quot;Remasters&quot; release.

===Revised track listing===
;Disc three: &quot;Profiled&quot;
*1) Led Zeppelin Profile
*2–8) Jimmy Page Station Liners
*9–20) Jimmy Page interview
*21–32) Robert Plant interview
*33–43) John Paul Jones interview

Disc three was originally issued under the title &quot;Profiled&quot;, as a promotional accompaniment to the &quot;Led Zeppelin Boxed Set&quot;.

===Personnel===
Led Zeppelin
*John Bonham – drums
*John Paul Jones – bass guitar, keyboards, mandolin
*Jimmy Page – guitars, production
*Robert Plant – vocals, harmonica, tambourine

Additional musicians
*Sandy Denny – vocals on &quot;The Battle of Evermore&quot;
*Ian Stewart – piano on &quot;Rock and Roll&quot;

===Chart performance===
===Certification===


===Release history===
==See also==
*List of best-selling albums in Australia

==References==
==External links==
*Atlanticrecords.com Remasters</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="65" end="82" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="137" end="149" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="259" end="275" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q526447" start="364" end="386" title="Led Zeppelin Boxed Set" label="Led Zeppelin Boxed Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q686360" start="452" end="472" title="Good Times Bad Times" label="Good Times Bad Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q267363" start="508" end="526" title="Misty Mountain Hop" label="Misty Mountain Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q642014" start="543" end="556" title="The Rain Song" label="The Rain Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="642" end="653" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="663" end="673" title="Percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="675" end="690" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="717" end="725" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="727" end="737" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="771" end="781" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="783" end="794" title="Audio mastering" label="remastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="817" end="829" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="840" end="849" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q236638" start="873" end="884" title="Sandy Denny" label="Sandy Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q319737" start="933" end="944" title="Ian Stewart (musician)" label="Ian Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q706364" start="1069" end="1082" title="art direction" label="art direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q433123" start="1110" end="1121" title="Peter Grant (music manager)" label="Peter Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053574" start="1124" end="1142" title="executive producer" label="executive producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="1297" end="1308" title="Audio mastering" label="remastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="1714" end="1731" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1776" end="1783" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088357" start="1784" end="1794" title="rock group" label="rock group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="1795" end="1807" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="1915" end="1931" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="2024" end="2034" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="2036" end="2048" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="2053" end="2068" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="2257" end="2267" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="2319" end="2331" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="2350" end="2365" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q526447" start="2492" end="2514" title="Led Zeppelin Boxed Set" label="Led Zeppelin Boxed Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="2553" end="2564" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q190243" start="2574" end="2589" title="John Paul Jones (musician)" label="John Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="2616" end="2624" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="2626" end="2636" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="2648" end="2658" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="2660" end="2672" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="2683" end="2692" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="2694" end="2704" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q236638" start="2728" end="2739" title="Sandy Denny" label="Sandy Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q319737" start="2788" end="2799" title="Ian Stewart (musician)" label="Ian Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q11789275" start="2920" end="2960" title="List of best-selling albums in Australia" label="List of best-selling albums in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50464" wikidata="Q239602" url="?curid=50464" title="Nectar (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Nectar]] is the sugar-rich liquid produced by the flowers of plants, in order to attract pollinating animals.

Nectar may also refer to:

*Nectar, originally a name of the food or drink of the gods in Greek mythology; see ambrosia
*Nectar (drink), a fruit juice beverage
==Places==
*Nectar, Alabama, a town in central Alabama
*&quot;Mare Nectaris&quot;, the Sea of Nectar, a geographic feature of the Moon
*Nectar Covered Bridge, a former covered bridge in Alabama

==Companies==
*Nectar d.o.o., a Serbian beverage company
* Northeast Connecticut Telephone and Ride (NECTAR), predecessor to the Northeastern Connecticut Transit District

==Science and technology==
* Nectar (National eResearch Collaboration Tools and Resources), now part of Australian Research Data Commons
*Nectar source, a flowering plant that produces nectar

==Other uses==
* Nectar, a fictional performance-enhancing drug in Free Radical Design&#x27;s PlayStation 3 game, &quot;HAZE&quot;
*Nectar (loyalty card), a loyalty card issued by a partnership of United Kingdom retailers
*&quot;Nectar&quot; (Enanitos Verdes album), 1999
*&quot;Nectar&quot; (Joji album), 2020
* Nectar, a product strongly resembling wine in &quot;The Sims 3 World Adventures&quot; expansion pack
* &quot;Nectar&quot;, a song by Opeth from &quot;Morningrise&quot;

==See also==
*Nektar, a 1970s English/German progressive rock band based in Germany</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q239602" start="0" end="10" title="Nectar (disambiguation)" label="[[Nectar]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q239602" start="113" end="119" title="Nectar (disambiguation)" label="Nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131409" start="224" end="232" title="ambrosia" label="ambrosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719623" start="234" end="248" title="Nectar (drink)" label="Nectar (drink)"/>
<link wikidata="Q67298" start="285" end="300" title="Nectar, Alabama" label="Nectar, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q210964" start="335" end="348" title="Mare Nectaris" label="Mare Nectaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985809" start="409" end="430" title="Nectar Covered Bridge" label="Nectar Covered Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604471" start="483" end="496" title="Nectar d.o.o." label="Nectar d.o.o."/>
<link wikidata="Q48848686" start="597" end="638" title="Northeastern Connecticut Transit District" label="Northeastern Connecticut Transit District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824459" start="744" end="776" title="Australian Research Data Commons" label="Australian Research Data Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q857678" start="778" end="791" title="Nectar source" label="Nectar source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450668" start="953" end="957" title="Haze (video game)" label="HAZE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874179" start="965" end="986" title="Nectar (loyalty card)" label="Nectar (loyalty card)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071419" start="1056" end="1098" title="Nectar (Enanitos Verdes album)" label="&amp;quot;Nectar&amp;quot; (Enanitos Verdes album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q90779639" start="1106" end="1137" title="Nectar (Joji album)" label="&amp;quot;Nectar&amp;quot; (Joji album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107864240" start="1198" end="1225" title="The Sims 3 World Adventures" label="The Sims 3 World Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q18611" start="1296" end="1307" title="Morningrise" label="Morningrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748178" start="1329" end="1335" title="Nektar" label="Nektar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50465" wikidata="Q476757" url="?curid=50465" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan">
<text>The Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, later known as the Republic of Afghanistan, was the Afghan state between 1978 and 1992. It was bordered by Pakistan to the east and south, by Iran to the west, by the Soviet Union to the north, and by China to the northeast. Established by the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) following the Saur Revolution in April 1978, it came to rely heavily on the Soviet Union for financial and military assistance and was therefore widely considered to be a Soviet satellite state. The PDPA&#x27;s rise to power is seen as the beginning of the ongoing Afghan conflict, and the majority of the country&#x27;s years in existence were marked by the Soviet–Afghan War. It collapsed by the end of the First Afghan Civil War in April 1992, having lasted only four months after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.

The PDPA began ruling Afghanistan after ousting the unelected autocrat Mohammad Daoud Khan, who had become president by leading the 1973 Afghan coup d&#x27;état; he was succeeded by Nur Muhammad Taraki as the head of state and government on 30 April 1978. Both Taraki and his successor Hafizullah Amin, who had organized the Saur Revolution as the General Secretary of the PDPA, introduced several contentious reforms during their time in office, such as land and marriage reforms and an enforced policy of de-Islamization vis-à-vis the promotion of socialism. Amin, in particular, built upon Khan&#x27;s reforms with even more radical legislation for Afghanistan&#x27;s conservative Muslim society, such as universal education and equal rights for women. Soon afterwards, a power struggle began between two PDPA factions: the hardline Khalq, led by Taraki and Amin; and the moderate Parcham, led by Babrak Karmal. The Khalqists eventually emerged victorious and subsequently purged the bulk of the Parchamite ranks, while also exiling most of the prominent Parcham leaders to the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc.

Following the Khalq–Parcham conflict, a power struggle arose within the Khalq faction itself, as Taraki and Amin increasingly contested each other&#x27;s influence. Amin gained the upper hand among the Khalqists and later had Taraki killed on his orders. Due to his earlier reforms, however, Amin&#x27;s rule proved to be unpopular throughout most of Afghanistan, with the country&#x27;s emerging instability prompting the Soviet government to begin planning for a direct military intervention in favour of the Parchamites. On 27 December 1979, the Soviet Union launched Operation Storm-333, assaulting the Tajbeg Palace in Kabul and assassinating Amin, who was then replaced by Karmal. The Karmal era, which lasted from 1979 to 1986, was marked by the height of the Soviet–Afghan War. As the Soviet and Afghan militaries fought against the Afghan mujahideen, which had been bolstered by military aid from the Muslim world and the Western Bloc, the country rapidly destabilized, resulting in widespread civilian casualties and the creation of millions of refugees, most of whom fled to Pakistan and Iran. In April 1980, the &quot;Fundamental Principles&quot; (comprising a constitution) were introduced by Karmal&#x27;s administration, and several non-PDPA members were allowed into the government to broaden the country&#x27;s support base. However, these policies ultimately failed to bring peace to Afghanistan, and in 1986, Karmal was succeeded by Mohammad Najibullah.

Najibullah pursued a policy known as National Reconciliation: a new constitution was introduced in 1987 and democratic elections were held in 1988, though they were boycotted by the mujahideen. After almost a decade of warfare, the Soviet Union withdrew from Afghanistan in February 1989, but continued to back the PDPA, which was facing mounting resistance from the opposition. By 1990, another constitution was introduced, stating that Afghanistan&#x27;s true nature was that of an Islamic republic and transforming the PDPA into the Watan Party. On the military front, the government still proved to be capable of performing in open combat, as demonstrated in the Battle of Jalalabad. However, with growing internal difficulties, such as the 1990 Khalqist coup d&#x27;état attempt, and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991, the Najibullah government was unable to sustain itself and ultimately lost the First Afghan Civil War in April 1992, which, in turn, triggered the Second Afghan Civil War. A distinct faction known as the Taliban emerged from among the mujahideen&#x27;s ranks during this period and eventually seized most of the country, establishing the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, which fought the Northern Alliance during the Third Afghan Civil War before collapsing to the United States invasion of Afghanistan in October 2001. This Islamic Emirate would be re-established after the end of the War in Afghanistan in August 2021.

==History==
===Saur Revolution and Taraki: 1978–1979===
Mohammad Daoud Khan, the President of the Republic of Afghanistan from 1973 to 1978, was ousted during the Saur Revolution (April Revolution) following the death of Mir Akbar Khyber, a Parchamite politician from the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), who died under mysterious circumstances. Hafizullah Amin, a Khalqist, was the coup&#x27;s chief architect. Nur Muhammad Taraki, the leader of the Khalqists, was elected Chairman of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council, Chairman of the Council of Ministers and retained his post as General Secretary of the PDPA Central Committee. Under him was Babrak Karmal, the leader of the Parcham faction, as Deputy Chairman of the Revolutionary Council and Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Amin as Council of Ministers deputy chairman and Minister of Foreign Affairs, and Mohammad Aslam Watanjar as Council of Ministers deputy chairman. The appointment of Karmal, Amin and Watanjar as Council of Ministers deputy chairmen proved unstable, and it led to three different governments being established within the government; the Khalq faction was answerable to Amin, the Parchamites were answerable to Karmal and the military officers (who were Parchamites) were answerable to Watanjar.

The first conflict between the Khalqists and Parchamites arose when the Khalqists wanted to give PDPA Central Committee membership to military officers who participated in the Saur Revolution. Amin, who previously opposed the appointment of military officers to the PDPA leadership, altered his position; he now supported their elevation. The PDPA Politburo voted in favour of giving membership to the military officers; the victors (the Khalqists) portrayed the Parchamites as opportunists (they implied that the Parchamites had ridden the revolutionary wave, but not actually participated in the revolution). To make matters worse for the Parchamites, the term Parcham was, according to Taraki, a word synonymous with factionalism. On 27 June, three months after the revolution, Amin managed to outmaneuver the Parchamites at a Central Committee meeting. The meeting decided that the Khalqists had the exclusive right to formulate and decide policy, which left the Parchamites impotent. Karmal was exiled. Later, a coup planned by the Parchamites and led by Karmal was discovered by the Khalqist leadership, prompting a swift reaction; a purge of Parchamites began. Parchamite ambassadors were recalled, but few returned; for instance, Karmal and Mohammad Najibullah stayed in their respective countries.

During Taraki&#x27;s rule, an unpopular land reform was introduced, leading to the requisitioning of land by the government without compensation; it disrupted lines of credit and led to some crop buyers boycotting beneficiaries of the reform, causing agricultural harvests to plummet and rising discontent amongst Afghans. When Taraki realized the degree of popular dissatisfaction with the reform he began to curtail the policy. Afghanistan&#x27;s long history of resistance to any type of strong centralized governmental control further undermined his authority. Consequently, much of the land reform did not get implemented nationwide. In the months following the coup, Taraki and other party leaders initiated other policies that challenged both traditional Afghan values and well-established traditional power structures in rural areas. Taraki introduced women to political life and legislated an end to forced marriage. The strength of the anti-reform backlash would ultimately lead to the Afghan Civil War.

===Amin and the Soviet intervention: 1979===

While Amin and Taraki had a very close relationship at the beginning, the relationship soon deteriorated. Amin, who had helped to create a personality cult centered on Taraki, soon became disgusted with the shape it took and with Taraki, who had begun to believe in his own brilliance. Taraki began dismissing Amin&#x27;s suggestions, fostering in Amin a deep sense of resentment. As their relationship turned increasingly sour, a power struggle developed between them for control of the Afghan Army. Following the 1979 Herat uprising, the Revolutionary Council and the PDPA Politburo established the Homeland Higher Defence Council. Taraki was elected its chairman, while Amin became its deputy. Amin&#x27;s appointment, and the acquisition of the premiership (as Chairman of the Council of Ministers), was not a step further up the ladder as one might assume; due to constitutional reforms, Amin&#x27;s new offices were more or less powerless. There was a failed assassination attempt led by the Gang of Four, which consisted of Watanjar, Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy, Sherjan Mazdoryar and Assadullah Sarwari. This assassination attempt prompted Amin to conspire against Taraki, and when Taraki returned from a trip to Havana, he was ousted, and later suffocated on Amin&#x27;s orders.

During his 104 days in power, Amin became committed to establishing a collective leadership. When Taraki was ousted, Amin promised &quot;from now on there will be no one-man government...&quot;. Prior to the Soviet intervention, the PDPA executed between 1,000 and 27,000 people, mostly at Pul-e-Charkhi prison. Between 17,000 and 25,000 people were arrested during Taraki&#x27;s and Amin&#x27;s rules combined. Amin was not liked by the Afghan people. During his rule, opposition to the communist regime increased, and the government lost control of the countryside. The state of the Afghan Armed Forces deteriorated under Amin; due to desertions the number of military personnel in the Afghan Army decreased from 100,000, in the immediate aftermath of the Saur Revolution, to somewhere between 50,000 and 70,000. Another problem was that the KGB had penetrated the PDPA, the military and the government bureaucracy. While his position in Afghanistan was becoming more perilous by the day, his enemies who were exiled in the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc were agitating for his removal. Babrak Karmal, the Parchamite leader, met several leading Eastern Bloc figures during this period, and Mohammad Aslam Watanjar, Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy and Assadullah Sarwari wanted to exact revenge on Amin.

Meantime in the Soviet Union, the Special Commission of the Politburo on Afghanistan, which consisted of Yuri Andropov, Andrei Gromyko, Dmitriy Ustinov and Boris Ponomarev, wanted to end the impression that the Soviet government supported Amin&#x27;s leadership and policies. Andropov fought hard for Soviet intervention, telling Leonid Brezhnev that Amin&#x27;s policies had destroyed the military and the government&#x27;s capability to handle the crisis by use of mass repression. The plan, according to Andropov, was to assemble a small force to intervene and remove Amin from power and replace him with Karmal. The Soviet Union declared its plan to intervene in Afghanistan on 12 December 1979, and the Soviet leadership initiated Operation Storm-333 (the first phase of the intervention) on 27 December 1979.

Amin remained trustful of the Soviet Union until the very end, despite the deterioration of official relations with the Soviet Union. When the Afghan intelligence service handed Amin a report that the Soviet Union would invade the country and topple him, Amin claimed the report was a product of imperialism. His view can be explained by the fact that the Soviet Union, after several months, decided to send troops into Afghanistan. Contrary to normal Western beliefs, Amin was informed of the Soviet decision to send troops into Afghanistan. Amin was killed by Soviet forces on 27 December 1979.

===Karmal era: 1979–1986===
Karmal ascended to power following Amin&#x27;s assassination. On 27 December Radio Kabul broadcast Karmal&#x27;s pre-recorded speech, which stated &quot;Today the torture machine of Amin has been smashed, his accomplices – the primitive executioners, usurpers and murderers of tens of thousand of our fellow countrymen – fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, sons and daughters, children and old people...&quot;. On 1 January Leonid Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and Alexei Kosygin, the Soviet Chairman of the Council of Ministers, congratulated Karmal on his &quot;election&quot; as leader, before any Afghan state or party organ had elected him to anything.

When he came to power, Karmal promised an end to executions, the establishment of democratic institutions and free elections, the creation of a constitution, the legalisation of parties other than the PDPA, and respect for individual and personal property. Prisoners incarcerated under the two previous governments would be freed in a general amnesty. He even promised that a coalition government was going to be established that was not going to espouse socialism. At the same time, he told the Afghan people that he had negotiated with the Soviet Union to give economic, military and political assistance. Even if Karmal indeed wanted all this, it would be impossible to put it into practice in the presence of the Soviet Union. Most Afghans mistrusted the government at this time. Many still remembered that Karmal had said he would protect private capital in 1978, a promise later proven to be a lie.
When a political solution failed, the Afghan government and the Soviet military decided to solve the conflict militarily. The change from a political to a military solution came gradually. It began in January 1981: Karmal doubled wages for military personnel, issued several promotions, and one general and thirteen colonels were decorated. The draft age was lowered, the obligatory length of military duty was extended, and the age for reservists was increased to thirty-five years of age. In June, Assadullah Sarwari lost his seat in the PDPA Politburo, and in his place were appointed Mohammad Aslam Watanjar, a former tank commander and the then Minister of Communications, Major General Mohammad Rafi, the Minister of Defence and KHAD Chairman Mohammad Najibullah. These measures were introduced due to the collapse of the army; before the invasion the army could field 100,000 troops, after the invasion only 25,000. Desertion was pandemic, and the recruitment campaigns for young people often led them to flee to the opposition. To better organise the military, seven military zones were established, each with its own Defence Council. The Defence Council was established at the national, provincial and district level to devolve powers to the local PDPA. It is estimated that the Afghan government spent as much as 40 percent of government revenue on defence.

Karmal was forced to resign from his post as PDPA General Secretary in May 1986, due to increasing pressure from the Soviet leadership, and was succeeded by Najibullah, the former Minister of State Security. He continued to have influence in the upper echelons of the party and state until he was forced to resign from his post of Revolutionary Council Chairman in November 1986, being succeeded by Haji Mohammad Chamkani, who was not a PDPA member.

===Najibullah and Soviet withdrawal: 1986–1989===
In September 1986 the National Compromise Commission (NCC) was established on the orders of Najibullah. The NCC&#x27;s goal was to contact counter-revolutionaries &quot;in order to complete the Saur Revolution in its new phase.&quot; An estimated 40,000 rebels were contacted by the government. At the end of 1986, Najibullah called for a six-month ceasefire and talks between the various opposition forces, as part of his policy of National Reconciliation. The discussions, if fruitful, would have led to the establishment of a coalition government and be the end of the PDPA&#x27;s monopoly on power. The programme failed, but the government was able to recruit disillusioned mujahideen fighters as government militias. The National Reconciliation did lead an increasing number of urban dwellers to support his rule, and to the stabilisation of the Afghan defence forces.

While Najibullah may have been the &quot;de jure&quot; leader of Afghanistan, Soviet advisers still did most of the work after Najibullah took power. As Gorbachev remarked &quot;We&#x27;re still doing everything ourselves... That&#x27;s all our people know how to do. They&#x27;ve tied Najibullah hand and foot.&quot; Fikryat Tabeev, the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan, was accused of acting like a Governor General by Gorbachev, and he was recalled from Afghanistan in July 1986. But while Gorbachev called for the end of Soviet management of Afghanistan, he could not resist doing some managing himself. At a Soviet Politburo meeting, Gorbachev said, &quot;It&#x27;s difficult to build a new building out of old material... I hope to God that we haven&#x27;t made a mistake with Najibullah.&quot; As time would prove, Najibullah&#x27;s aims were the opposite of the Soviet Union&#x27;s; Najibullah was opposed to a Soviet withdrawal, the Soviet Union wanted a withdrawal. This was understandable, since it was thought that the Afghan military was on the brink of dissolution. Najibullah thought his only means of survival was to retain the Soviet presence. In July 1986 six Soviet regiments, up to 15,000 troops, were withdrawn from Afghanistan. The aim of this early withdrawal was, according to Gorbachev, to show the world that the Soviet leadership was serious about leaving Afghanistan. The Soviets told the United States Government that they were planning to withdraw, but the United States Government didn&#x27;t believe it. When Gorbachev met with Ronald Reagan during his visit the United States, Reagan called, bizarrely, for the dissolution of the Afghan Military.

On 14 April the Afghan and Pakistani governments signed the 1988 Geneva Accords, and the Soviet Union and the United States signed as guarantors; the treaty specifically stated that the Soviet military had to withdraw from Afghanistan by 15 February 1989. During a Politburo meeting Eduard Shevardnadze said &quot;We will leave the country in a deplorable situation&quot;, and talked further about economic collapse, and the need to keep at least 10,000 to 15,000 troops in Afghanistan. Vladimir Kryuchkov, the KGB Chairman, supported this position. This stance, if implemented, would be a betrayal of the Geneva Accords just signed. Najibullah was against any type of Soviet withdrawal. A few Soviet troops remained after the Soviet withdrawal; for instance, parachutists who protected the Soviet embassy staff, military advisors and special forces and reconnaissance troops still operated in the &quot;outlying provinces&quot;, especially along the Afghan–Soviet border.

===Fall: 1989–1992===

Pakistan, under Zia ul-Haq, continued to support the Afghan mujahideen even though it was a contravention of the Geneva Accords. At the beginning most observers expected the Najibullah government to collapse immediately, and to be replaced with an Islamic fundamentalist government. Following the Soviet withdrawal the morale of the Afghan Military was said to have actually increased. The Central Intelligence Agency stated in a report, that the new government would be ambivalent, or even worse hostile, towards the United States. Almost immediately after the Soviet withdrawal, the Battle of Jalalabad was fought between Afghan government forces and the mujahideen; the government forces, to the surprise of many, repulsed the attack and won the battle. This trend would not continue, and by the summer of 1990, the Afghan government forces were on the defensive again. By the beginning of 1991, the government controlled only 10 percent of Afghanistan, the eleven-year Siege of Khost had ended in a mujahideen victory and the morale of the Afghan military slumped. In 1991 a coup led by members of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union to remove Gorbachev failed resulting in the removal of many Soviet politicians and military officers that favored continuing aid to the Homeland Party government in Kabul. The last Soviet aid came in October, with all Russian aid being cut by the new President of the Russian Federation Boris Yeltsin in January 1992. Correctly fearing that a Mujahedeen victory could lead to the new government backing Islamists against the former Soviet Central Asian republics, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan provided food aid to the Najibullah government. The end of weapon exports however led to a inability to equip the estimated 170 thousand strong militias Najibullah set up through his reconciliation policies.

In March 1992, Najibullah offered his government&#x27;s immediate resignation, and following an agreement with the United Nations (UN), his government was replaced by an interim government. In mid-April Najibullah accepted a UN plan to hand power to a seven-man council. A few days later, on 14 April, Najibullah was forced to resign by 4 of his generals, because of the loss of Bagram airbase and the town of Charikar. Abdul Rahim Hatef became acting head of state following Najibullah&#x27;s resignation. Najibullah, not long before Kabul&#x27;s fall, appealed to the UN for amnesty, which he was granted. But Najibullah was hindered by Abdul Rashid Dostum from escaping; instead, Najibullah sought haven in the local UN headquarters in Kabul. The war in Afghanistan did not end with Najibullah&#x27;s ouster, and continued until the final fall of Kabul to the Taliban in August 2021. Kabul would suffer destruction following Najibullah&#x27;s resignation as many factions fought for control.

==Politics==

===Political system===
The People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan described the Saur Revolution as a democratic revolution signifying &quot;a victory of the honourable working people of Afghanistan&quot; and the &quot;manifestation of the real will and interests of workers, peasants and toilers.&quot; While the idea of moving Afghanistan toward socialism was proclaimed, completing the task was seen as an arduous road. Thus, Afghanistan&#x27;s foreign minister commented that Afghanistan was a democratic but not yet socialist republic, while a member of the Politburo of the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan predicted that &quot;Afghanistan will not see socialism in my lifetime&quot; in an interview with a British journalist in 1981.

Afghanistan was considered by the Soviet Union as a state with a socialist orientation. The Soviets, in mid-1979, initially proclaimed Afghanistan as not merely a progressive ally, but a fully fledged member of the socialist community of nations. In contrast, later Soviet rhetoric invariably referred to the Saur Revolution as a democratic turn, but stopped short of recognizing a socialist society.

Under Hafizullah Amin, a commission working on a new constitution was established. There were 65 members of this commission, and they came from all walks of life. Due to his death, his constitution was never finished. In April 1980, under Babrak Karmal, the Fundamental Principles of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan were made law. The constitution was devoid of any references to socialism or communism, and instead laid emphasis on independence, Islam and liberal democracy. Religion was to be respected, the exception being when religion threatened the security of society. The Fundamental Principles were, in many ways, similar to Mohammad Daoud Khan&#x27;s 1977 constitution. While official ideology was de-emphasized, the PDPA did not lose its monopoly on power, and the Revolutionary Council continued to be ruled through its Presidium, the majority of Presidium members were from the PDPA Politburo. The Karmal government was &quot;a new evolutionary phase of the great Saur Revolution.&quot; The Fundamental Principles was not implemented in practice, and it was replaced by the 1987 constitution in a &quot;loya jirga&quot; under Muhammad Najibullah but did not have support of opposition parties. Islamic principles were embedded in the 1987 constitution. For instance, Article 2 of the constitution stated that Islam was the state religion, and Article 73 stated that the head of state had to be born into a Muslim Afghan family. In 1990, the 1987 constitution was amended to state that Afghanistan was an Islamic republic, and the last references to communism were removed. Article 1 of the amended constitution said that Afghanistan was an &quot;independent, unitary and Islamic state.&quot;

The 1987 constitution liberalized the political landscape in areas under government control. Political parties could be established as long as they opposed colonialism, imperialism, neo-colonialism, Zionism, racial discrimination, apartheid, and fascism. The Revolutionary Council was abolished, and replaced by the National Assembly of Afghanistan, a democratically elected parliament. The government announced its willingness to share power, and form a coalition government. The new parliament was bicameral, and consisted of a Senate (Sena) and a House of Representatives (Wolesi Jirga). The president was to be indirectly elected to a 7-year term. A parliamentary election was held in 1988. The PDPA won 46 seats in the House of Representatives and controlled the government with support from the National Front, which won 45 seats, and from various newly recognized left-wing parties, which had won a total of 24 seats. Although the election was boycotted by the Mujahideen, the government left 50 of the 234 seats in the House of Representatives, as well as a small number of seats in the Senate, vacant in the hope that the guerrillas would end their armed struggle and participate in the government. The only armed opposition party to make peace with the government was Hizbollah, a small Shi&#x27;a party not to be confused with the bigger party in Iran.

The Council of Ministers was the Afghan cabinet, and its chairman was the head of government. It was the most important government body in PDPA Afghanistan, and it ran the governmental ministries. The Council of Ministers was responsible to the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council, and after the adoption of the 1987 constitution, to the President and House of Representatives. There seems to have been a deliberate power-sharing between the two bodies; few Presidium members were ministers. It was the PDPA (perhaps with the involvement of the Soviets) which appointed and decided the membership of the Council of Ministers. An Afghan dissident who had previously worked in the office of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers reported that all topics up for discussion in the Council of Ministers had to be approved by the Soviets. Under Karmal, the Khalqist&#x27;s were purged and replaced by the Parcham majority in the Council of Ministers. Of the 24 members of the Council of Ministers under Karmal&#x27;s chairmanship, only four were Khalqists.

==== People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan ====
The PDPA constitution was written during the party&#x27;s First Congress in 1965. The constitution regulated all party activities and modelled itself after the Leninist party model; the party was based on the principles of democratic centralism and Marxism–Leninism was the party&#x27;s official ideology. In theory, the Central Committee of the PDPA ruled Afghanistan by electing the members to the Revolutionary Council, Secretariat, and the Politburo of the People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan, the key decision-making bodies of state and party. After the Soviet intervention, the powers of the PDPA decreased because of the government&#x27;s increased unpopularity amongst the masses. Soviet advisers took over nearly all aspects of Afghan administration; according to critics, the Afghans became the advisors and the Soviet became the advised. The Soviet intervention had forced Karmal upon the party and state. While trying to portray the new government as a Khalq–Parcham coalition, most members (the majority of whom were Khalqists), saw through the lies. At the time of the Parchamite takeover of the state and party, an estimated 80 percent of military officers were Khalqists.

In the party&#x27;s history, only two congresses were held; the founding congress in 1965 and the Second Congress in June 1990, which transformed the PDPA into the Watan Party, which has survived to this today in the shape of the Democratic Watan Party. The Second Congress renamed the party and tried to revitalise it by admitting to past mistakes and evolving ideologically. The policy of national reconciliation was given a major ideologically role, since the party now looked for a peaceful solution to the conflict; class struggle was still emphasised. The party also decided to support and further develop the market economy in Afghanistan.

=====Factions=====
* The Khalq faction was the more militant of the two. It was more revolutionary and believed in a purer form of Marxism–Leninism than did the Parcham. Following the Soviet intervention, the Khalqi leadership of Taraki and Amin had been all but driven out. Several low and middle level functionaries were still present in the PDPA, and they still formed a majority within the armed forces; the Khalq faction still managed to create a sense of cohesion. While still believing in Marxism–Leninism, many of them were infuriated at the Soviet intervention, and the Soviets&#x27; pro-Parchamite policies. Taraki, in a speech, said &quot;We will defend our non-aligned policy and independence with all valour. We will not give even an inch of soil to anyone and we will not be dictated in our foreign policy [nor] will we accept anybody&#x27;s orders in this regard.&quot; While it was not clear, who Taraki was pointing at, the Soviet Union was the only country which Afghanistan neighbored which had the strength to occupy the country.
* The Parcham faction was the more moderate of the two and was steadfastly pro-Soviet. This position would hurt its popularity when it came to power following the Soviet intervention. Before the Saur Revolution, the Parcham faction had been the Soviets&#x27; favored faction. Following the Parchamites&#x27; seizure of power with Soviet assistance, party discipline was breaking down because of the Khalq–Parcham feud. After the PDPA government had ordered the replacement of seven Khalqist officers with Parchamites, the seven officers sent the intended replacements back. While the Parchamite government gave up trying to take over the armed forces, it did announce the execution of 13 officials who had worked for Amin. These executions led to three failed Khalqist coups in June, July and October 1980. The Western press, during the anti-Parchamite purge of 1979, referred to the Parcham faction as &quot;moderate socialist intellectuals&quot;.

Throughout PDPA history there were also other factions, such as the Kar faction led by Dastagir Panjsheri, who later became a Khalqist, and Settam-e-Melli formed and led by Tahir Badakhshi. The Settam-e-Melli was a part of the insurgency against the PDPA government. In 1979, a Settam-e-Melli group killed Adolph Dubs, the United States Ambassador to Afghanistan. Ideologically Settam-e-Melli was very close to the Khalqist faction, but Settam-e-Melli opposed what they saw as the Khalq faction&#x27;s &quot;Pashtun chauvinism.&quot; Settam-e-Melli followed the ideology of Maoism. When Karmal ascended to power, the Settamites relationship with the government improved, mostly due to Karmal&#x27;s former good relationship with Badakhshi, who was killed by government forces in 1979. In 1983, Bashir Baghlani, a Settam-e-Melli member, was appointed Minister of Justice.

===National Front===

Karmal had first mentioned the possibility of establishing a &quot;broad national front&quot; in March 1980, but given the situation the country was in, the campaign for the establishment of such an organisation began only in January 1981. A &quot;spontaneous&quot; demonstration in support of establishing such an organisation was held that month. The first pre-front institution to be established was a tribal jirga in May 1981 by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. This jirga later became a member of the front. The National Fatherland Front (NFF) held its founding congress in June 1981, after being postponed on several occasions. The founding congress, which was planned to last four days, lasted only one. Within one month of its founding, 27 senior members had been assassinated by the mujahideen. Due to this, the organisation took time to establish itself; its first Provincial Committee was established in November, and its first jirga in December. It was not until 1983 that the NFF became an active, and important organisation. The aim of the NFF was to establish a pro-PDPA organisation for those who did not support the PDPA ideologically.

Its first leader was Salah Mohammad Zeary, a prominent politician within the PDPA. Zeary&#x27;s selection had wider implications: the PDPA dominated all NFF activities. Officially, the NFF had amassed 700,000 members after its founding, which later increased to one million. The majority of its members were already members of affiliated organisations, such as the Women&#x27;s Council, the Democratic Youth Organisation and the trade unions, all of which were controlled by the PDPA. The membership numbers were in any case inflated. In 1984 the NFF had 67,000 members, and in 1986 its membership peaked at 112,209. In 1985 Zeary stepped down as NFF leader, and was succeeded by Abdul Rahim Hatef, who was not a member of the PDPA. The ascension of Hatef proved more successful, and in 1985–86 the NFF succeeded in recruiting several &quot;good Muslims&quot;. The NFF was renamed the National Front in 1987.

===Symbols: flag and emblem===

On 19 October 1978 the PDPA government introduced a new flag, a red flag with a yellow seal, and it was similar to the flags of the Soviet Central Asian republics. The new flag stirred popular resentment, as many Afghans saw it as proof of the PDPA government&#x27;s attempt to introduce state atheism. It was shown to the public for the first time in an official rally in Kabul. The red flag introduced under Taraki was replaced in 1980, shortly after the Soviet intervention, to the more traditional colours black, red and green. The PDPA flag, which was red with a yellow seal, was retained to emphasise the difference between the party and state to the Afghan people. The red star, the book and communist symbols in general, were removed from the flag in 1987 under Najibullah.

The new emblem, which replaced Daoud&#x27;s eagle emblem, was introduced together with the flag in 1978. When Karmal introduced a new emblem in 1980, he said &quot;it is from the pulpit that thousands of the faithful are led to the right path.&quot; The book depicted in the emblem (and the flag) was generally considered to be &quot;Das Kapital&quot;, a work by Karl Marx, and not the &quot;Quran&quot;, the central Islamic text. The last emblem was introduced in 1987 by the Najibullah government. This emblem was, in contrast to the previous ones, influenced by Islam. The Red Star and &quot;Das Kapital&quot; were removed from the emblem (and the flag). The emblem depicted the mihrab, the minbar and the shahada, an Islamic creed.
==Economy==

Taraki&#x27;s Government initiated a land reform on 1 January 1979, which attempted to limit the amount of land a family could own. Those whose landholdings exceeded the limit saw their property requisitioned by the government without compensation. The Afghan leadership believed the reform would meet with popular approval among the rural population while weakening the power of the bourgeoisie. The reform was declared complete in mid-1979 and the government proclaimed that 665,000 hectares (approximately 1,632,500 acres) had been redistributed. The government also declared that only 40,000 families, or 4 percent of the population, had been negatively affected by the land reform.

Contrary to government expectations the reform was neither popular nor productive. Agricultural harvests plummeted and the reform itself led to rising discontent amongst Afghans. When Taraki realized the degree of popular dissatisfaction with the reform he quickly abandoned the policy. However, the land reform was gradually implemented under the later Karmal administration, although the proportion of land area affected by the reform is unclear.

During the civil war, and the ensuing Soviet–Afghan War, most of the country&#x27;s infrastructure was destroyed, and normal patterns of economic activity were disrupted. The gross national product (GNP) fell substantially during Karmal&#x27;s rule because of the conflict; trade and transport were disrupted along with the loss of labor and capital. In 1981 the Afghan GDP stood at 154.3 billion Afghan afghanis, a drop from 159,7 billion in 1978. GNP per capita decreased from 7,370 in 1978 to 6,852 in 1981. The most dominant form of economic activity was the agricultural sector. Agriculture accounted for 63 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1981; 56 percent of the labour force worked in agriculture in 1982. Industry accounted for 21 percent of GDP in 1982, and employed 10 percent of the labour force. All industrial enterprises were government-owned. The service sector, the smallest of the three, accounted for 10 percent of GDP in 1981, and employed an estimated one-third of the labour force. The balance of payments, which had improved in the pre-communist administration of Mohammed Daoud Khan; the surplus decreased and became a deficit by 1982, which reached minus $US70.3 million. The only economic activity that grew substantially during Karmal&#x27;s rule was export and import.

Najibullah continued Karmal&#x27;s economic policies. The augmenting of links with the Eastern Bloc and the Soviet Union continued, as did bilateral trade. He also encouraged the development of the private sector in industry. The Five-Year Economic and Social Development Plan, which was introduced in January 1986, continued until March 1991, one year before the government&#x27;s fall. According to the plan, the economy, which had grown less than 2 percent annually until 1985, would grow 25 percent under the plan. Industry would grow 28 percent, agriculture 14–16 percent, domestic trade by 150 percent and foreign trade by 15 percent. None of these predictions were successful, and economic growth continued at 2%. The 1990 constitution gave attention to the private sector. Article 20 covered the establishment of private firms, and Article 25 encouraged foreign investment in the private sector.

==Military==

===Command and officer corps===
The military&#x27;s chain of command began with the Supreme Commander, who also held the posts of PDPA General Secretary and head of state. The order of precedence continued with the Minister of National Defense, the Deputy Minister of National Defence, Chief of General Staff, Chief of Army Operations, Air and Air Defence Commander and ended with the Chief of Intelligence.

Of the 8,000 strong officer corps in 1978, between 600 and 800 were communists. An estimated 40 to 45 percent of these officers were educated in the Soviet Union, and of them, between 5 and 10 percent were members of the PDPA or communists. By the time of the Soviet intervention, the officer corps had decreased to 1,100 members. This decrease can be explained by the number of purges centered on the armed forces. The purge of the military began immediately after the PDPA took power. According to Mohammad Ayub Osmani, an officer who defected to the enemy, of the 282 Afghan officers who attended the Malinovsky Military Armored Forces Academy in Moscow, an estimated 126 were executed by the authorities. Most of the officer corps, during the Soviet war and the ensuing civil war, were new recruits. The majority of officers were Khalqists, but after the Parchamites&#x27; ascension to power, Khalqists held no position of significance. The Parchamites, who were the minority, held the positions of power. Of the 1,100 large officer corps, only an estimated 200 were party members. According to Abdul Qadir, one-fifth of military personnel were party members, which meant that, if the military stood at 47,000, 9,000 were members of the PDPA. This number was, according to J. Bruce Amtstutz, an exaggeration.

===Branches===

====Army====
The strength of the Afghan Army was greatly weakened during the early stages of PDPA rule. One of the main reasons for the small size was that the Soviet military were afraid the Afghan army would defect &quot;en masse&quot; to the enemy if total personnel increased. There were several sympathisers of the mujahideen within the Afghan Armed Forces. Even so, there were several elite units under the command of the Afghan army, such as the 37th, 38th, 444th, 466th, 666th, 84th, 85th Commando Brigades. Additionally, there could have also been a possible 344th Commando Brigade in 1980.

The 26th Airborne Battalion was created from the 242nd and 455th Commando Battalions after the Saur Revolution. They were deemed politically unreliable, and on 5 August 1979, they (along with soldiers from the 444th Commando Brigade) initiated a rebellion against the PDPA government, the Bala Hissar uprising. As a result of the rebellion, the 26th Airborne Battalion was transformed into the 37th Commando Brigade. The Commando Brigades were, in contrast, considered reliable and were used as mobile strike forces until they sustained excessive casualties. After sustaining these casualties, the Commando Brigades were turned into battalions. The airborne capabilities of the Afghan commando brigades would cease in 1988, during the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, and the 666th Commando Brigade would be entirely decimated during the Battle of Khost in 1991.

In 1980, the DRA also introduced three special forces battalions, one for each of the army corps. The 203rd Special Purpose Battalion was tied to the 1st Central Army Corps in Kabul, the 213th Special Purpose Battalion was tied to the 2nd Army Corps in Kandahar and the 230th Special Purpose Battalion was tied to the 3rd Army Corps in Gardez.

Most soldiers were recruited for a three-year term, later extended to four-year terms in 1984. Each year, the Afghan army lost an estimated 15,000 soldiers, 10,000 from desertion and 5,000 from casualties sustained in battle. Everyone between 19 and 39 was eligible for conscription, the only exceptions were certain party members, or party members in certain tasks, Afghans who studied abroad, mostly in the Eastern Bloc and the Soviet Union, and one-child families or low earners. Unfortunately for the government, most people tried to evade conscription. So the government was forced to send army or police gangs to recruit civilians to service. Even so, some people carried fake papers so they could evade conscription. A side effect of the lack of recruits was that veterans were forced into longer service, or re-recruited. Of the 60 people who graduated from Kabul University in 1982, (few male Afghans attended Kabul University between 1980 and 1983), 15 of them fled to Pakistan or began working for the mujahideen. The army&#x27;s approach to conscription was carrot-and-stick. This policy was partially successful, and each year the government managed to induce 10,000 to 18,000 into the army. A general amnesty was announced in 1980 to army draft deserters from previous administrations. In 1982, students who served in the military, and graduated 10th grade in high school, would pass 11th and 12th grade and be given a scholarship. People who were conscripted after the 12th grade, could, after military service, attend whichever higher education facility they wanted. To stop army desertions, soldiers were quickly promoted to higher ranks.

The army consisted of 14 divisions, of these 11 were infantry and another three were armored, which were part of three military corps. While an infantry division was supposed to be composed of 4,000 to 8,000 men, between 1980 and 1983 a division normally mustered between 2,000 and 2,500. The strength of armored divisions in contrast were maintained, and stood at 4,000. During the Soviet war, the Afghan army used light weapons, and used neglected equipment. During the counter-insurgency, heavy equipment, tanks and artillery were most of the time, but not always, used and fired by Soviet soldiers. A problem faced the Afghan government, and the Soviet military—the degeneration of training for new military recruits; new recruits were being rushed into service, because the Afghan government and the Soviet military feared a total collapse of the government. Western analysts expected the Afghan Army to lose the Battle of Jalalabad, but contrary to their expectations, managed to repel the Mujahideen and Pakistani forces (who had the intention of establishing an interim government in Nangarhar Province by initially blowing up the Jalalabad Dam) and maintain control of the city. In April 1990, the DRA Armed Forces further proved their ability to fight without direct Soviet assistance when they successfully assaulted a fortified complex in Paghman. The Afghan Army, spearheaded by Junbish-i-Mili, the militia led by Abdul Rashid Dostum, were able to clear mujahideen entrenchments with constant assaults and heavy bombardment from the Afghan Air Force and heavy artillery regiments that lasted until June.

====Air Force====
As with the army, the majority of officers in the Afghan Air Force were Khalqists, but Parchamites held all the senior positions. Many in the Air Force were given education and training in the Soviet Union. The Air Force had throughout its history always been smaller than the Army. The Afghan Air Force was considered the most loyal element of the Communist regime. Following the Soviet intervention, the Soviets grounded the Air Force. Afghans were not allowed in security zones at Afghan airports by the Soviets. Afghans were generally not allowed to fly the airplanes of the Afghan Air Force, but the Soviets could. Afghan helicopters were assigned to tasks considered non-sensitive by the Soviets, and the majority of Air Force personnel were not told about missions beforehand, because the Soviets were afraid that they would contact the enemy. In Afghan helicopter flights a Soviet adviser was always present, and commanded the Afghan pilot who flew the helicopter.

Among the fixed-wing aircraft in use were MiG-17 and MiG-21 fighters, Su-7, Su-17, and Su-22 fighter-bombers, IL-28 bombers and An-2, An-24 and An-26 transport aircraft. MI-2, MI-4, MI-8, MI-24 and MI-35 helicopters were used by the Air Force. Other Soviet equipment and weapons were used by the government. The Czech L-39 jet trainers were the only non-Soviet equipment. The IL-28 bombers remained in very limited service, with their roles mostly being replaced by the Su-17 and Su-22 MiG-17s remained grounded by the end of the 1980s with the more modern MiG-21s taking on the mantle.
====Paramilitary and Militia forces====
The Ministry of Interior Affairs, a Khalqist stronghold, controlled the Sarandoy, or officially, the &quot;Defenders of the Revolution&quot;, which was a militarized Gendarmerie force. The Ministry of Tribes and Frontiers controlled, until 1983 under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Defence, the frontier troops and the tribal militia. According to the Afghan government, the Sarandoy mustered an estimated 115,000 males at its peak. Those who worked in the Sarandoy were paid 162 dollars a month, a wage which was higher than that of Deputy Minister of National Defence before the Saur Revolution. However, the militia was less disciplined than the regular Afghan Army and were sometimes described as ruthless thugs. KhAD also had their own paramilitary forces and elite units. KhAD ran a program of creating tribal militias. Notable militias include that of General Abdul Jabar Qahraman&#x27;s Helmand and Paktia militia, General Ismatullah Muslim Achakzai Kandahar Militia and General Abdul Rashid Dostum&#x27;s Junbish Militia.

==Demographics==

===Education===
During communist rule, the PDPA government reformed the education system; education was stressed for both sexes, and widespread literacy programmes were set up. By 1988, women made up 40 percent of the doctors and 60 percent of the teachers at Kabul University; 440,000 female students were enrolled in different educational institutions and 80,000 more in literacy programs. In addition to introducing mass literacy campaigns for women and men, the PDPA agenda included: massive land reform program; the abolition of bride price; and raising the marriage age to 16 for girls and to 18 for boys.
However, the mullahs and tribal chiefs in the interiors viewed compulsory education, especially for women, as going against the grain of tradition, as anti-religious, and as a challenge to male authority. This resulted in an increase in shootings of women in Western clothes, killing of PDPA reformers in rural areas, and general harassment of women social workers.
Despite improvements, a large percentage of the population remained illiterate. Beginning with the Soviet intervention in 1979, successive wars virtually destroyed the nation&#x27;s education system. Most teachers fled during the wars to neighboring countries.

===Refugees===

Afghan refugees are Afghan nationals who have fled their country as a result of the ongoing Afghan conflict. An estimated 6 million people have fled the country, most to neighbouring Pakistan and Iran, making it the largest producer of refugees in the world. Many of these refugees would later be the basis for the Taliban movement.

== See also ==
* &quot;Soviet Empire&quot;, a political term used to describe Soviet influence during the Cold War
* People&#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan, the Ruling party of the DRA
* Khalq, the Stalinist faction of the PDPA
* Parcham, the Islamic Socialist faction of the PDPA
* Fundamental Principals of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, The Constitution of the DRA as of April 20, 1980
* Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan
* Afghan Civil War (1989–1992)
* List of Vice Presidents of Afghanistan (1978–1992)

== Notes ==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* Soviet Air Power: Tactics and Weapons Used in Afghanistan by Lieutenant Colonel Denny R. Nelson
* Video on Afghan-Soviet War from the Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
* Library of Congress Country Study — Afghanistan
* Soviet Documents
* Online Afghan Calendar with Historical dates</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="4" end="38" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="59" end="82" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774879" start="113" end="126" title="History of Afghanistan (1978–1992)" label="1978 and 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="147" end="155" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="182" end="186" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="207" end="219" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="241" end="246" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="284" end="329" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="351" end="366" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090550" start="508" end="530" title="Soviet empire" label="Soviet satellite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519107" start="602" end="617" title="Afghan conflict" label="Afghan conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="696" end="713" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405009" start="746" end="768" title="Afghan Civil War (1989–1992)" label="First Afghan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="825" end="856" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="930" end="949" title="Mohammad Daoud Khan" label="Mohammad Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30070166" start="991" end="1019" title="1973 Afghan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1973 Afghan coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="1041" end="1060" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Nur Muhammad Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="1145" end="1160" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="1369" end="1381" title="Islamism" label="Islamization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1409" end="1418" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894104" start="1567" end="1586" title="Universal access to education" label="universal education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528559" start="1591" end="1613" title="Women in Afghanistan" label="equal rights for women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="1695" end="1700" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="1743" end="1750" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="1759" end="1772" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1961" end="1973" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q975430" start="2547" end="2566" title="Operation Storm-333" label="Operation Storm-333"/>
<link wikidata="Q937209" start="2583" end="2596" title="Tajbeg Palace" label="Tajbeg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="2600" end="2605" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="2817" end="2834" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="2886" end="2898" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="2907" end="2919" title="Western Bloc" label="Western Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q21500929" start="3019" end="3039" title="Afghan refugees" label="millions of refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q207728" start="3428" end="3447" title="Mohammad Najibullah" label="Mohammad Najibullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975209" start="3487" end="3510" title="National Reconciliation (Afghanistan)" label="National Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689131" start="3558" end="3596" title="1988 Afghan parliamentary election" label="democratic elections were held in 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q509561" start="3682" end="3720" title="Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan" label="Soviet Union withdrew from Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q672729" start="3934" end="3950" title="Islamic republic" label="Islamic republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041515" start="3986" end="3997" title="Watan Party of Afghanistan" label="Watan Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4117" end="4136" title="Afghan Civil War (1989–1992)#Battle of Jalalabad (1989)" label="Battle of Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815391" start="4195" end="4233" title="1990 Afghan coup attempt" label="1990 Khalqist coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980081" start="4440" end="4463" title="Afghan Civil War (1992–1996)" label="Second Afghan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="4497" end="4504" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q427941" start="4631" end="4661" title="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (1996–2001)" label="Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q309368" start="4680" end="4697" title="Northern Alliance" label="Northern Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302518" start="4709" end="4731" title="Afghan Civil War (1996–2001)" label="Third Afghan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646470" start="4757" end="4794" title="United States invasion of Afghanistan" label="United States invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="4817" end="4856" title="Afghanistan" label="Islamic Emirate would be re-established"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="4878" end="4896" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="War in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="4970" end="4989" title="Mohammad Daoud Khan" label="Mohammad Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415128" start="5012" end="5035" title="Republic of Afghanistan (1973–1978)" label="Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="5077" end="5092" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134733" start="5135" end="5151" title="Mir Akbar Khyber" label="Mir Akbar Khyber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="5155" end="5162" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="5186" end="5231" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="5281" end="5296" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="5300" end="5305" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="5347" end="5366" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Nur Muhammad Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140706" start="5409" end="5417" title="President of Afghanistan" label="Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318781" start="5442" end="5463" title="Revolutionary Council (Afghanistan)" label="Revolutionary Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q532240" start="5465" end="5473" title="Prime Minister of Afghanistan" label="Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176444" start="5481" end="5501" title="Council of Ministers (Afghanistan)" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="5552" end="5574" title="Central Committee of the People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="PDPA Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="5590" end="5603" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294381" start="5786" end="5813" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Afghanistan)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q973248" start="5819" end="5842" title="Mohammad Aslam Watanjar" label="Mohammad Aslam Watanjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q207728" start="7481" end="7500" title="Mohammad Najibullah" label="Mohammad Najibullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="7580" end="7591" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748844" start="8302" end="8315" title="Culture of Afghanistan" label="Afghan values"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519107" start="8536" end="8552" title="War in Afghanistan (1978–present)" label="Afghan Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="8607" end="8611" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q299559" start="8616" end="8622" title="Nur Muhammad Taraki" label="Taraki"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="8740" end="8756" title="personality cult" label="personality cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578716" start="9116" end="9135" title="1979 Herat uprising" label="1979 Herat uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210125" start="9171" end="9185" title="Politburo of the People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="PDPA Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520949" start="9599" end="9611" title="Gang of Four (Afghanistan)" label="Gang of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q973248" start="9632" end="9640" title="Mohammad Aslam Watanjar" label="Watanjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q500276" start="9642" end="9665" title="Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy" label="Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q720266" start="9689" end="9707" title="Assadullah Sarwari" label="Assadullah Sarwari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="9818" end="9824" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146169" start="9956" end="9977" title="collective leadership" label="collective leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="10052" end="10070" title="Autocracy" label="one-man government"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="10094" end="10113" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798487" start="10176" end="10196" title="Pul-e-Charkhi prison" label="Pul-e-Charkhi prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="10374" end="10390" title="communist regime" label="communist regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124966" start="10471" end="10490" title="Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Afghan Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="10933" end="10945" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="10978" end="10991" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q973248" start="11081" end="11104" title="Mohammad Aslam Watanjar" label="Mohammad Aslam Watanjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q500276" start="11106" end="11129" title="Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy" label="Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q720266" start="11134" end="11152" title="Assadullah Sarwari" label="Assadullah Sarwari"/>
<link wikidata="Q44071" start="11292" end="11305" title="Yuri Andropov" label="Yuri Andropov"/>
<link wikidata="Q184267" start="11307" end="11321" title="Andrei Gromyko" label="Andrei Gromyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q48067" start="11323" end="11338" title="Dmitriy Ustinov" label="Dmitriy Ustinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q658759" start="11343" end="11358" title="Boris Ponomarev" label="Boris Ponomarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="11517" end="11532" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q975430" start="11923" end="11942" title="Operation Storm-333" label="Operation Storm-333"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11948" end="11979" title="Soviet–Afghan War#Soviet invasion and palace coup" label="first phase of the intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="12299" end="12310" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q142900" start="12706" end="12717" title="Radio Kabul" label="Radio Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="13054" end="13069" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="13075" end="13092" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971373" start="13100" end="13160" title="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q202770" start="13166" end="13180" title="Alexei Kosygin" label="Alexei Kosygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q462189" start="13193" end="13201" title="Premier of the Soviet Union" label="Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148" start="13209" end="13229" title="Council of Ministers (Soviet Union)" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="13815" end="13824" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q720266" start="14765" end="14783" title="Assadullah Sarwari" label="Assadullah Sarwari"/>
<link wikidata="Q973248" start="14853" end="14876" title="Mohammad Aslam Watanjar" label="Mohammad Aslam Watanjar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866675" start="14915" end="14941" title="Ministry of Communications (Afghanistan)" label="Minister of Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="14943" end="14956" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308874" start="14957" end="14970" title="Mohammad Rafi (politician)" label="Mohammad Rafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982461" start="14976" end="14995" title="Ministry of Defence (Afghanistan)" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q384928" start="15000" end="15004" title="KHAD" label="KHAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q207728" start="15014" end="15033" title="Mohammad Najibullah" label="Mohammad Najibullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q384928" start="15814" end="15840" title="KHAD" label="Minister of State Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q187823" start="16033" end="16055" title="Haji Mohammad Chamkani" label="Haji Mohammad Chamkani"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="16274" end="16297" title="counter-revolutionaries" label="counter-revolutionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="16329" end="16344" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975209" start="16568" end="16591" title="National Reconciliation (Afghanistan)" label="National Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="17051" end="17058" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436014" start="17348" end="17380" title="Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan" label="Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="18570" end="18583" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124966" start="18673" end="18688" title="Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Afghan Military"/>
<link wikidata="Q957806" start="18756" end="18770" title="Geneva Accords (1988)" label="Geneva Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q151929" start="18974" end="18993" title="Eduard Shevardnadze" label="Eduard Shevardnadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q382145" start="19178" end="19196" title="Vladimir Kryuchkov" label="Vladimir Kryuchkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499427" start="19202" end="19214" title="KGB Chairman" label="KGB Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="19526" end="19540" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="19704" end="19714" title="Zia ul-Haq" label="Zia ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="19741" end="19758" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="Afghan mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="20078" end="20105" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20273" end="20292" title="Civil war in Afghanistan (1989–1992)#Battle of Jalalabad" label="Battle of Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="20345" end="20355" title="mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080960" start="20661" end="20675" title="Siege of Khost" label="Siege of Khost"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="20794" end="20829" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="20840" end="20849" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="20966" end="20980" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="Homeland Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="21117" end="21130" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="21658" end="21672" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q944395" start="21953" end="21961" title="Charikar" label="Charikar"/>
<link wikidata="Q317360" start="21963" end="21980" title="Abdul Rahim Hatef" label="Abdul Rahim Hatef"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="22182" end="22201" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519107" start="22293" end="22311" title="War in Afghanistan (1978–present)" label="war in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="22406" end="22413" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871359" start="22504" end="22536" title="Battle of Kabul (1992–1996)" label="many factions fought for control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="22640" end="22655" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210125" start="23122" end="23184" title="Politburo of the People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="Politburo of the People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="23285" end="23292" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q63831" start="23722" end="23737" title="Hafizullah Amin" label="Hafizullah Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q63827" start="23955" end="23968" title="Babrak Karmal" label="Babrak Karmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="24103" end="24112" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="24116" end="24125" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="24170" end="24175" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="24180" end="24197" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="24357" end="24376" title="Mohammad Daoud Khan" label="Mohammad Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318781" start="24499" end="24520" title="Revolutionary Council (Afghanistan)" label="Revolutionary Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="24700" end="24715" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192317" start="24839" end="24849" title="loya jirga" label="loya jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q207728" start="24862" end="24881" title="Muhammad Najibullah" label="Muhammad Najibullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="25045" end="25050" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="25059" end="25073" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q672729" start="25240" end="25256" title="Islamic republic" label="Islamic republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="25285" end="25294" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="25585" end="25596" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="25598" end="25609" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190586" start="25611" end="25626" title="neo-colonialism" label="neo-colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="25628" end="25635" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12332701" start="25637" end="25658" title="racial discrimination" label="racial discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="25660" end="25669" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="25675" end="25682" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386705" start="25745" end="25777" title="National Assembly of Afghanistan" label="National Assembly of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="25929" end="25938" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108181" start="26005" end="26017" title="Wolesi Jirga" label="Wolesi Jirga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689131" start="26083" end="26122" title="Afghan parliamentary election, 1988" label="parliamentary election was held in 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972799" start="26230" end="26244" title="National Front (Afghanistan)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="26397" end="26407" title="Mujahideen" label="Mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="26726" end="26736" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176444" start="26798" end="26818" title="Council of Ministers (Afghanistan)" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="28068" end="28076" title="Leninist" label="Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193852" start="28131" end="28152" title="democratic centralism" label="democratic centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="28157" end="28173" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="28229" end="28258" title="Central Committee of the PDPA" label="Central Committee of the PDPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318781" start="28308" end="28329" title="Revolutionary Council (Afghanistan)" label="Revolutionary Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210125" start="28352" end="28414" title="Politburo of the People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="Politburo of the People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="28883" end="28888" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="28889" end="28896" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041515" start="29337" end="29359" title="Democratic Watan Party" label="Democratic Watan Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975209" start="29498" end="29521" title="National Reconciliation (Afghanistan)" label="national reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="29628" end="29642" title="class struggle" label="class struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="29723" end="29737" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="29780" end="29785" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="30811" end="30818" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="31000" end="31015" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620490" start="31823" end="31834" title="Kar faction" label="Kar faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5557569" start="31842" end="31860" title="Dastagir Panjsheri" label="Dastagir Panjsheri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456857" start="31895" end="31909" title="Settam-e-Melli" label="Settam-e-Melli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675493" start="31928" end="31943" title="Tahir Badakhshi" label="Tahir Badakhshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q365323" start="32061" end="32072" title="Adolph Dubs" label="Adolph Dubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q30056287" start="32078" end="32117" title="United States Ambassador to Afghanistan" label="United States Ambassador to Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="32329" end="32335" title="Maoism" label="Maoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q809975" start="32549" end="32564" title="Bashir Baghlani" label="Bashir Baghlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867294" start="32605" end="32624" title="Ministry of Justice (Afghanistan)" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q42759" start="33440" end="33450" title="mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689109" start="34167" end="34187" title="Afghan Women&amp;#x27;s Council" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255863" start="34193" end="34222" title="Democratic Youth Organisation" label="Democratic Youth Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q317360" start="34482" end="34499" title="Abdul Rahim Hatef" label="Abdul Rahim Hatef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211919" start="34876" end="34895" title="Soviet Central Asia" label="Soviet Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864936" start="35032" end="35045" title="state atheism" label="state atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58784" start="35861" end="35872" title="Das Kapital" label="Das Kapital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="35890" end="35899" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="35919" end="35924" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="36092" end="36097" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q173907" start="36209" end="36215" title="mihrab" label="mihrab"/>
<link wikidata="Q443676" start="36221" end="36227" title="minbar" label="minbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41831" start="36236" end="36243" title="shahada" label="shahada"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="36313" end="36324" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="36660" end="36671" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="37452" end="37469" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="37589" end="37611" title="gross national product" label="gross national product"/>
<link wikidata="Q199471" start="37811" end="37825" title="Afghan afghani" label="Afghan afghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057397" start="37863" end="37877" title="GNP per capita" label="GNP per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974854" start="37977" end="37996" title="Agriculture in Afghanistan" label="agricultural sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="38038" end="38060" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="38265" end="38281" title="government-owned" label="government-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="38432" end="38451" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q310247" start="38511" end="38530" title="Mohammed Daoud Khan" label="Mohammed Daoud Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="38702" end="38708" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q62955" start="38713" end="38719" title="import" label="import"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="38809" end="38821" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="39487" end="39501" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="39584" end="39602" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642246" start="39677" end="39685" title="Afghan Armed Forces" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479879" start="39817" end="39836" title="order of precedence" label="order of precedence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982461" start="39856" end="39884" title="Ministry of Defense (Afghanistan)" label="Minister of National Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051130" start="39927" end="39949" title="Chief of General Staff (Afghanistan)" label="Chief of General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="40070" end="40077" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="40118" end="40127" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q282302" start="40654" end="40696" title="Malinovsky Military Armored Forces Academy" label="Malinovsky Military Armored Forces Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282006" start="41149" end="41160" title="Abdul Qadir (Afghan communist)" label="Abdul Qadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067567" start="41603" end="41611" title="en masse" label="en masse"/>
<link wikidata="Q21000730" start="41700" end="41710" title="Afghan mujahideen" label="mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124966" start="41722" end="41741" title="Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Afghan Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783195" start="42270" end="42290" title="Bala Hissar uprising" label="Bala Hissar uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="42887" end="42901" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="43024" end="43029" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="43101" end="43109" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="43602" end="43614" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="43812" end="43819" title="Impressment" label="recruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354097" start="44059" end="44075" title="Kabul University" label="Kabul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q227809" start="44263" end="44279" title="carrot-and-stick" label="carrot-and-stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q117184310" start="45768" end="45787" title="Battle of Jalalabad (1989)" label="Battle of Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q183303" start="45989" end="45998" title="Jalalabad" label="Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124966" start="46057" end="46073" title="Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="DRA Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502256" start="46201" end="46208" title="Paghman" label="Paghman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189989" start="46242" end="46256" title="Junbish-i-Milli" label="Junbish-i-Mili"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="46277" end="46296" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q120211630" start="46396" end="46412" title="Afghan Air Force (1978-1992)" label="Afghan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897627" start="46417" end="46432" title="heavy artillery" label="heavy artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q120211630" start="46536" end="46552" title="Afghan Air Force (1978-1992)" label="Afghan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="46558" end="46563" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="46573" end="46580" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q152976" start="47502" end="47508" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-17" label="MiG-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q150609" start="47513" end="47519" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21" label="MiG-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q170199" start="47530" end="47534" title="Sukhoi Su-7" label="Su-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q183146" start="47536" end="47541" title="Sukhoi Su-17" label="Su-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q183146" start="47547" end="47552" title="Sukhoi Su-17" label="Su-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q652911" start="47570" end="47575" title="Ilyushin Il-28" label="IL-28"/>
<link wikidata="Q207700" start="47588" end="47592" title="Antonov An-2" label="An-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q337467" start="47594" end="47599" title="Antonov An-24" label="An-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q62156" start="47604" end="47609" title="Antonov An-26" label="An-26"/>
<link wikidata="Q608997" start="47630" end="47634" title="Mil Mi-2" label="MI-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q169427" start="47636" end="47640" title="Mil Mi-4" label="MI-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q155635" start="47642" end="47646" title="Mil Mi-8" label="MI-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q155651" start="47648" end="47653" title="MI-24" label="MI-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q155651" start="47658" end="47663" title="Mi-35 Hind-E" label="MI-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q155899" start="47778" end="47782" title="Aero L-39 Albatros" label="L-39"/>
<link wikidata="Q652911" start="47836" end="47841" title="Ilyushin Il-28" label="IL-28"/>
<link wikidata="Q183146" start="47930" end="47935" title="Sukhoi Su-17" label="Su-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q183146" start="47940" end="47945" title="Su-22" label="Su-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867688" start="48091" end="48119" title="Ministry of Interior Affairs (Afghanistan)" label="Ministry of Interior Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="48123" end="48128" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423082" start="48159" end="48167" title="Sarandoy" label="Sarandoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="48253" end="48264" title="Gendarmerie" label="Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341539" start="48673" end="48688" title="Saur Revolution" label="Saur Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q383108" start="48749" end="48760" title="Afghan Army" label="Afghan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q384928" start="48809" end="48813" title="KHAD" label="KhAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34376010" start="48959" end="48979" title="Abdul Jabar Qahraman" label="Abdul Jabar Qahraman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084976" start="49023" end="49049" title="Ismatullah Muslim" label="Ismatullah Muslim Achakzai"/>
<link wikidata="Q331702" start="49079" end="49098" title="Abdul Rashid Dostum" label="Abdul Rashid Dostum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189989" start="49106" end="49121" title="National Islamic Movement of Afghanistan" label="Junbish Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="50013" end="50020" title="Western culture" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519107" start="50490" end="50505" title="War in Afghanistan (1978–present)" label="Afghan conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="50713" end="50720" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090550" start="50755" end="50768" title="Soviet Empire" label="Soviet Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186355" start="50849" end="50894" title="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773370" start="50926" end="50931" title="Khalq" label="Khalq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4273348" start="50969" end="50976" title="Parcham" label="Parcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4124966" start="51139" end="51193" title="Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405009" start="51196" end="51224" title="Afghan Civil War (1989–1992)" label="Afghan Civil War (1989–1992)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246669" start="51227" end="51277" title="Vice President of Afghanistan" label="List of Vice Presidents of Afghanistan (1978–1992)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50466" wikidata="Q5953387" url="?curid=50466" title="Hybris (computer worm)">
<text>Hybris (also known as Snow White, Vecna.22528, and Full Moon) is a computer worm believed to have been written by Brazilian virus writer Vecna, member of the computer virus writing group 29A. It first appeared in September 2000 and became more common in January 2001.

Hybris typically comes from an email that appears to be from hahaha@sexyfun.net. Malicious &quot;plug-ins&quot; enhanced Hybris&#x27;s functionality to include various other e-mail types. Other plugin functionalities include a spinning &quot;wheel of hypnosis.&quot;

The name &quot;Hybris&quot; originates from the text within the virus: &quot;HYBRIS&quot; &quot;(c) Vecna&quot;.

==External links==
*F-Secure Description
*CERT: Open mail relays used to deliver &quot;Hybris Worm&quot;
*The Register: &quot;Vandals behind spread of Hybris worm named&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5953387" start="0" end="6" title="Hybris (computer worm)" label="Hybris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953387" start="22" end="32" title="Hybris (computer worm)" label="Snow White"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953387" start="34" end="45" title="Hybris (computer worm)" label="Vecna.22528"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953387" start="51" end="60" title="Hybris (computer worm)" label="Full Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q485" start="158" end="172" title="computer virus" label="computer virus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50467" wikidata="Q179788" url="?curid=50467" title="Edict of Nantes">
<text>The Edict of Nantes () was signed in April 1598 by King Henry IV and granted the minority Calvinist Protestants of France, also known as Huguenots, substantial rights in the nation, which was predominantly Catholic.

While upholding Catholicism as the established religion, and requiring the re-establishment of Catholic worship in places it had lapsed, it granted religious toleration to the Protestant Huguenots, who had been waging a long and bloody struggle for their rights in France. The main contents were:
* Freedom of conscience and the right to practice their religion (Protestantism) in certain specified towns and cities throughout France.
* The right to hold public office, including the right to serve as judges and administrators, without having to renounce their religion.
* The right to maintain their own schools and universities, and to receive government funding for them.
* The right to fortify their towns and cities for their own protection.
* The right to maintain their own military forces (known as the &quot;Huguenot militia&quot;), which were to be paid for by the French government.
* The right to engage in certain specified trades and professions, including the manufacture and sale of textiles and arms.
* The right to travel freely throughout France, without being subject to searches or seizures of their property.
* The right to bury their dead in their own cemeteries.

The Edict of Nantes helped to end the Wars of Religion in France, which had been raging for decades. It also ensured that the Protestant minority in France would have a measure of religious and political freedom, and helped to establish France as a more tolerant and pluralistic society. However, the Edict was eventually revoked by King Louis XIV in 1685, leading to a mass exodus of Huguenots from France and a loss of talent and resources for the country.

In this edict, Henry aimed primarily to promote civil unity. The edict separated civil from religious unity, treated some Protestants for the first time as more than mere schismatics and heretics and opened a path for secularism and tolerance. In offering a general freedom of conscience to individuals, the edict offered many specific concessions to the Protestants, such as amnesty and the reinstatement of their civil rights, including the right to work in any field, even for the state, and to bring grievances directly to the king. It successfully marked the end of the French Wars of Religion, which had afflicted France during the second half of the 16th century.

The Edict of St. Germain, promulgated 36 years earlier by Catherine de Médici, had granted limited tolerance to Huguenots but was overtaken by events, as it was not formally registered until after the Massacre of Vassy on 1 March 1562, which triggered the first of the French Wars of Religion.

The Edict of Fontainebleau, which revoked the Edict of Nantes in October 1685, was promulgated by Louis XIV, the grandson of Henry IV. This act drove an exodus of Protestants and increased the hostility of Protestant nations bordering France.

==Background==
The edict aimed primarily to end the longrunning French Wars of Religion.

King Henry IV also had personal reasons for supporting the edict. Prior to assuming the throne in 1589, he had espoused Protestantism, and he remained sympathetic to the Protestant cause. It was widely believed that he converted to Catholicism in 1593 only to secure his position as king. The edict succeeded in restoring peace and internal unity to France but pleased neither party. Catholics rejected the apparent recognition of Protestantism as a permanent element in French society and still hoped to enforce religious uniformity. Protestants aspired to full parity with Catholics, which the edict did not provide. George A. Rothrock wrote : &quot;Toleration in France was a royal notion, and the religious settlement was dependent upon the continued support of the crown&quot;.

Re-establishing royal authority in France required internal peace, which was based on limited toleration enforced by the crown. Since royal troops could not be everywhere, Huguenots needed to be granted strictly-limited possibilities of self-defense.

==Terms==

The Edict of Nantes that Henry IV signed had four basic texts, including a main text made up of 92 articles that was largely based on unsuccessful peace treaties signed during the recent wars. The edict also included 56 &quot;particular&quot; (secret) articles dealing with Protestant rights and obligations. For example, the French state guaranteed protection of French Protestants travelling abroad from the Inquisition. &quot;This crucifies me&quot;, protested Pope Clement VIII upon hearing of the edict. The last two parts consisted of &quot;brevets&quot; (letters patent), which contained the military clauses and pastoral clauses. Both brevets were withdrawn in 1629 by Louis XIII after a final religious civil war.

The two letters patent supplementing the edict granted the Protestants safe havens (&quot;places de sûreté&quot;), which were military strongholds such as La Rochelle, in support of which the king paid 180,000 écus a year, along with a further 150 emergency forts (&quot;places de refuge&quot;), to be maintained at the Huguenots&#x27; own expense. Such an act of toleration was unusual in Western Europe, where standard practice forced subjects to follow the religion of their ruler under the application of the principle of &quot;cuius regio, eius religio&quot;.

While it granted certain privileges to Huguenots, the edict upheld Catholicism&#x27;s position as the established religion of France. Protestants gained no exemption from paying the tithe and had to respect Catholic holidays and restrictions regarding marriage. The authorities limited Protestant freedom of worship to specified geographic areas. The edict dealt only with Protestant and Catholic coexistence and made no mention of Jews or Muslims, who were offered temporary asylum in France when the Marranos and Moriscos were expelled from Spain.

The original act that promulgated the edict has disappeared. The &quot;Archives Nationales&quot; in Paris preserves only the text of a shorter document modified by concessions extracted from the King by the clergy and the Parlement of Paris, which delayed ten months before finally signing and setting seals to the document in 1599. A copy of the first edict, sent for safekeeping to the Protestant Geneva, survives. The provincial parlements resisted the edict. The most recalcitrant of them was the Parlement of Rouen, which unreservedly registered the edict only in 1609.

The location of the signing is uncertain. The edict itself stated merely that it was &quot;given at Nantes, in the month of April, in the year of Our Lord one thousand five hundred and ninety-eight&quot;. By the late 19th century the Catholic tradition cited the signing in the Maison des Tourelles, the home of the prosperous Spanish trader André Ruiz, which was destroyed by bombing during the Second World War.

==Revocation==
The Edict remained unaltered in effect, registered by the &quot;parlements&quot; as &quot;fundamental and irrevocable law&quot;, with the exception of the &quot;brevets,&quot; which had been granted for a period of eight years, and were renewed by Henry in 1606 and in 1611 by Marie de Médecis, who confirmed the Edict within a week of the assassination of Henry, stilling Protestant fears of another St. Bartholomew&#x27;s Day massacre. The subsidies had been reduced by degrees, as Henry gained more control of the nation. By the Peace of Montpellier in 1622, concluding a Huguenot revolt in Languedoc, the fortified Protestant towns were reduced to two, La Rochelle and Montauban. The &quot;brevets&quot; were entirely withdrawn in 1629, by Louis XIII, following the Siege of La Rochelle, in which Cardinal Richelieu blockaded the city for fourteen months.

During the remainder of Louis XIII&#x27;s reign, and especially during the minority of Louis XIV, the implementation of the Edict varied year by year, voiced in declarations and orders, and in case decisions in the Council, fluctuating according to the tides of domestic politics and the relations of France with powers abroad.

In October 1685, Louis XIV, the grandson of Henry IV, renounced the Edict and declared Protestantism illegal with the Edict of Fontainebleau. This act, commonly called the &quot;&#x27;revocation of the Edict of Nantes&quot;,&#x27; had very damaging results for France. While the wars of religion did not re-ignite, intense persecution of Protestants took place. All Protestant ministers were given two weeks to leave the country unless they converted to Catholicism and all other Protestants were prohibited from leaving the country. In spite of the prohibition, the renewed persecution – including many examples of torture – caused as many as 400,000 to flee France at risk of their lives. Most moved to Great Britain, Prussia, the Dutch Republic, Switzerland, South Africa and the new French colonies and the Thirteen Colonies in North America. Some moved to Denmark, where the city of Fredericia, laid waste after the Swedish conquest in 1656, needed new settlers and a specific clause in the city ordinance allowed Protestants other than Lutheran to live in the city. This exodus deprived France of many of its most skilled and industrious individuals, some of whom thereafter aided France&#x27;s rivals in the Netherlands and in England. The revocation of the Edict of Nantes also further damaged the perception of Louis XIV abroad, making the Protestant nations bordering France more hostile to his regime. Upon the revocation of the edict, Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg issued the Edict of Potsdam, which encouraged Protestants to come to Brandenburg-Prussia.

Freedom to worship and civil rights for non-Catholics in France were not restored until the signing of the Edict of Versailles, also known as the Edict of Tolerance, by Louis XVI 102 years later, on 7 November 1787. This edict was enacted by parlement two months later, less than two years before the end of the Ancien Régime and the Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen of 1789 would fully eliminate religious discrimination in France.

==Translation of selected passages==
These are the principal and most salient provisions of the edict as promulgated in Nantes, Brittany, probably on 30 April 1598:

&lt;poem&gt;Henri, by the grace of God king of France and of Navarre, to all to whom these presents come, greeting:

Among the infinite benefits which it has pleased God to heap upon us, the most signal and precious is his granting us the strength and ability to withstand the fearful disorders and troubles which prevailed on our advent in this kingdom. The realm was so torn by innumerable factions and sects that the most legitimate of all the parties was fewest in numbers. God has given us strength to stand out against this storm; we have finally surmounted the waves and made our port of safety,—peace for our state. For which his be the glory all in all, and ours a free recognition of his grace in making use of our instrumentality in the good work... We implore and await from the Divine Goodness the same protection and favor which he has ever granted to this kingdom from the beginning...

We have, by this perpetual and irrevocable edict, established and proclaimed and do establish and proclaim:

I. First, that the recollection of everything done by one party or the other between March, 1585, and our accession to the crown, and during all the preceding period of troubles, remain obliterated and forgotten, as if no such things had ever happened...

III. We ordain that the Catholic Apostolic and Roman religion shall be restored and reëstablished in all places and localities of this our kingdom and countries subject to our sway, where the exercise of the same has been interrupted, in order that it may be peaceably and freely exercised, without any trouble or hindrance; forbidding very expressly all persons, of whatsoever estate, quality, or condition, from troubling, molesting, or disturbing ecclesiastics in the celebration of divine service, in the enjoyment or collection of tithes, fruits, or revenues of their benefices, and all other rights and dues belonging to them; and that all those who during the troubles have taken possession of churches, houses, goods or revenues, belonging to the said ecclesiastics, shall surrender to them entire possession and peaceable enjoyment of such rights, liberties, and sureties as they had before they were deprived of them...

VI. And in order to leave no occasion for troubles or differences between our subjects, we have permitted, and herewith permit, those of the said religion called Reformed to live and abide in all the cities and places of this our kingdom and countries of our sway, without being annoyed, molested, or compelled to do anything in the matter of religion contrary to their consciences, ... upon condition that they comport themselves in other respects according to that which is contained in this our present edict.

VII. It is permitted to all lords, gentlemen, and other persons making profession of the said religion called Reformed, holding the right of high justice [or a certain feudal tenure], to exercise the said religion in their houses...

IX. We also permit those of the said religion to make and continue the exercise of the same in all villages and places of our dominion where it was established by them and publicly enjoyed several and divers times in the year 1597, up to the end of the month of August, notwithstanding all decrees and judgments to the contrary...

XIII. We very expressly forbid to all those of the said religion its exercise, either in respect to ministry, regulation, discipline, or the public instruction of children, or otherwise, in this our kingdom and lands of our dominion, otherwise than in the places permitted and granted by the present edict.

XIV. It is forbidden as well to perform any function of the said religion in our court or retinue, or in our lands and territories beyond the mountains, or in our city of Paris, or within five leagues of the said city...

XVIII. We also forbid all our subjects, of whatever quality and condition, from carrying off by force or persuasion, against the will of their parents, the children of the said religion, in order to cause them to be baptized or confirmed in the Catholic Apostolic and Roman Church; and the same is forbidden to those of the said religion called Reformed, upon penalty of being punished with especial severity...

XXI. Books concerning the said religion called Reformed may not be printed and publicly sold, except in cities and places where the public exercise of the said religion is permitted.

XXII. We ordain that there shall be no difference or distinction made in respect to the said religion, in receiving pupils to be instructed in universities, colleges, and schools; nor in receiving the sick and poor into hospitals, retreats, and public charities.&lt;/poem&gt;

==See also==
* Edict of toleration
* Freedom of religion
* Michel de l&#x27;Hôpital, a precursor to Henry IV&#x27;s policies
* Peace of Vervins

==Notes==
==References==
===Footnotes===
===Sources===
The source followed by most modern historians is the Huguenot refugee Élie Benoist&#x27;s &quot;Histoire de l&#x27;édit de Nantes&quot;, 3 vols. (Delft, 1693–95). E.G. Léonard devotes a chapter to the Edict of Nantes in his &quot;Histoire général du protestantisme&quot;, 2 vols. (Paris) 1961:II:312–89.

==Further reading==
* Alcock, Antony. &quot;A history of the protection of regional cultural minorities in Europe: From the Edict of Nantes to the present day&quot; (Springer, 2000).
* Baumgartner, Frederic J. &quot;The Catholic Opposition to the Edict of Nantes, 1598–1599.&quot; &quot;Bibliothèque d&#x27;humanisme et Renaissance&quot; 40.3 (1978): 525–536. online
* Cavendish, Richard. &quot;The edict of Nantes.&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; 48.4 (1998): 35+.
* Champeaud, Gregory. &quot;The Edict of Poitiers and the Treaty of Nérac, or two steps towards the Edict of Nantes.&quot; &quot;Sixteenth Century Journal&quot; (2001): 319–334. online
* Davis, Stephen M. &quot;The French Huguenots and Wars of Religion: Three Centuries of Resistance for Freedom of Conscience&quot; (2021) 
* Greengrass, Mark. &quot;The Edict of Nantes (1598).&quot; in &quot;Handbuch Frieden im Europa der Frühen Neuzeit&quot; (2021): 897–910. online in English
* Kleinman, Ruth. &quot;Changing Interpretations of the Edict of Nantes: The Administrative Aspect, 1643–1661.&quot; &quot;French Historical Studies&quot; 10.4 (1978): 541–571 online
* Gerson, Noel B. &quot;The Edict of Nantes&quot; (Grosset &amp; Dunlap, 1969) 
* Lualdi, Katharine J. &quot;Persevering in the faith: Catholic worship and communal identity in the wake of the Edict of Nantes.&quot; &quot;Sixteenth century journal&quot; (2004): 717–734. online
* Orcibal, Jean. &quot;Louis XIV and the Edict of Nantes.&quot; in &quot;Louis XIV and Absolutism&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 1976) pp. 154–176. 
* Parsons, Jotham, ed. &quot;The Edict of Nantes: Five Essays and a New Translation&quot; (National Huguenot Society, 1998).
* Pugh, Wilma J. &quot;Social welfare and the Edict of Nantes: Lyon and Nimes.&quot; &quot;French Historical Studies&quot; 8.3 (1974): 349–376. online
* Sutherland, Nicola M. &quot;The Crown, the Huguenots, and the Edict of Nantes.&quot; in &quot;The Huguenot Connection: The Edict of Nantes, Its Revocation, and Early French Migration to South Carolina&quot; (Springer, Dordrecht, 1988) pp. 28–48. 
* Sutherland, Nicola Mary. &quot;The Huguenots and the Edict of Nantes 1598–1629.&quot; in &quot;Huguenots in Britain and their French Background, 1550–1800&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 1987) pp. 158–174. 
* Treasure, Geoffrey. &quot;The Huguenots&quot; (Yale UP, 2015) 
* Tylor, Charles. &quot;The Huguenots in the Seventeenth Century: Including the History of the Edict of Nantes, from Its Enactment in 1598 to Its Revocation in 1685&quot; (1892) 
* Whelan, Ruth. &quot;Toleration and Religious Identity: The Edict of Nantes and its Implications in France, Britain and Ireland&quot; (2003) 

==External links==

* The Edict of Nantes 
* The Edict of Nantes Manuscript and French transcription of the Edict of Nantes
* The Edict of Nantes, with its Secret Articles and Brevets, Translated by Jotham Parsons</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="4" end="19" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="51" end="64" title="Henry IV of France" label="King Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="90" end="99" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="100" end="111" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="137" end="146" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="206" end="214" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="252" end="263" title="State_religion" label="established"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="1744" end="1753" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284645" start="1874" end="1879" title="edict" label="edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q126287984" start="2037" end="2048" title="schism (religion)" label="schismatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="2084" end="2094" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="2132" end="2153" title="freedom of thought" label="freedom of conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="2281" end="2293" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="2441" end="2464" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194744" start="2542" end="2562" title="Edict of St. Germain" label="Edict of St. Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="2596" end="2615" title="Catherine de Médici" label="Catherine de Médici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086489" start="2739" end="2756" title="Massacre of Vassy" label="Massacre of Vassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q512443" start="2837" end="2859" title="Edict of Fontainebleau" label="Edict of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="3141" end="3164" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="3172" end="3180" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3287" end="3300" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3399" end="3410" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="3517" end="3523" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535999" start="3786" end="3804" title="George A. Rothrock" label="George A. Rothrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="4624" end="4635" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q170395" start="4678" end="4695" title="Pope Clement VIII" label="Pope Clement VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="4776" end="4790" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="4891" end="4901" title="Louis XIII" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="4946" end="4960" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q82185" start="5093" end="5104" title="La Rochelle" label="La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q273724" start="5148" end="5152" title="écus" label="écus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="5328" end="5342" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q707722" start="5470" end="5495" title="cuius regio, eius religio" label="cuius regio, eius religio"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="5543" end="5552" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="5686" end="5691" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="5711" end="5728" title="feast day" label="Catholic holidays"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5936" end="5940" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="5944" end="5951" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q312214" start="6006" end="6014" title="Marrano" label="Marranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="6019" end="6027" title="Moriscos" label="Moriscos"/>
<link wikidata="Q182542" start="6126" end="6145" title="Archives Nationales (France)" label="Archives Nationales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242473" start="6277" end="6295" title="Parlement of Paris" label="Parlement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="6454" end="6460" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="6487" end="6497" title="parlements" label="parlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365517" start="6556" end="6574" title="Parlement of Rouen" label="Parlement of Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12191" start="6731" end="6737" title="Nantes" label="Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7027" end="7043" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182021" start="7338" end="7354" title="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Marie de Médecis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163891" start="7462" end="7497" title="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Day massacre" label="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Day massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536839" start="7593" end="7613" title="Treaty of Montpellier" label="Peace of Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q82185" start="7718" end="7729" title="La Rochelle" label="La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172593" start="7734" end="7743" title="Montauban" label="Montauban"/>
<link wikidata="Q737533" start="7805" end="7815" title="Louis XIII of France" label="Louis XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q815170" start="7831" end="7851" title="Siege of La Rochelle" label="Siege of La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="7862" end="7880" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Cardinal Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="8268" end="8277" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q512443" start="8369" end="8391" title="Edict of Fontainebleau" label="Edict of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="8956" end="8969" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="8971" end="8978" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="8984" end="8998" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="9000" end="9011" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142490" start="9013" end="9025" title="Huguenots in South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="9034" end="9053" title="New France" label="new French colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="9062" end="9079" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q21181" start="9139" end="9149" title="Fredericia" label="Fredericia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152727" start="9698" end="9739" title="Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg" label="Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q819756" start="9751" end="9767" title="Edict of Potsdam" label="Edict of Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q157367" start="9809" end="9828" title="Brandenburg-Prussia" label="Brandenburg-Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253397" start="9938" end="9957" title="Edict of Versailles" label="Edict of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268943" start="9977" end="9995" title="Edict of Tolerance" label="Edict of Tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="10000" end="10009" title="Louis XVI of France" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="10073" end="10082" title="parlement" label="parlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="10143" end="10156" title="Ancien Régime" label="Ancien Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q169759" start="10165" end="10217" title="Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen of 1789" label="Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268943" start="15140" end="15159" title="Edict of toleration" label="Edict of toleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="15162" end="15181" title="Freedom of religion" label="Freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q551804" start="15184" end="15208" title="Michel de l&amp;#x27;Hôpital" label="Michel de l&amp;#x27;Hôpital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188688" start="15252" end="15268" title="Peace of Vervins" label="Peace of Vervins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587719" start="15395" end="15407" title="Élie Benoist" label="Élie Benoist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50468" wikidata="Q524818" url="?curid=50468" title="Leishmania">
<text>Leishmania is a parasitic protozoan, a single-celled organism of the genus &quot;Leishmania&quot; that is responsible for the disease leishmaniasis. They are spread by sandflies of the genus &quot;Phlebotomus&quot; in the Old World, and of the genus &quot;Lutzomyia&quot; in the New World. At least 93 sandfly species are proven or probable vectors worldwide. Their primary hosts are vertebrates; &quot;Leishmania&quot; commonly infects hyraxes, canids, rodents, and humans.

==History==
Members of an ancient genus of &quot;Leishmania&quot;-like parasites, &quot;Paleoleishmania&quot;, have been detected in fossilized sand flies dating back to the early Cretaceous period. The first written reference to the conspicuous symptoms of cutaneous leishmaniasis surfaced in the Paleotropics within oriental texts dating back to the 7th century BC (allegedly transcribed from sources several hundred years older, between 1500 and 2000 BC). Due to its broad and persistent prevalence throughout antiquity as a mysterious disease of diverse symptomatic outcomes, leishmaniasis has been dubbed with various names ranging from &quot;white leprosy&quot; to &quot;black fever&quot;. Some of these names suggest links to negative cultural beliefs or mythology, which still feed into the social stigmatization of leishmaniasis today.

In India, both cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis are caused by &quot;Leishmania donovani&quot;. The first records of cutaneous leishmaniasis in India were from British medical officers in the early 19th century. The disease was by then known as &quot;oriental sore&quot; or &quot;Delhi boil&quot;; while the visceral form was variously called &quot;Burdwan [after the city Burdwan] fever&quot;, &quot;kala azar&quot; (black fever), or &quot;Dumdum a city in West Bengal] fever&quot;.

The causative parasite for the disease was identified in 1901 as a concurrent finding by William Boog Leishman and Charles Donovan. They independently visualised microscopic single-celled parasites (later called Leishman-Donovan bodies) living within the cells of infected human organs. The parasitic genus would later be classed as trypanosomatid protozoans under the phylogenetic designation, &quot;Leishmania donovani&quot;. Several species have since been classified and grouped under two major subgenera i.e. &quot;Leishmania Viannia&quot; (generally located in the Neotropics) or &quot;Leishmania Leishmania&quot; (generally located in the Paleotropics, with the major exception of the &quot;L. mexicana&quot; subgroup).

==Epidemiology==
&quot;Leishmania&quot; currently affects 6 million people in 98 countries. About 0.9–1.6 million new cases occur each year, and 21 species are known to cause disease in humans: it is considered a zoonosis.

==Structure==
&quot;Leishmania&quot; species are unicellular eukaryotes having a well-defined nucleus and other cell organelles including kinetoplasts and flagella. Depending on the stage of their life cycle, they exist in two structural variants, as: 
#The amastigote form is found in the mononuclear phagocytes and circulatory systems of humans. It is an intracellular and nonmotile form, being devoid of external flagella. The short flagellum is embedded at the anterior end without projecting out. It is oval in shape, and measures 3–6 μm in length and 1–3 μm in breadth. The kinetoplast and basal body lie towards the anterior end.
#The promastigote form is found in the alimentary tract of sandflies. It is an extracellular and motile form. It is considerably larger and highly elongated, measuring 15-30 μm in length and 5 μm in width. It is spindle-shaped, tapering at both ends. A long flagellum (about the body length) is projected externally at the anterior end. The nucleus lies at the centre, and in front of it are the kinetoplast and the basal body.
==Evolution==
The details of the evolution of this genus are debated, but &quot;Leishmania&quot; apparently evolved from an ancestral trypanosome lineage. The oldest lineage is that of the Bodonidae, followed by &quot;Trypanosoma brucei&quot;, the latter being confined to the African continent. &quot;Trypanosoma cruzi&quot; groups with trypanosomes from bats, South American mammals, and kangaroos suggest an origin in the Southern Hemisphere. These clades are only distantly related.

The remaining clades in this tree are &quot;Blastocrithidia&quot;, &quot;Herpetomonas&quot;, and &quot;Phytomonas&quot;. The four genera &quot;Leptomonas&quot;, &quot;Crithidia&quot;, &quot;Leishmania&quot;, and &quot;Endotrypanum&quot; form the terminal branches, suggesting a relatively recent origin. Several of these genera may be polyphyletic and may need further division.

The origins of genus &quot;Leishmania&quot; itself are unclear. One theory proposes an African origin, with migration to the Americas. Another proposes migration from the Americas to the Old World via the Bering Strait land bridge around 15 million years ago. A third theory proposes a Palearctic origin. Such migrations would entail subsequent migration of vector and reservoir or successive adaptations along the way. A more recent migration is that of &quot;L. infantum&quot; from Mediterranean countries to Latin America (known as &quot;L. chagasi&quot;), since European colonization of the New World, where the parasites picked up their current New World vectors in their respective ecosystems. This is the cause of the epidemics now evident. One recent New World epidemic concerns foxhounds in the USA.

Although it was suggested that &quot;Leishmania&quot; might have evolved in the Neotropics, this is probably true for species belonging to the subgenera &quot;Viannia&quot; and &quot;Endotrypanum&quot;. However, there is evidence that the primary evolution of the subgenera &quot;Leishmania&quot; and &quot;Sauroleishmania&quot; is the Old World. While the &quot;Mundinia&quot; species appear to be more universal in their evolution. One theory is that different lineages became isolated geographically during different periods and it is this that gave rise to this evolutionary mosaicism. But there is no doubt that the Leishmaniinae are a monophyletic group.

A large data set analysis suggests that &quot;Leishmania&quot; evolved 90 to 100 million years ago in Gondwana. The reptile infecting species originated in mammalian clades.

&quot;Sauroleishmania&quot; species were originally defined on the basis that they infected reptiles (lizards) rather than mammals. Based on molecular evidences, they have been moved to subgenus status within &quot;Leishmania&quot;. This subgenus probably evolved from a group that originally infected mammals.

==Taxonomy==

53 species are recognised in this genus. The status of several of these is disputed, so the final number may differ. At least 20 species infect humans. To make things more complex, hybrids might be involved, as it has been reported in Brazil with a hybrid between &quot;Leishmania (V.) guyanensis&quot; and &quot;Leishmania (V.) shawi shawi&quot;.

The genus is presently divided into 4 subgenera: &quot;Leishmania&quot;, &quot;Sauroleishmania&quot;, &quot;Mundinia&quot; and &quot;Viannia&quot;. The division into the two subgenera (&quot;Leishmania&quot; and &quot;Viannia&quot;) was made by Lainson and Shaw in 1987 on the basis of their location within the insect gut. The species in the &quot;Viannia&quot; subgenus develop in the hind gut: &quot;L. (V.) braziliensis&quot; has been proposed as the type species for this subgenus. This division has been confirmed by all subsequent studies. Shaw, Camargo and Teixeira created the subgenus &quot;Mundinia&quot; while revising Leishmaniinae in 2016.

&quot;Endotrypanum&quot; is closely related to &quot;Leishmania&quot;. Some &quot;Endotypanum&quot; species are unique in that they infect the erythrocytes of their hosts (sloths). All species are confined to Central and South America. &quot;E. colombiensis&quot; infections have been found in man.

&quot;Sauroleishmania&quot; was originally described by Ranquein 1973 as a separate genus, but molecular studies suggest this is actually a subgenus rather than a separate genus.

The proposed division of the &quot;Leishmania&quot; into &quot;Euleishmania&quot; and &quot;Paraleishmania&quot; groups in 2000 emphasized the deep phylogenic distance between parasites, some of which had been named as &quot;Leishmania&quot; species. The &quot;Euleishmania&quot; included species currently placed in the subgenera &quot;Leishmania&quot;, &quot;Sauroleishmania&quot;, &quot;Mundinia&quot; and &quot;Viannia&quot;. The proposed &quot;Paraleishmania&quot; included species of &quot;Endotypanum,&quot; &quot;Leishmamnia&quot;-&quot;L. colomubensis&quot;, &quot;L. herreri&quot;, &quot;L. hertigi&quot;and &quot;L. deanei&quot; and &quot;L. equatorensis&quot;. In a recent revision these species were given different generic status.
Four subgenera of &quot;Leishmania&quot; are now recognised - &quot;Leishmania&quot;, &quot;Sauroleishmania&quot;, &quot;Viannia&quot; and &quot;Mundinia&quot; (the &quot;L. enriettii&quot; complex). The genus &quot;Endotrypanum&quot; and &quot;Porcisia&quot; belong to the &quot;Paraleishmania&quot;.

There are four &quot;Mundinia&quot; species - &quot;L. (Mundinia) enriettii&quot;, &quot;L. (Mundinia) martiniquensis&quot;, &quot;L. (Mundinia) macropodum&quot;, and &quot;L. (Mundinia) orientalis,&quot; which is found in Thailand.

&quot;L. archibaldi&quot;&#x27;s specific status is unsettled but it is closely related to &quot;L. donovani&quot;.
&quot;L. herreri&quot; belongs to the genus &quot;Endotypanum&quot; rather than to &quot;Leishmania&quot;.

&quot;L. donovani&quot; and &quot;L. infantum&quot; are closely related.

===Notes===

The selenoenzyme &quot;Seltryp&quot; appears to be unique to this order. It has been removed from the subgenus &quot;Viannia&quot;.

&quot;L. deanei&quot; and &quot;L. hertigi&quot;, both of which infect porcupines have been moved to the genus &quot;Porcisia.&quot;

==Classification==

Subgenus Leishmania 
*&quot;Leishmania aethiopica&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania amazonensis&quot; (includes &quot;garnhami&quot; )
*&quot;Leishmania arabica&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania aristidesi&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania donovani&quot;
*&quot;Leishmania forattinii&quot;
*&quot;Leishmania gerbilli&quot;
*&quot;Leishmania infantum&quot; (subspecies &quot;chagasi&quot; )
*&quot;Leishmania killicki&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania major&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania mexicana&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania pifanoi&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania tropica&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania turanica&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania venezeulensis&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania waltoni&quot; 

Subgenus Mundinia 
*&quot;Leishmania enriettii&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania macropodum&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania martiniquensis&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania orientalis&quot;

Subgenus Sauroleishmania 
*&quot;Leishmania adleri&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania agamae&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania ceramodactyli&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania gulikae&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania gymnodactyli&quot; † 
*&quot;Leishmania helioscopi&quot; † 
*&quot;Leishmania hemidactyli&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania hoogstraali&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania nicollei&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania platycephala&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania phrynocephali&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania senegalensis&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania sofieffi&quot; ↑ 
*&quot;Leishmania tarentolae&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania zmeevi&quot; ↑ 
*&quot;Leishmania zuckermani&quot; 
Subgenus Viannia 
*&quot;Leishmania braziliensis&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania guyanensis&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania lainsoni&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania lindenbergi&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania naiffi&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania panamensis&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania peruviana&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania shawi&quot; 
*&quot;Leishmania utingensis&quot; 

===Related genera===

The relationships between &quot;Leishmania&quot; and other genera such as &quot;Endotrypanum&quot;, &quot;Novymonas&quot;, &quot;Porcisia&quot;, and &quot;Zelonia&quot; is presently unclear as they are closely related. &quot;Endotrypanum colombiensis&quot;, ofter known as &quot;Leishmania colombiensis,&quot; has been associated with both cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis in Venezuela.

Genus Endotrypanum
*&quot;Endotrypanum colombiensis&quot; 
*&quot;Endotrypanum equatorensis&quot; 
*&quot;Endotrypanum herreri&quot; 
*&quot;Endotrypanum monterogeii&quot; 
*&quot;Endotrypanum schaudinni&quot; 

Genus Novymonas 
*&quot;Novymonas esmeraldas&quot; 

Genus Porcisia 
*&quot;Porcisia deanei&quot; 
*&quot;Porcisia hertigi&quot; 

Genus Zelonia 
*&quot;Zelonia australiensis&quot; 
*&quot;Zelonia costaricensis&quot; 

==Biochemistry and cell biology==
The biochemistry and cell biology of &quot;Leishmania&quot; is similar to that of other kinetoplastids. They share the same main morphological features: a single flagellum which has an invagination - the flagellar pocket - at its base; a kinetoplast, which is found in the single mitochondrion; and a subpelicular array of microtubules, which make up the main part of the cytoskeleton.

===Lipophosphoglycan coat===
&quot;Leishmania&quot; possesses a lipophosphoglycan coat over the outside of the cell. Lipophosphoglycan is a trigger for toll-like receptor 2, a signalling receptor involved in triggering an innate immune response in mammals.

The precise structure of lipophosphoglycan varies depending on the species and lifecycle stage of the parasite. The glycan component is particularly variable and different lipophosphoglycan variants can be used as a molecular marker for different lifecycle stages. Lectins, a group of proteins which bind different glycans, are often used to detect these lipophosphoglycan variants. For example, peanut agglutinin binds a particular lipophosphoglycan found on the surface of the infective form of &quot;L. major&quot;.

Lipophosphoglycan is used by the parasite to promote its survival in the host and the mechanisms by which the parasite does this center around modulating the immune response of the host. This is vital, as the &quot;Leishmania&quot; parasites live within macrophages and need to prevent the macrophages from killing them. Lipophosphoglycan has a role in resisting the complement system, inhibiting the oxidative burst response, inducing an inflammation response and preventing natural killer T cells recognising that the macrophage is infected with the &quot;Leishmania&quot; parasite.

===Intracellular mechanism of infection===
In order to avoid destruction by the immune system and thrive, the &quot;Leishmania&quot; &#x27;hides&#x27; inside its host&#x27;s cells. This location enables it to avoid the action of the humoral immune response (because the pathogen is safely inside a cell and outside the open bloodstream), and furthermore it may prevent the immune system from destroying its host through nondanger surface signals which discourage apoptosis. The primary cell types &quot;Leishmania&quot; infiltrates are phagocytotic cells such as neutrophils and macrophages.

Usually, a phagocytotic immune cell like a macrophage will ingest a pathogen within an enclosed endosome and then fill this endosome with enzymes which digest the pathogen. However, in the case of &quot;Leishmania&quot;, these enzymes have no effect, allowing the parasite to multiply rapidly. This uninhibited growth of parasites eventually overwhelms the host macrophage or other immune cell, causing it to die.

Transmitted by the sandfly, the protozoan parasites of &quot;L. major&quot; may switch the strategy of the first immune defense from eating/inflammation/killing to eating/no inflammation/no killing of their host phagocyte and corrupt it for their own benefit. They use the willingly phagocytosing polymorphonuclear neutrophil granulocytes (PMNs) rigorously as a tricky hideout, where they proliferate unrecognized from the immune system and enter the long-lived macrophages to establish a &quot;hidden&quot; infection.

===Uptake and survival===
Upon microbial infection, PMNs move out from the bloodstream through the vessels&#x27; endothelial layer, to the site of the infected tissue (dermal tissue after fly bite). They immediately initiate the first immune response and phagocytize the invader by recognition of foreign and activating surfaces on the parasite. Activated PMN secrete chemokines, IL-8 particularly, to attract further granulocytes and stimulate phagocytosis. Further, &quot;L. major&quot; increases the secretion of IL-8 by PMNs. This mechanism is observed during infection with other obligate intracellular parasites, as well. For microbes like these, multiple intracellular survival mechanisms exist. Surprisingly, the coinjection of apoptotic and viable pathogens causes by far a more fulminate course of disease than injection of only viable parasites. When the anti-inflammatory signal phosphatidylserine usually found on apoptotic cells, is exposed on the surface of dead parasites, &quot;L. major&quot; switches off the oxidative burst, thereby preventing killing and degradation of the viable pathogen.

In the case of &quot;Leishmania&quot;, progeny are not generated in PMNs, but in this way they can survive and persist untangled in the primary site of infection. The promastigote forms also release &quot;Leishmania&quot; chemotactic factor (LCF) to actively recruit neutrophils, but not other leukocytes, for instance monocytes or NK cells. In addition to that, the production of interferon gamma (IFNγ)-inducible protein 10 (IP10) by PMNs is blocked in attendance of &quot;Leishmania&quot;, what involves the shut down of inflammatory and protective immune response by NK and Th1 cell recruitment. The pathogens stay viable during phagocytosis since their primary hosts, the PMNs, expose apoptotic cell-associated molecular pattern (ACAMP) signaling &quot;no pathogen&quot;.

===Persistency and attraction===
The lifespan of neutrophil granulocytes is quite short. They circulate in bloodstream for about 6 to 10 hours after leaving bone marrow, whereupon they undergo spontaneous apoptosis. Microbial pathogens have been reported to influence cellular apoptosis by different strategies. Obviously because of the inhibition of caspase3-activation, &quot;L. major&quot; can induce the delay of neutrophils apoptosis and extend their lifespan for at least 2–3 days. The fact of extended lifespan is very beneficial for the development of infection because the final host cells for these parasites are macrophages, which normally migrate to the sites of infection within two or three days. The pathogens are not dronish; instead they take over the command at the primary site of infection. They induce the production by PMNs of the chemokines MIP-1α and MIP-1β (macrophage inflammatory protein) to recruit macrophages.

An important factor in prolonging infection is the inhibition of the adaptive immune system. This occurs especially during the intercellular phases, when amastigotes search for new macrophages to infect and are more susceptible to immune responses. Nearly all types of phagocytes are targeted. For example, mincle has been shown to be targeted by &quot;L. major&quot;. Interaction between mincle and a protein released by the parasite results in a weakened immune response in dendritic cells.

=== Silent phagocytosis theory ===
To save the integrity of the surrounding tissue from the toxic cell components and proteolytic enzymes contained in neutrophils, the apoptotic PMNs are silently cleared by macrophages. Dying PMNs expose the &quot;eat me&quot;-signal phosphatidylserine which is transferred to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane during apoptosis. By reason of delayed apoptosis, the parasites that persist in PMNs are taken up into macrophages, employing an absolutely physiological and nonphlogistic process. The strategy of this &quot;silent phagocytosis&quot; has the following advantages for the parasite:

* Taking up apoptotic cells silences macrophage killing activity leading to a survival of the pathogens.
* Pathogens inside of PMNs have no direct contact to the macrophage surface receptors, because they can not see the parasite inside the apoptotic cell. So, the activation of the phagocyte for immune activation does not occur.

However, studies have shown this is unlikely, as the pathogens are seen to leave apoptopic cells and no evidence is known of macrophage uptake by this method.

== Molecular biology ==
An important aspect of the &quot;Leishmania&quot; protozoan is its glycoconjugate layer of lipophosphoglycan (LPG). This is held together with a phosphoinositide membrane anchor, and has a tripartite structure consisting of a lipid domain, a neutral hexasaccharide, and a phosphorylated galactose-mannose, with a termination in a neutral cap. Not only do these parasites develop postphlebotomus digestion, but it is also thought to be essential to oxidative bursts, thus allowing passage for infection. Characteristics of intracellular digestion include an endosome fusing with a lysosome, releasing acid hydrolases which degrade DNA, RNA, proteins and carbohydrates.

== Genomics ==
The genomes of four &quot;Leishmania&quot; species (&quot;L. major&quot;, &quot;L. infantum&quot;, &quot;L. donovani&quot; and &quot;L. braziliensis&quot;) have been sequenced, revealing more than 8300 protein-coding and 900 RNA genes. Almost 40% of protein-coding genes fall into 662 families containing between two and 500 members. Most of the smaller gene families are tandem arrays of one to three genes, while the larger gene families are often dispersed in tandem arrays at different loci throughout the genome. Each of the 35 or 36 chromosomes is organized into a small number of gene clusters of tens-to-hundreds of genes on the same DNA strand. These clusters can be organized in head-to-head (divergent) or tail-to-tail (convergent) fashion, with the latter often separated by tRNA, rRNA and/or snRNA genes. Transcription of protein-coding genes initiates bidirectionally in the divergent strand-switch regions between gene clusters and extends polycistronically through each gene cluster before terminating in the strand-switch region separating convergent clusters. &quot;Leishmania&quot; telomeres are usually relatively small, consisting of a few different types of repeat sequence. Evidence can be found for recombination between several different groups of telomeres. The &quot;L. major&quot; and &quot;L. infantum&quot; genomes contain only about 50 copies of inactive degenerated &quot;Ingi&quot;/L1Tc-related elements (DIREs), while &quot;L. braziliensis&quot; also contains several telomere-associated transposable elements and spliced leader-associated retroelements. The &quot;Leishmania&quot; genomes share a conserved core proteome of about 6200 genes with the related trypanosomatids &quot;Trypanosoma brucei&quot; and &quot;Trypanosoma cruzi&quot;, but around 1000 &quot;Leishmania&quot;-specific genes are known, which are mostly randomly distributed throughout the genome. Relatively few (about 200) species-specific differences in gene content exist between the three sequenced &quot;Leishmania&quot; genomes, but about 8% of the genes appear to be evolving at different rates between the three species, indicative of different selective pressures that could be related to disease pathology. About 65% of protein-coding genes currently lack functional assignment.

&quot;Leishmania&quot; species produce several different heat shock proteins. These include Hsp83, a homolog of Hsp90. A regulatory element in the 3&#x27; UTR of Hsp83 controls translation of Hsp83 in a temperature-sensitive manner. This region forms a stable RNA structure which melts at higher temperatures.

== Genomic instability ==

&quot;Leishmania&quot; lacks of promoter-dependent regulation, so its genomic regulation is at post-transcriptional level through copy number variations (CNV) of transcripts, a mechanism capable of controlling the abundance of these transcripts according to the situation in which the organism finds itself. These processes cause a great susceptibility to genomic instability in the parasite. This involves epistatic interactions between genes, which drive these changes in gene expression, leading to compensatory mechanisms in the &quot;Leishmania&quot; genome that result in the adaptive evolution of the parasite.
During the research carried out by Giovanni Bussotti and collaborators at the Pasteur Institute, belonging to the University of Paris, a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of &quot;Leishmania donovani&quot; identified CNVs in 14% of the coding regions and in 4% of the non-coding regions. In addition, an experimental evolution study (EE Approach) was performed on L. donovani amastigotes obtained from clinical cases of hamsters. By extracting these amastigotes from infected organisms and culturing them in vitro for 36 weeks (3800 generations), it was demonstrated how genomic instability in this parasite is capable of adapting to complicated situations, such as in vitro culture.
An 11kb deletion was detected in the gene coding for Ld1S_360735700, a NIMA-related kinase with key functions in the correct progression of mitosis. With the advancement of in vitro culture generations the loss of the kinase becomes more notorious, decreasing growth rate of the parasite, but the genomic instability of Leishmania manages, through compensatory mechanisms, to attenuate this reduction in growth so that the in vitro culture is maintained. First, as an adaptation of the culture to the loss of this kinase, it was detected an increase in the expression of another orthologous kinase (Ld1S_360735800) whose coding region is adjacent to that of the lost kinase. Secondly, a reduction in the expression of 23 transcripts related to flagellar biogenesis was observed. So adaptation in Leishmania leads the parasite to eliminate flagellar movement from its needs, since it is not necessary in in vitro culture, preserving the energy invested in this movement to increase the growth rate and compensating the loss of the kinase.
Finally, coamplification of ribosomal protein clusters, ribosomal RNA (rRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA) and nucleolar small RNA (snoRNA) was observed. Increased expression of these clusters leads to increased ribosomal biogenesis and protein biosynthesis. This is most evident in the case of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNA), for which amplification of a large cluster of 15 snoRNAs was observed on chromosome 33. The function of these nucleic acids is methylation and inclusion of pseuouridine in ribosomes. In this case, an increase in these modifications was observed in the large subunits of the ribosomes of individuals in culture, specifically in the PTC (peptidyl transferase center) and in the mRNA entry tunnel to the ribosome for protein synthesis. These changes lead to an increase in ribosomal biogenesis, resulting in increased protein synthesis and growth rate.
In conclusion, the loss of the kinase is compensated by the genomic instability of &quot;Leishmania donovani&quot; by increasing the expression of another orthologous kinase, decreasing flagellar biogenesis and increasing ribosomal biogenesis. These compensations result in the growth rate of the culture being as less affected as possible by the initial loss of the kinase, and the parasite is perfectly adapted to the in vitro culture, which is not its natural habitat.
== Sexual reproduction ==

A microbial pathogen&#x27;s reproductive system is one of the basic biologic processes that condition the microorganism&#x27;s ecology and disease spread. In 2009 Akopyants et al. demonstrated that &quot;L. major&quot; has a sexual cycle, including a meiotic process. Hybrid progeny are formed that have full genomic complements from both parents. Mating only occurs in the sand fly vector, and hybrids can be transmitted to the mammalian host by sand fly bite. In &quot;L. braziliensis&quot; matings in nature are predominantly between related individuals resulting in extreme inbreeding. The rate of outcrossing between different strains of &quot;Leishmania&quot; in the sand fly vector depends on the frequency of co-infection. Such outcrossing events appear to be rare in &quot;L. major&quot; and &quot;L. donovani&quot;.

&quot;L. infantum&quot; produces proteins BRCA1 and RAD51 that interact with each other to promote homologous recombinational repair. These proteins play a key role in meiosis. Thus, meiotic events provide the adaptive advantage of efficient recombinational repair of DNA damages even when they do not lead to outcrossing

== See also ==
* Canine leishmaniasis
* List of parasites (human)

== References ==
== Further reading ==
*Shaw, Jeffrey Jon (1969). The Haemoflagellates of Sloths. H. K. Lewis &amp; Co. Ltd.: London.

== External links ==

* A discussion list (Leish-L) is also available with over 600 subscribers to the list, ranging from molecular biologists to public health workers, from many countries both inside and outside endemic regions. Comments and questions are welcomed.
* KBD: Kinetoplastid Biology and Disease, is a website devoted to leishmaniasis, sleeping sickness and Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis). It contains free access to full text peer-reviewed articles on these subjects. The site contains many articles relating to the unique kinetoplastid organelle and genetic material therein.
* Drug Search for Leishmaniasis World Community Grid</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="26" end="35" title="protozoan" label="protozoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="69" end="74" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q331283" start="134" end="147" title="leishmaniasis" label="leishmaniasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416438" start="168" end="177" title="Phlebotominae" label="sandflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709478" start="197" end="208" title="Phlebotomus" label="Phlebotomus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="222" end="231" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953779" start="256" end="265" title="Lutzomyia" label="Lutzomyia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="279" end="288" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="384" end="394" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q53099" start="437" end="442" title="hyrax" label="hyrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324" start="446" end="451" title="canid" label="canid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="454" end="460" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="467" end="472" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="510" end="515" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21445997" start="564" end="579" title="Paleoleishmania" label="Paleoleishmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="609" end="619" title="fossilized" label="fossilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416192" start="620" end="630" title="sand flies" label="sand flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="656" end="666" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590966" start="734" end="757" title="cutaneous leishmaniasis" label="cutaneous leishmaniasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563142" start="774" end="786" title="Paleotropics" label="Paleotropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="794" end="802" title="oriental" label="oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046113" start="1153" end="1164" title="black fever" label="black fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046113" start="1351" end="1373" title="visceral leishmaniasis" label="visceral leishmaniasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950752" start="1394" end="1413" title="Leishmania donovani" label="Leishmania donovani"/>
<link wikidata="Q709267" start="1698" end="1705" title="Burdwan" label="Burdwan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1773" end="1779" title="[Dum Dum" label="a city"/>
<link wikidata="Q979928" start="1899" end="1920" title="William Boog Leishman" label="William Boog Leishman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076920" start="1925" end="1940" title="Charles Donovan" label="Charles Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19273846" start="2143" end="2157" title="trypanosomatid" label="trypanosomatid"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="2158" end="2168" title="protozoans" label="protozoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="2179" end="2191" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="2381" end="2391" title="Neotropics" label="Neotropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563142" start="2456" end="2468" title="Paleotropics" label="Paleotropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493771" start="2508" end="2519" title="Leishmania mexicana" label="L. mexicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="2751" end="2759" title="zoonosis" label="zoonosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="2811" end="2832" title="protist" label="unicellular eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="2856" end="2863" title="Cell nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q511594" start="2900" end="2911" title="kinetoplast" label="kinetoplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="2917" end="2925" title="flagella" label="flagella"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="3438" end="3454" title="alimentary tract" label="alimentary tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950703" start="4016" end="4025" title="Bodonidae" label="Bodonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q33244" start="4045" end="4063" title="Trypanosoma brucei" label="Trypanosoma brucei"/>
<link wikidata="Q150162" start="4129" end="4146" title="Trypanosoma cruzi" label="Trypanosoma cruzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q541987" start="4165" end="4176" title="Trypanosoma" label="trypanosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070208" start="4217" end="4225" title="kangaroo" label="kangaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174253" start="4359" end="4374" title="Blastocrithidia" label="Blastocrithidia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4388" end="4400" title="Herpetomonas" label="Herpetomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10349292" start="4418" end="4428" title="Phytomonas" label="Phytomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10317527" start="4458" end="4468" title="Leptomonas" label="Leptomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998692" start="4482" end="4491" title="Crithidia" label="Crithidia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4533" end="4545" title="Endotrypanum" label="Endotrypanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="4882" end="4891" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q11769" start="4900" end="4913" title="Bering Strait" label="Bering Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="4981" end="4991" title="Palearctic realm" label="Palearctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="5206" end="5219" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="5290" end="5299" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="5355" end="5362" title="Vector (epidemiology)" label="vectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="5585" end="5595" title="Neotropics" label="Neotropics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="6269" end="6277" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="6434" end="6441" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="6444" end="6450" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="6465" end="6471" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="6849" end="6856" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q30673019" start="7678" end="7690" title="Endotrypanum schaudinni" label="Endotrypanum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8215" end="8227" title="Euleishmania" label="Euleishmania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8244" end="8258" title="Paraleishmania" label="Paraleishmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493686" start="10060" end="10081" title="Leishmania aethiopica" label="Leishmania aethiopica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10096" end="10117" title="Leishmania amazonensi" label="Leishmania amazonensi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10165" end="10183" title="Leishmania arabica" label="Leishmania arabica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10198" end="10219" title="Leishmania aristidesi" label="Leishmania aristidesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950752" start="10234" end="10253" title="Leishmania donovani" label="Leishmania donovani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10267" end="10288" title="Leishmania forattinii" label="Leishmania forattinii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10302" end="10321" title="Leishmania gerbilli" label="Leishmania gerbilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950789" start="10335" end="10354" title="Leishmania infantum" label="Leishmania infantum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10402" end="10421" title="Leishmania killicki" label="Leishmania killicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950715" start="10436" end="10452" title="Leishmania major" label="Leishmania major"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493771" start="10467" end="10486" title="Leishmania mexicana" label="Leishmania mexicana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10501" end="10519" title="Leishmania pifanoi" label="Leishmania pifanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950818" start="10534" end="10552" title="Leishmania tropica" label="Leishmania tropica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10567" end="10586" title="Leishmania turanica" label="Leishmania turanica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10601" end="10625" title="Leishmania venezeulensis" label="Leishmania venezeulensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10640" end="10658" title="Leishmania waltoni" label="Leishmania waltoni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10676" end="10684" title="Mundinia" label="Mundinia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10693" end="10713" title="Leishmania enriettii" label="Leishmania enriettii"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10728" end="10749" title="Leishmania macropodum" label="Leishmania macropodum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10764" end="10789" title="Leishmania martiniquensis" label="Leishmania martiniquensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10804" end="10825" title="Leishmania orientalis" label="Leishmania orientalis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10842" end="10857" title="Sauroleishmania" label="Sauroleishmania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10866" end="10883" title="Leishmania adleri" label="Leishmania adleri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10898" end="10915" title="Leishmania agamae" label="Leishmania agamae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10930" end="10954" title="Leishmania ceramodactyli" label="Leishmania ceramodactyli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10969" end="10987" title="Leishmania gulikae" label="Leishmania gulikae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11002" end="11025" title="Leishmania gymnodactyli" label="Leishmania gymnodactyli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11042" end="11063" title="Leishmania helioscopi" label="Leishmania helioscopi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11080" end="11102" title="Leishmania hemidactyli" label="Leishmania hemidactyli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11117" end="11139" title="Leishmania hoogstraali" label="Leishmania hoogstraali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11154" end="11173" title="Leishmania nicollei" label="Leishmania nicollei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11188" end="11211" title="Leishmania platycephala" label="Leishmania platycephala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11226" end="11250" title="Leishmania phrynocephali" label="Leishmania phrynocephali"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11265" end="11288" title="Leishmania senegalensis" label="Leishmania senegalensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11303" end="11322" title="Leishmania sofieffi" label="Leishmania sofieffi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11339" end="11360" title="Leishmania tarentolae" label="Leishmania tarentolae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11375" end="11392" title="Leishmania zmeevi" label="Leishmania zmeevi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11409" end="11430" title="Leishmania zuckermani" label="Leishmania zuckermani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11447" end="11454" title="Viannia" label="Viannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493699" start="11463" end="11486" title="Leishmania braziliensis" label="Leishmania braziliensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11501" end="11522" title="Leishmania guyanensis" label="Leishmania guyanensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11537" end="11556" title="Leishmania lainsoni" label="Leishmania lainsoni"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11571" end="11593" title="Leishmania lindenbergi" label="Leishmania lindenbergi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11608" end="11625" title="Leishmania naiffi" label="Leishmania naiffi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11640" end="11661" title="Leishmania panamensis" label="Leishmania panamensis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11676" end="11696" title="Leishmania peruviana" label="Leishmania peruviana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11711" end="11727" title="Leishmania shawi" label="Leishmania shawi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11742" end="11763" title="Leishmania utingensis" label="Leishmania utingensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q100348303" start="11900" end="11909" title="Novymonas" label="Novymonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131630" start="12739" end="12753" title="Kinetoplastida" label="kinetoplastids"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="12813" end="12822" title="flagellum" label="flagellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q511594" start="12889" end="12900" title="kinetoplast" label="kinetoplast"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="12931" end="12944" title="mitochondrion" label="mitochondrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q154626" start="13023" end="13035" title="cytoskeleton" label="cytoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556736" start="13102" end="13119" title="lipophosphoglycan" label="lipophosphoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q410015" start="13190" end="13210" title="TLR 2" label="toll-like receptor 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q428253" start="13260" end="13282" title="innate immune system" label="innate immune response"/>
<link wikidata="Q513359" start="13375" end="13384" title="Biological life cycle" label="lifecycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311855" start="13512" end="13528" title="molecular marker" label="molecular marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q408693" start="13561" end="13567" title="Lectin" label="Lectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="13581" end="13589" title="proteins" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157929" start="13692" end="13709" title="peanut agglutinin" label="peanut agglutinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="14070" end="14081" title="macrophages" label="macrophages"/>
<link wikidata="Q334848" start="14183" end="14200" title="complement system" label="complement system"/>
<link wikidata="Q838181" start="14217" end="14232" title="oxidative burst" label="oxidative burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="14255" end="14267" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q224930" start="14292" end="14314" title="Natural Killer T cell" label="natural killer T cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="14482" end="14495" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142875" start="14635" end="14658" title="humoral immune response" label="humoral immune response"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="14865" end="14874" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184726" start="14938" end="14950" title="phagocytosis" label="phagocytotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188417" start="14965" end="14976" title="neutrophils" label="neutrophils"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="14981" end="14992" title="macrophages" label="macrophages"/>
<link wikidata="Q824237" start="15091" end="15099" title="endosome" label="endosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416192" start="15429" end="15436" title="sandfly" label="sandfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="15442" end="15451" title="protozoan" label="protozoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="15452" end="15461" title="parasitism" label="parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q107647" start="15622" end="15631" title="phagocyte" label="phagocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q189159" start="15799" end="15810" title="cell growth" label="proliferate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184204" start="15872" end="15883" title="macrophages" label="macrophages"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="15918" end="15927" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="15961" end="15970" title="microbial" label="microbial"/>
<link wikidata="Q421866" start="16298" end="16308" title="chemokines" label="chemokines"/>
<link wikidata="Q421859" start="16310" end="16314" title="Interleukin 8" label="IL-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q223143" start="16348" end="16360" title="granulocytes" label="granulocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720909" start="16515" end="16547" title="obligate intracellular parasites" label="obligate intracellular parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354337" start="16821" end="16839" title="phosphatidylserine" label="phosphatidylserine"/>
<link wikidata="Q838181" start="16957" end="16972" title="oxidative burst" label="oxidative burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q42395" start="17336" end="17346" title="leukocytes" label="leukocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q107244" start="17361" end="17370" title="monocytes" label="monocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q332181" start="17374" end="17382" title="NK cells" label="NK cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q24741149" start="17423" end="17439" title="interferon gamma" label="interferon gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q632518" start="17620" end="17628" title="Th1 cell" label="Th1 cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188417" start="17869" end="17892" title="neutrophil granulocytes" label="neutrophil granulocytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="17927" end="17938" title="bloodstream" label="bloodstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="17977" end="17988" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="18025" end="18034" title="apoptosis" label="apoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25805" start="18171" end="18178" title="caspase" label="caspase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725509" start="18703" end="18734" title="macrophage inflammatory protein" label="macrophage inflammatory protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645075" start="18826" end="18852" title="Adaptive immune system" label="the adaptive immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q107647" start="19030" end="19039" title="phagocyte" label="phagocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q21114193" start="19068" end="19074" title="Mincle receptor" label="mincle"/>
<link wikidata="Q506253" start="19237" end="19251" title="dendritic cell" label="dendritic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="19347" end="19352" title="toxic" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33123" start="19373" end="19384" title="proteolysis" label="proteolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="19385" end="19391" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354337" start="19523" end="19541" title="phosphatidylserine" label="phosphatidylserine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="19591" end="19606" title="plasma membrane" label="plasma membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="19747" end="19760" title="physiology" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q208467" start="20070" end="20079" title="Receptor (biochemistry)" label="receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q416019" start="20472" end="20486" title="glycoconjugate" label="glycoconjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556736" start="20496" end="20513" title="lipophosphoglycan" label="lipophosphoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q824237" start="20962" end="20970" title="endosome" label="endosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q83330" start="20985" end="20993" title="lysosome" label="lysosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q96286" start="21010" end="21019" title="hydrolase" label="hydrolase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="21035" end="21038" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="21040" end="21043" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="21058" end="21071" title="carbohydrates" label="carbohydrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="21314" end="21317" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="21579" end="21583" title="Locus (genetics)" label="loci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="21599" end="21605" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="21628" end="21638" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="21876" end="21880" title="tRNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="21882" end="21886" title="rRNA" label="rRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q284578" start="21894" end="21899" title="snRNA" label="snRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060602" start="22048" end="22055" title="cistron" label="cistron"/>
<link wikidata="Q14872779" start="22190" end="22198" title="telomere" label="telomere"/>
<link wikidata="Q418939" start="23440" end="23458" title="heat shock protein" label="heat shock protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q24772687" start="23495" end="23500" title="Hsp90" label="Hsp90"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272830" start="23530" end="23541" title="3&amp;#x27; UTR" label="3&amp;#x27; UTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="23560" end="23571" title="Translation (genetics)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589957" start="23643" end="23656" title="Nucleic acid secondary structure" label="RNA structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501491" start="23851" end="23879" title="Copy number variation" label="copy number variations (CNV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q751748" start="24128" end="24150" title="Epistasis" label="epistatic interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098876" start="24507" end="24511" title="Genome-wide association study" label="GWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3592884" start="24646" end="24688" title="Experimental evolution" label="experimental evolution study (EE Approach)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030033" start="25097" end="25116" title="NIMA-related kinase 1" label="NIMA-related kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q189998" start="25770" end="25790" title="Flagellum" label="flagellar biogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="26120" end="26133" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="26142" end="26154" title="transfer RNA" label="transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q284416" start="26166" end="26185" title="SnoRNA" label="nucleolar small RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q518328" start="26508" end="26519" title="methylation" label="methylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q420445" start="26537" end="26549" title="Pseudouridine" label="pseuouridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q424702" start="26717" end="26737" title="peptidyl transferase" label="peptidyl transferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416192" start="27804" end="27812" title="sand fly" label="sand fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032413" start="28597" end="28617" title="Canine leishmaniasis" label="Canine leishmaniasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635818" start="28620" end="28645" title="List of parasites (human)" label="List of parasites (human)"/>
<link wikidata="Q121027510" start="28745" end="28771" title="H. K. Lewis &amp;amp; Co. Ltd." label="H. K. Lewis &amp;amp; Co. Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q649558" start="29152" end="29166" title="Chagas disease" label="Chagas disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q826776" start="29415" end="29435" title="World Community Grid" label="World Community Grid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50469" wikidata="Q23400" url="?curid=50469" title="Garlic">
<text>Garlic (Allium sativum) is a species of bulbous flowering plants in the genus &quot;Allium&quot;. Its close relatives include the onion, shallot, leek, chives, Welsh onion, and Chinese onion. It is native to Central Asia, South Asia, and northeastern Iran. It has long been used as a seasoning and culinary ingredient worldwide, with a history of several thousand years of human consumption and use, including use in traditional medicine. It was known to ancient Egyptians and other ancient cultures for which its consumption has had a significant culinary cultural impact, especially across the Mediterranean region and across parts of Asia. It is produced globally, but the largest producer is China, which produced 73% of the world&#x27;s supply of garlic in 2021. There are two subspecies and hundreds of varieties of garlic.

==Description==

Garlic is a perennial flowering plant that is native to Central Asia, South Asia and northeastern Iran. and grows from a bulb. It has a tall, erect flowering stem that grows up to . The leaf blade is flat, linear, solid, and approximately wide, with an acute apex. The plant may produce pink to purple flowers from July to September in the Northern Hemisphere. The bulb has a strong odor and is typically made up of 10 to 20 cloves. The cloves close to the center are symmetrical, and those surrounding the center can be asymmetrical. Each clove is enclosed in an inner sheathing leaf surrounded by layers of outer sheathing leaves. If garlic is planted at the proper time and depth, it can be grown as far north as Alaska. It produces hermaphroditic flowers. It is pollinated by butterflies, moths, and other insects.

=== Chemistry ===
Fresh or crushed garlic yields the sulfur-containing compounds allicin, ajoene, diallyl polysulfides, vinyldithiins, and , as well as enzymes, saponins, flavonoids, and Maillard reaction products when cooked, which are not sulfur-containing compounds.

The phytochemicals responsible for the sharp flavor of garlic are produced when the plant&#x27;s cells are damaged. When a cell is broken by chopping, chewing, or crushing, enzymes stored in cell vacuoles trigger the breakdown of several sulfur-containing compounds stored in the cell fluids (cytosol). The resultant compounds are responsible for the sharp or hot taste and strong smell of garlic. Some of the compounds are unstable and continue to react over time.

Among alliums, garlic has by far the highest concentrations of initial reaction products, making garlic much more potent than onion, shallot, or leeks. Although many humans enjoy the taste of garlic, these compounds are believed to have evolved as a defensive mechanism, deterring animals such as birds, insects, and worms from eating the plant.

A large number of sulfur compounds contribute to the smell and taste of garlic. Allicin has been found to be the compound most responsible for the &quot;hot&quot; sensation of raw garlic. This chemical opens thermo-transient receptor potential channels that are responsible for the burning sense of heat in foods. The process of cooking garlic removes allicin, thus mellowing its spiciness. Allicin, along with its decomposition products diallyl disulfide and diallyl trisulfide, are major contributors to the characteristic odor of garlic, with other allicin-derived compounds, such as vinyldithiins and ajoene.

==Taxonomy==
Identification of the wild progenitor of common garlic is difficult due to the sterility of its many cultivars, which limits the ability to cross test with wild relatives. Genetically and morphologically, garlic is most similar to the wild species &quot;Allium longicuspis&quot;, which grows in central and southwestern Asia. However, because &quot;A. longicuspis&quot; is also mostly sterile, it is doubtful that it is the ancestor of &quot;A. sativum&quot;. Other candidates that have been suggested include &quot;A. tuncelianum&quot;, &quot;A. macrochaetum&quot;, and &quot;A. truncatum&quot;, all of which are native to the Middle East.

&quot;Allium sativum&quot; grows in the wild in areas where it has become naturalized. The &quot;wild garlic&quot;, &quot;crow garlic&quot;, and &quot;field garlic&quot; of Britain are members of the species &quot;A. ursinum&quot;, &quot;A. vineale&quot;, and &quot;A. oleraceum&quot;, respectively. In North America, &quot;A. vineale&quot; (known as &quot;wild garlic&quot; or &quot;crow garlic&quot;) and &quot;Allium canadense&quot; (known as &quot;meadow garlic&quot;, &quot;wild garlic&quot;, or &quot;wild onion&quot;) are common weeds in fields. So-called elephant garlic is actually a wild leek (&quot;A. ampeloprasum&quot;) and not a true garlic. Single clove garlic (also called pearl or solo garlic) originated in the Yunnan province of China.

===Subspecies and varieties===
There are two subspecies of &quot;A. sativum&quot;, ten major groups of varieties, and hundreds of varieties, or cultivars.

*&quot;A. sativum&quot; var. &quot;ophioscorodon&quot; (Link) Döll, called &quot;Ophioscorodon&quot; or hardneck garlic, includes porcelain garlics, rocambole garlic, and purple stripe garlics. It is sometimes considered to be a separate species, &quot;Allium ophioscorodon&quot; G.Don.
*&quot;A. sativum&quot; var. &quot;sativum&quot;, or softneck garlic, includes artichoke garlic, silverskin garlic, and creole garlic.

There are at least 120 cultivars originating from Central Asia, making it the main center of garlic biodiversity.
Some garlics have protected status in the UK and the EU, including:

=== Etymology ===
The word &quot;garlic&quot; derives from Old English, &quot;garlēac&quot;, meaning &quot;gar&quot; (spear) and leek, as a &#x27;spear-shaped leek&#x27;.

== Ecology ==
Garlic plants are usually hardy and not affected by many pests or diseases. Garlic plants are said to repel rabbits and moles. The California Department of Food and Agriculture conducts a certification program to assure freedom from nematode and white rot disease caused by &quot;Stromatinia cepivora&quot;, two pathogens that can both destroy a crop and remain in the soil indefinitely once introduced. Garlic may also suffer from pink root, a typically non-fatal disease that stunts the roots and turns them pink or red; or leek rust, which usually appears as bright orange spots. The larvae of the leek moth attack garlic by mining into the leaves or bulbs.

Botrytis neck and bulb rot is a disease of onion, garlic, leek and shallot. &quot;Botrytis allii&quot; and &quot;Botrytis aclada&quot; cause this disease in onion and &quot;Botrytis porri&quot; causes it in garlic. According to the University of California,Initial symptoms usually begin at the neck, where affected tissue softens, becomes water-soaked, and turns brown. In a humid atmosphere, a gray and feltlike growth (where spores are produced) appears on rotting scales, and mycelia may develop between scales. Dark-brown-to-black sclerotia (the resting bodies of the pathogen) may eventually develop in the neck or between scales.

== Cultivation ==
Garlic is easy to cultivate and may grow year-round in mild climates. While sexual propagation of garlic is possible, nearly all of the garlic in cultivation is propagated asexually by planting individual cloves in the ground. 
In colder climates, cloves are best planted about six weeks before the soil freezes. The goal is to have the bulbs produce only roots and no shoots above the ground.
Harvest is in late spring or early summer.

Garlic plants can be grown closely together, leaving enough space for the bulbs to mature, and are easily grown in containers of sufficient depth. Garlic does well in loose, dry, well-drained soils in sunny locations, and is hardy throughout USDA climate zones 4–9. When selecting garlic for planting, it is important to pick large bulbs from which to separate cloves. Large cloves, along with proper spacing in the planting bed, will also increase bulb size. Garlic plants prefer to grow in a soil with a high organic material content, but are capable of growing in a wide range of soil conditions and pH levels.

There are different varieties of garlic, most notably split into the subspecies of hardneck garlic and softneck garlic. The latitude where the garlic is grown affects the choice of type, as garlic can be day-length sensitive. Hardneck garlic is generally grown in cooler climates and produces relatively large cloves, whereas softneck garlic is generally grown closer to the equator and produces small, tightly packed cloves.

Garlic scapes are removed to focus all the garlic&#x27;s energy into bulb growth. The scapes can be eaten raw or cooked.
=== Propagation ===
The method of propagating garlic from planting cloves is called division. Asexual propagation of garlic for production purposes requires cool temperatures that can vary depending on the cultivar. Hardneck varieties require long cold temperature exposure where as softneck varieties thrive in milder climates. This cold climate is required for the process of vernalization, a form of stratification of the cloves necessary for the development of multiple-clove bulbs. Solo garlic is the result of garlic grown without the process of vernalization.

=== Production ===
In 2021, world production of garlic was 28 million tonnes, with China alone accounting for 73% of the total.


==Adverse effects and toxicology==
The scent of garlic is known to linger upon the human body and cause bad breath (halitosis) and body odor. This is caused by allyl methyl sulfide (AMS). AMS is a volatile liquid which is absorbed into the blood during the metabolism of garlic-derived sulfur compounds; from the blood it travels to the lungs (and from there to the mouth, causing garlic breath) and skin, where it is exuded through skin pores. Since digestion takes several hours, and release of AMS several hours more, the effect of eating garlic may be present for a long time. Washing the skin with soap is only a partial and imperfect solution to the smell. Studies have shown sipping milk at the same time as consuming garlic can significantly neutralize bad breath. Mixing garlic with milk in the mouth before swallowing reduced the odor better than drinking milk afterward. Plain water, mushrooms, and basil may also reduce the odor; the mix of fat and water found in milk, however, was the most effective. Garlic breath is allegedly alleviated by eating fresh parsley.

Abundant sulfur compounds in garlic are also responsible for turning garlic green or blue during pickling and cooking. Under these conditions (&quot;i.e.&quot;, acidity, heat) the sulfur-containing compound alliin reacts with common amino acids to make pyrroles, clusters of carbon-nitrogen rings. These rings can be linked together into polypyrrole molecules. Ring structures absorb particular wavelengths of light and thus appear colored. The two-pyrrole molecule looks red, the three-pyrrole molecule looks blue, and the four-pyrrole molecule looks green (like chlorophyll, a tetrapyrrole). Like chlorophyll, the pyrrole pigments are safe to eat. Upon cutting, similar to a color change in onion caused by reactions of amino acids with sulfur compounds, garlic can turn green.

The green, dry &quot;folds&quot; in the center of the garlic clove are especially pungent. The sulfur compound allicin, produced by crushing or chewing fresh garlic, produces other sulfur compounds: ajoene, allyl polysulfides, and vinyldithiins. Aged garlic lacks allicin, but may have some activity due to the presence of S-allylcysteine.

Some people suffer from allergies to garlic and other species of &quot;Allium&quot;. Symptoms can include irritable bowel, diarrhea, mouth and throat ulcerations, nausea, breathing difficulties, and, in rare cases, anaphylaxis. Garlic-sensitive people show positive tests to diallyl disulfide, allylpropyldisulfide, allylmercaptan, and allicin, all of which are present in garlic. People who suffer from garlic allergies are often sensitive to many other plants, including onions, chives, leeks, shallots, garden lilies, ginger, and bananas.

Several reports of serious burns resulting from garlic being applied topically for various purposes, including naturopathic uses and acne treatment, indicate care must be taken for these uses, usually testing a small area of skin using a low concentration of garlic. On the basis of numerous reports of such burns, including burns to children, topical use of raw garlic, as well as insertion of raw garlic into body cavities, is discouraged. In particular, topical application of raw garlic to young children is not advisable.

The side effects of long-term garlic supplementation are largely unknown. Possible side effects include gastrointestinal discomfort, sweating, dizziness, allergic reactions, bleeding, and menstrual irregularities.

Some breastfeeding mothers have found, after consuming garlic, that their babies can be slow to feed, and have noted a garlic odor coming from them.

If higher-than-recommended doses of garlic are taken with anticoagulant medications, this can lead to a higher risk of bleeding. Garlic may interact with warfarin, saquinavir, antihypertensives, calcium channel blockers, the quinolone family of antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin, and hypoglycemic drugs, as well as other medications. The American Veterinary Medical Association considers garlic to be toxic to pets.

==Uses==
Because of sulfur compounds circulating in blood, consumed garlic may act as a mosquito repellent, although there is no scientific evidence of its efficacy.

===Nutrition===

In the typical serving size of 1–3 cloves (3–9 grams), raw garlic provides no significant nutritional value, with the content of all essential nutrients below 10% of the Daily Value (DV). In a reference amount of , raw garlic contains some micronutrients in rich amounts (20% or more of the DV), including vitamins B6 (73% DV) and C (35% DV), and the dietary mineral, manganese (73% DV). Per 100 gram serving, raw garlic is a moderate source (10–19% DV) of the B vitamins, thiamin and pantothenic acid, as well as the dietary minerals, calcium, potassium, phosphorus, and zinc.

The composition of raw garlic is 59% water, 33% carbohydrates, 6% protein, 2% dietary fiber, and less than 1% fat.

===Culinary===

Garlic is widely used around the world for its pungent flavor as a seasoning or condiment.

The garlic plant&#x27;s bulb is the most commonly used part of the plant. With the exception of the single clove types, garlic bulbs are normally divided into numerous fleshy sections called cloves. Garlic cloves are used for consumption (raw or cooked) or for medicinal purposes. They have a characteristic pungent, spicy flavor that mellows and sweetens considerably with cooking. The distinctive aroma is mainly due to organosulfur compounds including allicin present in fresh garlic cloves and ajoene which forms when they are crushed or chopped. A further metabolite allyl methyl sulfide is responsible for garlic breath.

Other parts of the garlic plant are also edible. The leaves and flowers (bulbils) on the head (spathe) are sometimes eaten. They are milder in flavor than the bulbs, and are most often consumed while immature and still tender. Immature garlic is sometimes pulled, rather like a scallion, and sold as &quot;green garlic&quot;. When green garlic is allowed to grow past the &quot;scallion&quot; stage, but not permitted to fully mature, it may produce a garlic &quot;round&quot;, a bulb like a boiling onion, but not separated into cloves like a mature bulb.

Green garlic imparts a garlic flavor and aroma in food, minus the spiciness. Green garlic is often chopped and stir-fried or cooked in soup or hot pot in Southeast Asian (i.e. Vietnamese, Thai, Myanmar, Lao, Cambodian, Singaporean), and Chinese cookery, and is very abundant and low-priced. Additionally, the immature flower stalks (scapes) of the hardneck are sometimes marketed for uses similar to asparagus in stir-fries.

Inedible or rarely eaten parts of the garlic plant include the &quot;skin&quot; covering each clove and root cluster. The papery, protective layers of &quot;skin&quot; over various parts of the plant are generally discarded during preparation for most culinary uses, though in Korea immature whole heads are sometimes prepared with the tender skins intact. The root cluster attached to the basal plate of the bulb is the only part not typically considered palatable in any form.

An alternative is to cut the top off the bulb, coat the cloves by dribbling olive oil (or other oil-based seasoning) over them, and roast them in an oven. Garlic softens and can be extracted from the cloves by squeezing the (root) end of the bulb, or individually by squeezing one end of the clove. In Korea, heads of garlic are heated over the course of several weeks; the resulting product, called black garlic, is sweet and syrupy, and is exported to the United States, United Kingdom, and Australia.

Garlic may be applied to different kinds of bread, usually in a medium of butter or oil, to create a variety of classic dishes, such as garlic bread, garlic toast, bruschetta, crostini, and canapé. The flavor varies in intensity and aroma with the different cooking methods. It is often paired with onion, tomato, or ginger.

Immature scapes are tender and edible. They are also known as &quot;garlic spears&quot;, &quot;stems&quot;, or &quot;tops&quot;. Scapes generally have a milder taste than the cloves. They are often used in stir frying or braised like asparagus. Garlic leaves are a popular vegetable in many parts of Asia. The leaves are cut, cleaned, and then stir-fried with eggs, meat, or vegetables.

Garlic powder is made from dehydrated garlic and can be used as a substitute for fresh garlic, though the taste is not quite the same. Garlic salt combines garlic powder with table salt.

====Regions====
Garlic is a fundamental component in many or most dishes of various regions, including eastern Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, the Middle East, northern Africa, southern Europe, Eastern Europe and parts of Latin America. Latin American seasonings, particularly, use garlic in sofritos and mofongos.

Oils can be flavored with garlic cloves. These infused oils are used to season all categories of vegetables, meats, breads, and pasta. Garlic, along with fish sauce, chopped fresh chilis, lime juice, sugar, and water, is a basic essential item in dipping fish sauce, a highly used dipping sauce condiment used in Indochina. In East and Southeast Asia, chili oil with garlic is a popular dipping sauce, especially for meat and seafood. Tuong ot toi Viet Nam (Vietnam chili garlic sauce) is a highly popular condiment and dip across North America and Asia.

In some cuisines, the young bulbs are pickled for three to six weeks in a mixture of sugar, salt, and spices. In eastern Europe, the shoots are pickled and eaten as an appetizer. Laba garlic, prepared by soaking garlic in vinegar, is a type of pickled garlic served with dumplings in northern China to celebrate the Chinese New Year.

Garlic is essential in Middle Eastern and Arabic cooking, with its presence in many food items. In the Levant, garlic is traditionally crushed together with olive oil, and occasionally salt, to create a Middle Eastern garlic sauce called Toum (تُوم; meaning &quot;garlic&quot; in Arabic). While not exclusively served with meats, toum is commonly paired with chicken or other meat dishes such as shawarma. Garlic is also a key component in some hummus varieties, an Arabic dip composed of chickpeas, tahini, garlic, lemon juice, and salt.

Lightly smoked garlic is used in British and other European cuisine. It is particularly prized for stuffing poultry and game, and in soups and stews.

Emulsifying garlic with olive oil produces &quot;aioli&quot;. Garlic, oil, and a chunky base produce &quot;skordalia&quot;. Crushed garlic, oil, and water produce a strong flavored sauce, mujdei. Blending garlic, almond, oil, and soaked bread produces &quot;ajoblanco&quot;. &quot;Tzatziki&quot;, yogurt mixed with garlic and salt, is a common sauce in Eastern Mediterranean cuisines.

====Culinary history ====
Numerous cuneiform records show that garlic has been cultivated in Mesopotamia for at least 4,000 years. The use of garlic in China and Egypt also dates back thousands of years. Well-preserved garlic was found in the tomb of Tutankhamun (c. 1325 ). It was consumed by ancient Greek and Roman soldiers, sailors, and rural classes (Virgil, &quot;Eclogues&quot; ii. 11), and, according to Pliny the Elder (&quot;Natural History&quot; xix. 32), by the African peasantry. Garlic was placed by the ancient Greeks on the piles of stones at crossroads, as a supper for Hecate (Theophrastus, &quot;Characters, The Superstitious Man&quot;).

Garlic was rare in traditional English cuisine (though it is said to have been grown in England before 1548) but has been a common ingredient in Mediterranean Europe. Translations of the Assize of Weights and Measures, an English statute generally dated to the 13th century, indicate a passage as dealing with standardized units of garlic production, sale, and taxation—the hundred of 15 ropes of 15 heads each—but the Latin version of the text may refer to herring rather than garlic.

====Storage====
Domestically, garlic is stored warm [above 18°C (64°F)] and dry to keep it dormant (to inhibit sprouting). It is traditionally hung; softneck varieties are often braided in strands called plaits or &quot;grappes&quot;. Peeled cloves may be stored in wine or vinegar in the refrigerator. Commercially, garlic is stored at 0°C (32°F), in a dry, low-humidity environment. Garlic will keep longer if the tops remain attached.

Garlic is often kept in oil to produce flavored oil; however, the practice requires measures to be taken to prevent the garlic from spoiling which may include rancidity and growth of &quot;Clostridium botulinum&quot;. Acidification with a mild solution of vinegar minimizes bacterial growth. Refrigeration does not assure the safety of garlic kept in oil, requiring use within one month to avoid bacterial spoilage. Garlic is also dried at low temperatures, to preserve the enzymatic activity and sold and kept as garlic granules, and can be rehydrated to reactivate it.

Stored garlic can be affected by &quot;Penicillium&quot; decay known as &quot;blue mold&quot; (or &quot;green mold&quot; in some locales), especially in high humidity. Infection may first appear as soft or water-soaked spots, followed by white patches (of mycelium) which turn blue or green with sporulation. As sporulation and germination are delayed at low temperature, and at −4 °C are inhibited entirely, in refrigerated cloves one may only see the white mycelium during early stages. &quot;Penicillium hirsutum&quot; and &quot;Penicillium allii&quot; are two of the predominant species identified in blue mold.

===Medical research===
====Cardiovascular====

As of 2016, clinical research found that consuming garlic produces only a small reduction in blood pressure (4 mmHg), and there is no clear long-term effect on hypertension, cardiovascular morbidity or mortality. A 2016 meta-analysis indicated there was no effect of garlic consumption on blood levels of lipoprotein(a), a biomarker of atherosclerosis.

Because garlic might reduce platelet aggregation, people taking anticoagulant medication are cautioned about consuming garlic.

====Cancer====
Two reviews found no effect of consuming garlic on colorectal cancer. A 2016 meta-analysis of case-control and cohort studies found a moderate inverse association between garlic intake and some cancers of the upper digestive tract.

====Common cold====
A 2014 review found insufficient evidence to determine the effects of garlic in preventing or treating the common cold. Other reviews concluded a similar absence of high-quality evidence for garlic having a significant effect on the common cold.

===Folk medicine===
Garlic has been used for traditional medicine in diverse cultures such as in Korea, Egypt, Japan, China, Rome, and Greece. In his &quot;Natural History&quot;, Pliny gave a list of conditions in which garlic was considered beneficial (&quot;N.H.&quot; xx. 23). Galen, writing in the second century, eulogized garlic as the &quot;rustic&#x27;s theriac&quot; (cure-all) (see F. Adams&#x27; &quot;Paulus Aegineta&quot;, p. 99). Alexander Neckam, a writer of the 12th century (see Wright&#x27;s edition of his works, p. 473, 1863), discussed it as a palliative for the heat of the sun in field labor. In the 17th century, Thomas Sydenham valued it as an application in confluent smallpox, and William Cullen&#x27;s &quot;Materia Medica&quot; of 1789 found some dropsies cured by it alone.

===Other uses===
The sticky juice within the bulb cloves is used as an adhesive in mending glass and porcelain. An environmentally benign garlic-derived polysulfide product is approved for use in the European Union (under Annex 1 of 91/414) and the UK as a nematicide and insecticide, including for use in the control of cabbage root fly and red mite in poultry.

==In culture==
Garlic is present in the folklore of many cultures. In Europe, many cultures have used garlic for protection or white magic, perhaps owing to its reputation in folk medicine. Central European folk beliefs considered garlic a powerful ward against demons, werewolves, and vampires. To ward off vampires, garlic could be worn, hung in windows, or rubbed on chimneys and keyholes.

In the foundation myth of the ancient Korean kingdom of Gojoseon, eating nothing but 20 cloves of garlic and a bundle of Korean mugwort for 100 days let a bear be transformed into a woman.

In celebration of Nowruz (Persian calendar New Year), garlic is one of the essential items in a Haft-sin (&quot;seven things beginning with &#x27;S&#x27;&quot;) table, a traditional New Year&#x27;s display: the name for garlic in Persian is سیر (&quot;seer&quot;), which begins with &quot;س&quot; (&quot;sin&quot;, pronounced &quot;seen&quot;) the Perso-Arabic letter corresponding to &quot;S&quot;.

In Islam, it is recommended not to eat raw garlic prior to going to the mosque. This is based on several hadith.

Some Mahāyāna Buddhists and sects in China and Vietnam avoid eating onions, garlic, scallions, chives and leeks, which are known as &quot;Wu hun&quot; ((), &#x27;the five forbidden pungent vegetables&#x27;).

Because of its strong odor, garlic is sometimes called the &quot;stinking rose&quot;.

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Garlic oil
*Garlic sauce
*Herbalism
*International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants
*List of garlic dishes
*List of garlic festivals
*Pyruvate scale

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
*

==External links==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="0" end="6" title="Garlic" label="Garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="29" end="36" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q188748" start="40" end="44" title="bulb" label="bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="48" end="63" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="72" end="77" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49391" start="84" end="90" title="Allium" label="Allium"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="130" end="135" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193498" start="137" end="144" title="shallot" label="shallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="146" end="150" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q51148" start="152" end="158" title="chives" label="chives"/>
<link wikidata="Q27938" start="160" end="171" title="Allium fistulosum" label="Welsh onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q422240" start="177" end="190" title="Allium chinense" label="Chinese onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="208" end="220" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="222" end="232" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="251" end="255" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="417" end="437" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="455" end="468" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="696" end="701" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="860" end="869" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="904" end="916" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="918" end="928" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="946" end="950" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q188748" start="969" end="973" title="bulb" label="bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q303479" start="1584" end="1598" title="hermaphrodite" label="hermaphroditic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="1614" end="1624" title="Pollination" label="pollinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="1721" end="1727" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q409641" start="1749" end="1756" title="allicin" label="allicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q338762" start="1758" end="1764" title="ajoene" label="ajoene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330876" start="1788" end="1800" title="vinyldithiin" label="vinyldithiin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="1820" end="1826" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q207653" start="1829" end="1836" title="saponin" label="saponin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="1839" end="1848" title="flavonoid" label="flavonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q647574" start="1855" end="1872" title="Maillard reaction" label="Maillard reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="1943" end="1957" title="phytochemicals" label="phytochemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="2036" end="2041" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q127702" start="2135" end="2142" title="vacuole" label="vacuole"/>
<link wikidata="Q220599" start="2232" end="2239" title="cytosol" label="cytosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="2551" end="2555" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004252" start="2656" end="2694" title="Plant defense against herbivory" label="defensive mechanism, deterring animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q304043" start="2968" end="2996" title="transient receptor potential" label="transient receptor potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q419633" start="3191" end="3208" title="diallyl disulfide" label="diallyl disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148332" start="3213" end="3231" title="diallyl trisulfide" label="diallyl trisulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330876" start="3340" end="3352" title="vinyldithiin" label="vinyldithiin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="3481" end="3490" title="cultivars" label="cultivars"/>
<link wikidata="Q558235" start="3520" end="3530" title="test cross" label="cross test"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="3634" end="3652" title="Allium longicuspis" label="Allium longicuspis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732942" start="3896" end="3910" title="Allium tuncelianum" label="A. tuncelianum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3924" end="3939" title="Allium macrochaetum" label="A. macrochaetum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15522273" start="3957" end="3969" title="Allium truncatum" label="A. truncatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="4008" end="4019" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878495" start="4096" end="4107" title="naturalisation (biology)" label="naturalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q15947122" start="4173" end="4185" title="field garlic" label="field garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="4195" end="4202" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q130882" start="4236" end="4246" title="Allium ursinum" label="A. ursinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q161230" start="4260" end="4270" title="Allium vineale" label="A. vineale"/>
<link wikidata="Q161107" start="4288" end="4300" title="Allium oleraceum" label="A. oleraceum"/>
<link wikidata="Q161230" start="4346" end="4356" title="Allium vineale" label="A. vineale"/>
<link wikidata="Q582461" start="4435" end="4451" title="Allium canadense" label="Allium canadense"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="4558" end="4562" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392799" start="4585" end="4600" title="elephant garlic" label="elephant garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q148995" start="4632" end="4647" title="Allium ampeloprasum" label="A. ampeloprasum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880492" start="4678" end="4690" title="Solo garlic" label="Single clove"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="4751" end="4757" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="4823" end="4833" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q767728" start="4881" end="4890" title="Variety (botany)" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="5407" end="5419" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q363268" start="5489" end="5505" title="Protected Geographical Status" label="protected status"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="5599" end="5610" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="5658" end="5663" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="5669" end="5673" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852702" start="5752" end="5757" title="Hardiness (plants)" label="hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="5834" end="5841" title="rabbits" label="rabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189180" start="5846" end="5851" title="mole (animal)" label="moles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020425" start="5857" end="5902" title="California Department of Food and Agriculture" label="California Department of Food and Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="5959" end="5967" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976101" start="6006" end="6026" title="Stromatinia cepivora" label="Stromatinia cepivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263445" start="6158" end="6167" title="Pyrenochaeta terrestris" label="pink root"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116610" start="6252" end="6261" title="Puccinia porri" label="leek rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032508" start="6327" end="6336" title="leek moth" label="leek moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134284" start="6388" end="6396" title="Botrytis (fungus)" label="Botrytis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="6431" end="6436" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="6446" end="6450" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q193498" start="6455" end="6462" title="shallot" label="shallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q10433881" start="6470" end="6484" title="Botrytis allii" label="Botrytis allii"/>
<link wikidata="Q326228" start="6868" end="6875" title="mycelia" label="mycelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="7216" end="7225" title="asexual reproduction" label="asexually"/>
<link wikidata="Q188748" start="7556" end="7560" title="bulb" label="bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="7724" end="7742" title="USDA climate zones" label="USDA climate zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783121" start="7993" end="8009" title="organic material" label="organic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="8085" end="8087" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="8221" end="8229" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q887261" start="8531" end="8537" title="scape (botany)" label="scapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284420" start="8729" end="8737" title="Division (horticulture)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q654799" start="9023" end="9036" title="vernalization" label="vernalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893382" start="9048" end="9062" title="Stratification (seeds)" label="stratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880492" start="9132" end="9143" title="Solo garlic" label="Solo garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="9283" end="9288" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259127" start="9308" end="9318" title="Garlic production in China" label="accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16408" start="9459" end="9468" title="halitosis" label="halitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652757" start="9503" end="9523" title="allyl methyl sulfide" label="allyl methyl sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523465" start="9724" end="9737" title="garlic breath" label="garlic breath"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="10412" end="10419" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q57741566" start="10629" end="10635" title="alliin" label="alliin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="10655" end="10665" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q242627" start="10675" end="10682" title="pyrrole" label="pyrrole"/>
<link wikidata="Q146230" start="10760" end="10771" title="polypyrrole" label="polypyrrole"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="10986" end="10997" title="chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="11115" end="11120" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517948" start="11285" end="11292" title="pungency" label="pungent"/>
<link wikidata="Q409641" start="11314" end="11321" title="allicin" label="allicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q338762" start="11402" end="11408" title="ajoene" label="ajoene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330876" start="11434" end="11446" title="vinyldithiin" label="vinyldithiin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232749" start="11568" end="11577" title="garlic allergy" label="allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="11650" end="11665" title="irritable bowel" label="irritable bowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="11667" end="11675" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="11707" end="11713" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="11759" end="11770" title="anaphylaxis" label="anaphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419633" start="11819" end="11836" title="diallyl disulfide" label="diallyl disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q51148" start="12025" end="12031" title="chives" label="chives"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="12065" end="12071" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="12077" end="12083" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q420054" start="12156" end="12163" title="topical" label="topical"/>
<link wikidata="Q79928" start="12220" end="12224" title="acne" label="acne"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="13038" end="13051" title="anticoagulant" label="anticoagulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368879" start="13134" end="13142" title="warfarin" label="warfarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422654" start="13144" end="13154" title="saquinavir" label="saquinavir"/>
<link wikidata="Q575890" start="13156" end="13173" title="antihypertensives" label="antihypertensives"/>
<link wikidata="Q421700" start="13175" end="13199" title="calcium channel blockers" label="calcium channel blockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13669486" start="13205" end="13236" title="quinolone antibiotic" label="quinolone family of antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q256602" start="13245" end="13258" title="ciprofloxacin" label="ciprofloxacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="13264" end="13276" title="hypoglycemic" label="hypoglycemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843064" start="13318" end="13357" title="American Veterinary Medical Association" label="American Veterinary Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q123682686" start="13485" end="13503" title="mosquito repellent" label="mosquito repellent"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="13714" end="13733" title="essential nutrients" label="essential nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="13751" end="13762" title="Daily Value" label="Daily Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q531507" start="13821" end="13834" title="micronutrient" label="micronutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q205130" start="13896" end="13898" title="vitamin B6" label="B6"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="13912" end="13913" title="vitamin C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="13932" end="13947" title="dietary mineral" label="dietary mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="13949" end="13958" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q183206" start="14042" end="14052" title="B vitamins" label="B vitamins"/>
<link wikidata="Q83187" start="14054" end="14061" title="thiamin" label="thiamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179894" start="14066" end="14082" title="pantothenic acid" label="pantothenic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q60097" start="14117" end="14124" title="calcium in biology" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234712" start="14126" end="14135" title="potassium in biology" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="14137" end="14147" title="phosphorus in biology" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q112872206" start="14153" end="14157" title="zinc in biology" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="14208" end="14220" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21296145" start="14226" end="14233" title="protein (nutrient)" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="14238" end="14251" title="dietary fiber" label="dietary fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="14270" end="14273" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596997" start="14372" end="14381" title="condiment" label="condiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188748" start="14408" end="14412" title="bulb" label="bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517948" start="14692" end="14713" title="piquancy" label="pungent, spicy flavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q422785" start="14806" end="14818" title="organosulfur" label="organosulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q409641" start="14839" end="14846" title="allicin" label="allicin"/>
<link wikidata="Q338762" start="14882" end="14888" title="ajoene" label="ajoene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652757" start="14956" end="14976" title="allyl methyl sulfide" label="allyl methyl sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="15065" end="15071" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="15076" end="15083" title="flowers" label="flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10437539" start="15085" end="15091" title="bulbil" label="bulbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="15107" end="15113" title="spathe" label="spathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="15681" end="15691" title="stir-fried" label="stir-fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="15705" end="15709" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q846849" start="15713" end="15720" title="hot pot" label="hot pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q826059" start="15746" end="15756" title="Vietnamese cuisine" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="15758" end="15762" title="Thai cuisine" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187275" start="15764" end="15771" title="Burmese cuisine" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372774" start="15773" end="15776" title="Lao cuisine" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q139430" start="15778" end="15787" title="Cambodian cuisine" label="Cambodian"/>
<link wikidata="Q136726" start="15789" end="15800" title="Singaporean cuisine" label="Singaporean"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="15807" end="15822" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese cookery"/>
<link wikidata="Q887261" start="15903" end="15909" title="scape (botany)" label="scapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28367" start="15970" end="15979" title="asparagus" label="asparagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="15983" end="15993" title="Stir frying" label="stir-fries"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="16273" end="16278" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188748" start="16386" end="16397" title="bulb" label="basal plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="16552" end="16561" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865573" start="16608" end="16613" title="roast" label="roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827931" start="16876" end="16888" title="black garlic (food)" label="black garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359006" start="17117" end="17129" title="garlic bread" label="garlic bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108835" start="17131" end="17143" title="garlic toast" label="garlic toast"/>
<link wikidata="Q614448" start="17145" end="17155" title="bruschetta" label="bruschetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141574" start="17157" end="17165" title="Crostino" label="crostini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032806" start="17171" end="17177" title="canapé" label="canapé"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="17280" end="17285" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="17287" end="17293" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="17298" end="17304" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10716334" start="17695" end="17708" title="Garlic powder" label="Garlic powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935156" start="17830" end="17841" title="Garlic salt" label="Garlic salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q934309" start="18062" end="18077" title="cuisine of the Mediterranean" label="southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622106" start="18079" end="18093" title="Mujdei" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147677" start="18177" end="18184" title="sofrito" label="sofrito"/>
<link wikidata="Q908963" start="18190" end="18197" title="mofongo" label="mofongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="18298" end="18308" title="vegetables" label="vegetables"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="18329" end="18334" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q545985" start="18355" end="18365" title="fish sauce" label="fish sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="18389" end="18399" title="lime juice" label="lime juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324118" start="18448" end="18466" title="nước chấm" label="dipping fish sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="18514" end="18523" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="18528" end="18532" title="East Asia" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="18537" end="18551" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026822" start="18553" end="18562" title="chili oil" label="chili oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046560" start="18588" end="18601" title="dipping sauce" label="dipping sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q10769810" start="18636" end="18657" title="Tuong ot toi Viet Nam" label="Tuong ot toi Viet Nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10491467" start="18936" end="18947" title="Laba garlic" label="Laba garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="18979" end="18986" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854639" start="19028" end="19036" title="dumpling" label="dumpling"/>
<link wikidata="Q131772" start="19073" end="19089" title="Chinese New Year" label="Chinese New Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="19195" end="19201" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095315" start="19330" end="19334" title="Toum" label="Toum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412448" start="19488" end="19496" title="shawarma" label="shawarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q241987" start="19537" end="19543" title="hummus" label="hummus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="19640" end="19646" title="smoking (cooking)" label="smoked"/>
<link wikidata="Q283231" start="19832" end="19837" title="aioli" label="aioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753265" start="19890" end="19899" title="skordalia" label="skordalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622106" start="19971" end="19977" title="mujdei" label="mujdei"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="19996" end="20002" title="almond" label="almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q413126" start="20041" end="20050" title="ajoblanco" label="ajoblanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q836538" start="20064" end="20072" title="Tzatziki" label="Tzatziki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="20262" end="20273" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="20420" end="20431" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tutankhamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="20471" end="20476" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="20481" end="20486" title="ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="20525" end="20531" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="20581" end="20596" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="20604" end="20619" title="Pliny&amp;#x27;s Natural History" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="20756" end="20762" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="20764" end="20776" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q918277" start="20858" end="20873" title="British cuisine" label="English cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980150" start="21014" end="21044" title="Assize of Weights and Measures" label="Assize of Weights and Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942184" start="21201" end="21208" title="hundred (unit)" label="hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667379" start="21215" end="21220" title="rope (garlic)" label="ropes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="21285" end="21292" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21528" end="21547" title=":fr:wikt:grappe" label="&amp;quot;grappes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="21580" end="21584" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="21588" end="21595" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="21677" end="21685" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131268" start="21942" end="21963" title="Clostridium botulinum" label="Clostridium botulinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q843136" start="22364" end="22375" title="Penicillium" label="Penicillium"/>
<link wikidata="Q177332" start="22621" end="22632" title="sporulation" label="sporulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="22653" end="22664" title="germination" label="germination"/>
<link wikidata="Q20721314" start="22820" end="22840" title="Penicillium hirsutum" label="Penicillium hirsutum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987716" start="22857" end="22874" title="Penicillium allii" label="Penicillium allii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133849" start="23001" end="23018" title="clinical research" label="clinical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="23082" end="23096" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="23149" end="23161" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="23178" end="23187" title="morbidity" label="morbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="23191" end="23200" title="death" label="mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="23209" end="23222" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21112670" start="23294" end="23308" title="lipoprotein(a)" label="lipoprotein(a)"/>
<link wikidata="Q864574" start="23312" end="23321" title="biomarker" label="biomarker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252367" start="23325" end="23340" title="atherosclerosis" label="atherosclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q101026" start="23371" end="23391" title="platelet aggregation" label="platelet aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="23407" end="23420" title="anticoagulant" label="anticoagulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="23537" end="23554" title="colorectal cancer" label="colorectal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q961652" start="23580" end="23592" title="case-control study" label="case-control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778788" start="23597" end="23611" title="cohort study" label="cohort studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="23701" end="23716" title="digestive tract" label="digestive tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125" start="23846" end="23857" title="common cold" label="common cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="24142" end="24157" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="24165" end="24170" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="24178" end="24196" title="traditional medicine" label="list of conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="24266" end="24271" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974885" start="24430" end="24446" title="Alexander Neckam" label="Alexander Neckam"/>
<link wikidata="Q29483" start="24551" end="24561" title="palliative" label="palliative"/>
<link wikidata="Q559213" start="24623" end="24638" title="Thomas Sydenham" label="Thomas Sydenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="24680" end="24688" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q462762" start="24694" end="24708" title="William Cullen" label="William Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="24762" end="24770" title="dropsy" label="dropsies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="24862" end="24870" title="adhesive" label="adhesive"/>
<link wikidata="Q910391" start="25048" end="25058" title="nematicide" label="nematicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="25063" end="25074" title="insecticide" label="insecticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q761689" start="25112" end="25128" title="cabbage root fly" label="cabbage root fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272501" start="25133" end="25141" title="red mite" label="red mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="25195" end="25203" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858206" start="25282" end="25293" title="white magic" label="white magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="25330" end="25343" title="folk medicine" label="folk medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="25417" end="25422" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9410" start="25425" end="25435" title="werewolf" label="werewolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q46721" start="25441" end="25448" title="vampire" label="vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405" start="25605" end="25613" title="Gojoseon" label="Gojoseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076280" start="25670" end="25684" title="Artemisia princeps" label="Korean mugwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q712628" start="25704" end="25736" title="Ungnyeo" label="bear be transformed into a woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q483236" start="25757" end="25763" title="Nowruz" label="Nowruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568159" start="25835" end="25843" title="Haft-sin" label="Haft-sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="25969" end="25976" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q744068" start="26087" end="26099" title="Perso-Arabic" label="Perso-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="26143" end="26148" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="26245" end="26251" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="26259" end="26267" title="Mahayana" label="Mahāyāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="26291" end="26296" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="26301" end="26308" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q72480094" start="26576" end="26586" title="Garlic oil" label="Garlic oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4514907" start="26588" end="26600" title="Garlic sauce" label="Garlic sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="26602" end="26611" title="Herbalism" label="Herbalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q941761" start="26613" end="26669" title="International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants" label="International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q48796124" start="26671" end="26692" title="List of garlic dishes" label="List of garlic dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523463" start="26694" end="26718" title="List of garlic festivals" label="List of garlic festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263805" start="26720" end="26734" title="Pyruvate scale" label="Pyruvate scale"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50473" wikidata="Q215194" url="?curid=50473" title="Gargoyle">
<text>In architecture, and specifically Gothic architecture, a gargoyle () is a carved or formed grotesque with a spout designed to convey water from a roof and away from the side of a building, thereby preventing it from running down masonry walls and eroding the mortar between. Architects often used multiple gargoyles on a building to divide the flow of rainwater off the roof to minimize potential damage from rainstorms. A trough is cut in the back of the gargoyle and rainwater typically exits through the open mouth. Gargoyles are usually elongated fantastical animals because their length determines how far water is directed from the wall. When Gothic flying buttresses were used, aqueducts were sometimes cut into the buttress to divert water over the aisle walls.

== Etymology ==
The term originates from the French &quot;gargouille&quot; (Old French &quot;gargoule&quot; (1294) &quot;conduit for waterflow&quot;), composed of the onomatopoeic root &quot;garg-&quot; and the Old French &quot;goule&quot; &quot;animal mouth, throat&quot;, which remained dialectal or is otherwise known as the &quot;gullet&quot;; &quot;gullet&quot; is itself from Old French &quot;golet&quot;, diminutive form of &quot;gole&quot; (older spelling of &quot;goule&quot;) cf. Latin &quot;gula&quot; &quot;gullet, throat, palate, mouth&quot;, &quot;gurgulio&quot; and similar words derived from the root &quot;gurg-&quot; / &quot;garg-&quot; &quot;to swallow&quot;, which represented the &quot;gurgling&quot; sound of water (e.g., Portuguese and Spanish &quot;garganta,&quot; &quot;throat&quot;; but &quot;gárgola&quot; &quot;gargoyle&quot; is from Old French). It is also connected to the French verb &quot;gargariser&quot;, which shares the &quot;garg-&quot; root with the verb &quot;gargle&quot;, from Old French too and is likely imitative in origin. The Italian word for gargoyle is &quot;doccione&quot; or &quot;gronda sporgente,&quot; an architecturally precise phrase which means &quot;protruding gutter&quot;. Italian also uses &quot;gargolla&quot; or &quot;garguglia&quot;, borrowed from Old French and French, when it has a grotesque shape.

When not constructed as a waterspout and only serving an ornamental or artistic function, the technical term for such a sculpture is a grotesque, chimera, or boss. There are also regional variations, such as the hunky punk. Just as with bosses and chimeras, gargoyles are said to protect what they guard, such as a church, from any evil or harmful spirits.

== Legend of the Gargouille ==

A French legend that sprang up around the name of St. Romanus (; fl. ), the former chancellor of the Merovingian king Chlothar II who was made bishop of Rouen, relates how he delivered the country around Rouen from a monster called &quot;Gargouille&quot; or &quot;Goji&quot;. La Gargouille is said to have been the typical dragon with bat-like wings, a long neck, and the ability to breathe fire from its mouth. Multiple versions of the story are given, either that St. Romanus subdued the creature with a crucifix, or he captured the creature with the help of the only volunteer, a condemned man. In each, the monster is led back to Rouen and burned, but its head and neck would not burn due to being tempered by its own fire breath. The head was then mounted on the walls of the newly built church to scare off evil spirits, and used for protection. In commemoration of St. Romain, the Archbishops of Rouen were granted the right to set a prisoner free on the day that the reliquary of the saint was carried in procession (see details at Rouen).

== History ==
The term &quot;gargoyle&quot; is most often applied to medieval work, but throughout all ages, some means of water diversion, when not conveyed in gutters, was adopted. In ancient Egyptian architecture, gargoyles showed little variation, typically in the form of a lion&#x27;s head. Similar lion-mouthed water spouts were also seen on Greek temples, carved or modelled in the marble or terracotta cymatium of the cornice. An excellent example of this are the 39 remaining lion-headed water spouts on the Temple of Zeus. Originally, it had 102 gargoyles or spouts, but due to the heavy weight (they were crafted from marble), many snapped off and had to be replaced.

Many medieval cathedrals included gargoyles and chimeras. According to French architect and author Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, himself one of the great producers of gargoyles in the 19th century, the earliest known medieval gargoyles appear on Laon Cathedral (c. 1200–1220). One of the more famous examples is the gargoyles of Notre-Dame de Paris, which dons 54 chimeras crowded around the railings of the cathedral that came to be in the 1843 restoration project. Although most have grotesque features, the term gargoyle has come to include all types of images. Some gargoyles were depicted as monks, or combinations of real animals and people, many of which were humorous. Unusual animal mixtures, or chimeras, did not act as rainspouts and are more properly called grotesques. They serve as ornamentation but are now popularly called gargoyles.

Both ornamented and unornamented waterspouts projecting from roofs at parapet level were a common device used to shed rainwater from buildings until the early 18th century. From that time, more and more buildings used drainpipes to carry the water from the guttering roof to the ground and only very few buildings using gargoyles were constructed. This was because some people found them frightening, and sometimes heavy ones fell off, causing damage. In 1724, the London Building Act passed by the Parliament of Great Britain made the use of downpipes compulsory in all new construction.

== Purpose ==

There are divided ideas as to the purpose of adding gargoyles to religious structures. Some state that gargoyles were meant to illustrate evil and sin, while others have posited that grotesques in architecture were apotropaic devices. In the 12th century, before the use of gargoyles as rain spouts, St. Bernard of Clairvaux was famous for speaking out against gargoyles carved on the walls of his monastery&#x27;s cloister: St. Bernard emphasizes the absurdity of the beastly figures, pointing out their strange combinations of bodily parts. St. Bernard was a Cistercian, meaning he was unimpressed by the more ornate and expressive decoration used in any given cathedral or church. Because of this, he was repulsed by gargoyles and found them insulting to the church.
While the theory that gargoyles were spiritual devices made to ward off devilish evil was very widely known and accepted, other schools of thoughts have developed over time. For example, in the case of gargoyles unattributable to any one or two animals, some say that they were simply the product of pagan mythology passed down through generations in the medium of fireside tales. Akin to the leading catholic theory but slightly different, some suggest that gargoyles were meant not to intimidate evil spirits or demons, but humans. It is said that at the gateway of the city of Amiens, France, two gargoyles stood guard, and anyone with bad intentions toward the city and its people would be spewed with acid before being able to enter. On the contrary, the king of Amiens would be showered with coins with every return.

Other gargoyles were meant to strike fear into the heart of the pious, specifically those that were anthropomorphized. Gargoyles that were mostly human but had animalistic attributes, like the harpy or cynocephaly were meant to represent the torturous fate of sinners. Some gargoyles were purely decoration, like the monkey in the courtyard of the palace of Jacques Cœur in Bourges, France. This stylistic choice was supposedly a nod to Cours exotic and adventurous lifestyle, as monkeys are a species not native to France.

It is most likely that gargoyles meant all of these things depending on where and when they were made, and it shouldn&#x27;t be the objective of the viewer to pin one purpose to the entirety of gargoyles. According to Lester Burbank Bridaham, writing in &quot;Gargoyles, Chimeres and the Grotesque in French Gothic Sculpture&quot;, &quot;There is much symbolism in the sculpture of the Gothic period; but we must be wary of reading in too much meaning.&quot;

== Animals ==
The ancient Egyptians, Greeks, Etruscans, and Romans all used animal-shaped waterspouts. During the 12th Century, when gargoyles appeared in Europe, the Roman Catholic Church was growing stronger and converting many new people. Most of the population at this time was illiterate, so images were very important to convey ideas. Many early gargoyles depicted some version of a dragon, especially in France. In addition to serving as spouts for water, the gaping mouths of these gargoyles evoked the fearsome destructiveness of these legendary beasts, reminding the laity of the need for the church&#x27;s protection. The reason why many gargoyles are depicted as these dragon-looking, unidentifiable monsters is because it is said the founding bishops of churches would rid their respective towns of these kinds of beasts.

Human qualities were sometimes ascribed to specific animals—that is, the animals were anthropomorphized. This was especially common for pagans, and using these ideas helped conversion to Catholicism. Some animals (such as the rhinoceros and the hippopotamus) were unknown in western Europe during the Middle Ages, so gargoyles of these species (such as the ones at Laon Cathedral) are modern gargoyles and therefore did not have symbolic meaning in medieval times.

The Lion was the most prominent figure for animal gargoyles, likely due to their frequent appearances in other medieval art and even art in antiquity. Lions became a symbol of Christ and, therefore, were said to have the same characteristics as Christ. Supposedly, the lion&#x27;s tail had the power to erase its tracks, and because of this could elude the devil. The lioness was said to give birth to dead cubs, which would resurrect 3 days later, like Jesus Christ. Among these divine attributes, lions were generally believed to be virtuous in a multitude of ways, such as being extremely loyal and in control of their emotions

== Humanization ==
Depictions of humans in gargoyle and grotesque figures were later developments from the animalistic or beastly examples one is likely more familiar with, and were almost a natural progression in subject matter for the statues. Humans gargoyles were often comedic and depicted in bawdy positions, some leaning over the ledge they&#x27;re perched on to vomit or defecate off of. The orifice that rainwater would come out of would imply that it was vomit or fecal matter. Alike the aforementioned gargoyles akin to the monstrous races, many human gargoyles would represent the common acts of certain sinners, such as a prostitute or moneylender. Some gargoyles depict those who are guilty of what one would call a social sin. A woman who is reading for example, as women were not expected and often shunned for attempting to engage in literature.

Since the initial idea behind the brutish and frightening gargoyle in the 12th century was to ward off evil, it&#x27;s hard to believe that these later humorous and sarcastic figures served the same purpose. Instead it&#x27;s often hypothesized that many human gargoyles were meant to be criticisms of the common church attendee, a mirror into one&#x27;s own sin or wrongdoings used for introspection. Others believe, however, that the change to human characteristics in gargoyles created a sense of familiarity and relatability in the eyes of the everyday Church-goer.

The furthest evolution of human gargoyles and grotesques would be the corbel head. Extremely realistic, corbel heads were the most impressive works by stone carvers as they best depicted human facial structure and emotion. Corbel heads were not exclusive to any particular kind of person, and represented a fair array of social classes, however, it was very common for them to be mocking the clergy. Corbel heads were often in places that couldn&#x27;t be seen by anyone on the ground looking up at the corresponding cathedral, in fact, the corbel heads of Reims Cathedral were only recently discovered in the early 20th century when photographers were permitted to scale the buildings. Because of their frequently hidden locations, corbel heads were likely sites of practice for stone carvers, a place obscured by the public eye where they can work on their craft. This along with the suspected frustration of stone artisans due to disproportionate compensation from the clergy, lead some to think that stone cutters created the obnoxious, tongue-out, mouth-pulling faces as a way to mock the clergy.

== Influence on the Western World ==
Although gargoyles were exclusive to Europe for the longest time, their intrigue still attracted those a continent away. Gargoyles can be found in the columns of the Harvard Law School building, fitting for its Gothic architecture. These along with grotesques built at Princeton College were sculpted by Gutzon Borglum. George B. Post was responsible for the frequent use of grotesques on multiple New York City buildings. His architectural works consisted of the multiple grotesques scattered across the multiple buildings of the College of the City of New York and four corbel heads that can be found under a balcony at the National Arts Club Building, Gramercy Park South in New York City. Other important figures in the American implementation of gargoyles and grotesques consist of E.F Guilbert, who had the construction of various gargoyles on the Newark Manuel Training School represents the several aspects of the curriculum, as well as John Russell Pope, who carved several grotesques of varying distinct human expressions from wood at Deepdale, Long Island, a personal estate of the Vanderbilt family.John Taylor Arms educated the American Public of gargoyles through his own etchings of various gargoyles found across Europe. Some instances include etchings of the gargoyles at Notre Dame Cathedral and Amiens Cathedral. his works were regarded as incredibly accurate in portraying the emotion in the expression of the original gargoyles.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Architectural sculpture
* Chiwen
* Rainhead
* Sheela na gig
* Animal representation in Western medieval art

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==

* Gargoyles – Dolores Herrero
* Rouen in France claims to be the origin of gargoyles, through the legend of a dragon La Gargouille
* VIDEO about the conservation of Gargoyles
* The Gargoyles of Princeton University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="3" end="15" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="34" end="53" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q215194" start="57" end="65" title="Gargoyle" label="gargoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q672590" start="91" end="100" title="Grotesque (architecture)" label="grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q272999" start="229" end="236" title="masonry" label="masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="259" end="265" title="Mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="649" end="655" title="Gothic art" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690580" start="656" end="671" title="flying buttress" label="flying buttress"/>
<link wikidata="Q474" start="685" end="694" title="aqueduct (watercourse)" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="816" end="822" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1261" end="1266" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1515" end="1525" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1530" end="1537" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1843" end="1850" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q672590" start="2272" end="2281" title="Grotesque (architecture)" label="grotesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749997" start="2295" end="2299" title="Boss (architecture)" label="boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016164" start="2349" end="2359" title="hunky punk" label="hunky punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749997" start="2374" end="2378" title="Boss (architecture)" label="boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q672590" start="2385" end="2393" title="Grotesque (architecture)" label="chimeras"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440790" start="2577" end="2588" title="Romanus of Rouen" label="St. Romanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36424" start="2592" end="2595" title="floruit" label="fl."/>
<link wikidata="Q59488" start="2628" end="2639" title="Merovingian dynasty" label="Merovingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q209118" start="2645" end="2656" title="Chlothar II" label="Chlothar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q569265" start="2670" end="2685" title="bishop of Rouen" label="bishop of Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q722604" start="3502" end="3511" title="reliquary" label="reliquary"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="3567" end="3572" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3645" end="3653" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="3762" end="3775" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q267596" start="3925" end="3937" title="Greek temple" label="Greek temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q837249" start="3966" end="3972" title="marble sculpture" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q60424" start="3976" end="3986" title="terracotta" label="terracotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753617" start="3987" end="3995" title="cymatium" label="cymatium"/>
<link wikidata="Q328092" start="4003" end="4010" title="cornice (architecture)" label="cornice"/>
<link wikidata="Q197019" start="4094" end="4108" title="Temple of Zeus, Olympia" label="Temple of Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272912" start="4356" end="4377" title="Eugène Viollet-le-Duc" label="Eugène Viollet-le-Duc"/>
<link wikidata="Q585947" start="4496" end="4510" title="Laon Cathedral" label="Laon Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981" start="4579" end="4598" title="Notre-Dame de Paris" label="Notre-Dame de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q152833" start="5358" end="5367" title="Rain gutter" label="guttering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="5600" end="5627" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="Parliament of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15292" start="5844" end="5848" title="evil" label="evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="5921" end="5931" title="Apotropaic magic" label="apotropaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="6006" end="6030" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="St. Bernard of Clairvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q181360" start="7493" end="7498" title="harpy" label="harpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122064" start="7502" end="7513" title="cynocephaly" label="cynocephaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q461757" start="7658" end="7670" title="Jacques Cœur" label="Jacques Cœur"/>
<link wikidata="Q132404" start="7674" end="7681" title="Bourges" label="Bourges"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="8303" end="8316" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="8322" end="8328" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="8330" end="8339" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="8345" end="8351" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="9207" end="9224" title="Anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphized"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="9347" end="9357" title="rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q34505" start="9366" end="9378" title="hippopotamus" label="hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q585947" start="9486" end="9500" title="Laon Cathedral" label="Laon Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="9763" end="9769" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q206823" start="12211" end="12226" title="Reims Cathedral" label="Reims Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485777" start="12960" end="12987" title="Langdell Hall" label="Harvard Law School building"/>
<link wikidata="Q336432" start="13098" end="13112" title="Gutzon Borglum" label="Gutzon Borglum"/>
<link wikidata="Q670136" start="13114" end="13128" title="George B. Post" label="George B. Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q973881" start="13739" end="13756" title="John Russell Pope" label="John Russell Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q284829" start="13887" end="13904" title="Vanderbilt family" label="Vanderbilt family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260399" start="13905" end="13921" title="John Taylor Arms" label="John Taylor Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476515" start="14276" end="14299" title="Architectural sculpture" label="Architectural sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q758019" start="14302" end="14308" title="Chiwen" label="Chiwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508508" start="14311" end="14319" title="Rainhead" label="Rainhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q509424" start="14322" end="14335" title="Sheela na gig" label="Sheela na gig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427390" start="14338" end="14383" title="Animal representation in Western medieval art" label="Animal representation in Western medieval art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50475" wikidata="Q233541" url="?curid=50475" title="Lisa Lopes">
<text>Lisa Nicole Lopes (May 27, 1971 – April 25, 2002), also known by her stage name Left Eye, was an American singer and rapper. Lopes was a member of the R&amp;B girl group TLC, alongside Tionne &quot;T-Boz&quot; Watkins and Rozonda &quot;Chilli&quot; Thomas. Besides rapping and singing on TLC recordings, Lopes was the creative force behind the group, receiving more co-writing credits than the other members. She also designed some of their outfits and the stage for their FanMail Tour and contributed to the group&#x27;s image, album titles, artworks, and music videos. Through her work with TLC, Lopes won four Grammy Awards.

During her brief solo career, Lopes “Left Eye” scored two US top 10 singles with &quot;Not Tonight&quot; and &quot;U Know What&#x27;s Up&quot;, as well as one UK number-one single with &quot;Never Be the Same Again&quot;, the latter a collaboration with Melanie C of the English girl group Spice Girls. She also produced another girl group, Blaque, who scored a platinum album and two US top 10 hits. Lopes remains the only member of TLC to have released a solo album.

On April 25, 2002, Lopes was killed in a car accident in Roma, Jutiapa, Honduras, while volunteering at a children&#x27;s development center. Lopes was speeding and lost control of her rental SUV. Four other passengers were injured enough to require hospitalization. The documentary &quot;The Last Days of Left Eye&quot; was released and aired on VH1 in May 2007.

==Early life==
Lisa Nicole Lopes was born on May 27, 1971, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the daughter of Wanda (née Andino), a seamstress, and Ronald Lopes Sr., a US Army staff sergeant. Lisa has a younger brother, Ronald Jr., and a younger sister, Rain (nicknamed Reigndrop). Lopes said her father was &quot;very strict, very domineering&quot; and that he treated the family like they were in &quot;boot camp&quot;. He was also a &quot;talented musician&quot; who played the harmonica, clarinet, piano, and saxophone.

Lopes&#x27; parents separated when she was still in school, and her paternal grandmother raised her during the later years of her childhood. She began playing with a toy piano at five years old, and later composed her own songs. By age 10, Lopes formed the musical trio The Lopes Kids with her siblings, with whom she performed gospel songs at local events and churches. She attended the Philadelphia High School for Girls. In an interview with &quot;The Independent&quot;, Lopes said that at 14 she was moved after hearing the Queen Latifah and Monie Love song &quot;Ladies First&quot;.

==Career==
=== 1990–1999: TLC ===
In late 1990, Lopes moved to Atlanta to dance in an artist&#x27;s music video. TLC originally started as a female trio called &#x27;2nd Nature&#x27;, with T-Boz, Left Eye and Crystal. The group was renamed TLC, derived from the first initials of its members at the time: Tionne Watkins, Lisa Lopes and Crystal Jones. Things did not work out with Jones, and TLC&#x27;s manager Perri &quot;Pebbles&quot; Reid brought in Damian Dame backup dancer Rozonda Thomas as a third member of the group. To preserve the band&#x27;s original name, Thomas needed a name starting with C, which is how she became &quot;Chilli&quot;, a name chosen by Lopes. Watkins became T-Boz, derived from the first letter of her first name and &quot;Boz&quot; (slang for &quot;boss&quot;). Lopes was renamed &quot;Left Eye&quot; after a compliment from her friend, speculated to be New Edition member Michael Bivins, who once told her he was attracted to her because of her left eye, which was more slanted than her right eye. Lopes emphasized her nickname by wearing a pair of glasses with the right lens covered by a condom in keeping with the group&#x27;s support of safe sex, wearing a black stripe under her left eye, and eventually getting her left eyebrow pierced.

The group debuted in 1992 with the album &quot;Ooooooohhh... On the TLC Tip&quot;. With four hit singles, it sold six million copies worldwide, leading to the group becoming a household name. Shortly afterwards, Lopes began dating Atlanta Falcons football player Andre Rison, and the two soon moved in together in Rison&#x27;s upscale double-story home. Their relationship was allegedly filled with violent moments, and Lopes filed an assault charge against Rison on September 2, 1993. Lopes had a battle with alcohol at the time, having started drinking at the age of fifteen. After another fight between the couple, in the early morning hours of June 9, 1994, Lopes tossed numerous pairs of Rison&#x27;s newly purchased sneakers into a bathtub and lit them on fire. The fiberglass bathtub quickly melted and set the structural frame of the house on fire. Lopes and Rison had had a fight previously because she caught Rison in bed with another woman. Lopes had thrown numerous teddy bears Rison had bought her into the tub and lit them on fire. Rison then had the damaged marble tub replaced with a cheaper fiberglass model, which went up in flames immediately when she set the shoes on fire. Lopes was arrested and indicted on charges of first-degree arson; she was sentenced to five years of probation and a $10,000 fine. Rison eventually reconciled with Lopes, and they continued dating on and off for seven years.

Shortly after, &quot;CrazySexyCool&quot; was released, selling over 23 million copies worldwide. However, Lopes&#x27; stint in rehab had led to her only having limited input in the writing and recording of the album. After the release of &quot;CrazySexyCool&quot;, Lopes was a featured artist for the first time on &quot;How Do You Like It?&quot; a song by Keith Sweat in 1994. Later in 1995, Lopes recorded a well-received verse to the rap version of &quot;Freedom&quot; of the soundtrack from the Black Panther-based docudrama &quot;Panther&quot; with fellow female hip-hop artists such as Queen Latifah, MC Lyte, Patra, Yo-Yo, Salt &#x27;n&#x27; Pepa and Meshell Ndegeocello. In 1997, Lopes was featured on the remix to Lil&#x27; Kim&#x27;s &quot;Not Tonight&quot;, alongside Missy Elliott, Angie Martinez and Da Brat. The single earned all artists a nomination for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group at the 1998 Grammy Awards. TLC&#x27;s third album, &quot;FanMail&quot;, was released in 1999 and sold over 14 million copies worldwide. The album&#x27;s title was named by Lopes as a tribute to TLC&#x27;s loyal fans and the sleeve contained the names of hundreds of fans screen names as a &quot;thank you&quot;.

During and after the release of &quot;FanMail&quot;, Lopes made it known to the press on multiple occasions that she felt that she was unable to express herself in TLC fully. Her contributions to songs had been reduced to periodic eight-bar raps, and there were several songs in which she had no vocals. Studio session singers such as Debra Killings often sang background vocals for Chilli. In the May 1999 issue of &quot;Vibe&quot; magazine, Lopes said, &quot;I&#x27;ve graduated from this era. I cannot stand 100 percent behind this TLC project and the music that is supposed to represent me.&quot; In response to Lopes&#x27; comments, Watkins and Thomas stated to &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; that Lopes &quot;doesn&#x27;t respect the whole group&quot; and &quot;Left Eye is only concerned with Left Eye.&quot; In response, Lopes sent a reply through &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; issuing a &quot;challenge&quot; to Watkins and Thomas to release solo albums and let the fans decide the winner of TLC. Not only would it be entertaining, but more importantly, the three albums would fulfill their contractual obligations and end their deal with LaFace Records:

Watkins and Thomas were unconvinced by the strategy behind &#x27;The Challenge&#x27; and declined to take up the offer, though Lopes remained firm in her support for the idea. Things were heated between the band for some time, with Thomas speaking out against Lopes, calling her antics &quot;selfish&quot;, &quot;evil&quot;, and &quot;heartless&quot;. TLC then addressed these struggles by saying that they are very much like sisters who have their disagreements every now and then as Lopes explained, &quot;It&#x27;s deeper than a working relationship. We have feelings for each other, which is why we get so mad at each other. I usually say that you cannot hate someone unless you love them. So, we love each other. That&#x27;s the problem.&quot;

=== 1998–2002: Solo career ===
In 1998, Lopes hosted the short-lived MTV series &quot;The Cut&quot;, in which a list of aspiring pop stars, rappers, and rock bands competed against each other in front of judges. The show&#x27;s winner, which ended up being a male-female rap duo named Silky, was promised a record deal and funding to produce a music video, which would then enter MTV&#x27;s heavy rotation. A then-unknown Anastacia finished in third place, but ended up securing a record deal after Lopes and the show&#x27;s three judges were impressed by her performance.

Lopes created Left Eye Productions to discover new talent. She mentored the R&amp;B trio Blaque, and helped them secure a record deal with Columbia Records. Their self-titled debut album was executive-produced by Lopes, who also made a cameo appearance in their music video &quot;808&quot; and also rapped in their second music video &quot;I Do&quot;. Lopes was also developing and promoting another new band called Egypt. They worked with Lopes on her second album under her new nickname, N.I.N.A., meaning New Identity Not Applicable. She was also featured on Method Mans second album &quot;Judgement Day&quot; on the song &quot;Cradle Rock&quot;.

In 2000, Lopes became a featured rapper on several singles, including Spice Girls Melanie C&#x27;s &quot;Never Be the Same Again&quot;, which topped the charts in 35 countries, including the United Kingdom. She was also featured on &quot;U Know What&#x27;s Up&quot;, the first single from Donell Jones&#x27; second album, &quot;Where I Wanna Be&quot;, and she rapped a verse in &quot;Space Cowboy&quot; with NSYNC on their 2000 album, &quot;No Strings Attached&quot;. On October 4, 2000, Lopes co-hosted the UK&#x27;s MOBO Awards with Trevor Nelson, where she also performed &quot;U Know What&#x27;s Up&quot; with Jones. She also collaborated on &quot;Gimme Some&quot; by Toni Braxton for her 2000 album &quot;The Heat&quot;. She had previously featured on Keith Sweat&#x27;s song &quot;How Do You Like It?&quot;. In 2001, she appeared in a commercial for the fashion brand Gap. In July 2001, Lopes appeared on the singers&#x27; edition of &quot;Who Wants to Be a Millionaire&quot; along with Joey McIntyre, Tyrese, Nick Lachey, and Lee Ann Womack. She dropped the $125,000 question and won $32,000 for her charity. After her death in 2002, the episode she appeared in was shown in dedication to her.

In 2008, Lopes&#x27; family opened UNI Studios, which she had created for the purpose of recording solo projects, to the public. Her brother Ronald is the general manager of the studio. Lopes had a dream of making new artists able to record music at a low cost, in a high-end studio at her house. Her family continues to operate it and fill it with new equipment.

==== &quot;Supernova&quot; ====
Lopes spent much of her free time after the conclusion of TLC&#x27;s first headlining tour, the FanMail Tour, recording her debut solo album, &quot;Supernova&quot;. It includes a song titled &quot;A New Star is Born&quot;, which is dedicated to her late father. She told MTV News:

Other tracks covered other personal issues, including her tumultuous relationship with Rison. Among the album&#x27;s 13 tracks was also a posthumous duet with Tupac Shakur that was assembled from the large cache of unreleased recordings done prior to his murder in 1996. Initially scheduled for release on a date to coincide with the 11th anniversary of her grandfather&#x27;s death, Arista Records decided to delay and then cancel the American release. The album was eventually released in August 2001 in different foreign countries. The Japanese import includes a bonus track called &quot;Friends&quot;, which would later be sampled for &quot;Give It to Me While It&#x27;s Hot&quot; on TLC&#x27;s fourth album &quot;3D&quot;.

==== N.I.N.A. ====
After numerous talks with Death Row Records CEO Suge Knight, Lopes severed her solo deal with Arista (despite remaining signed to the label as a member of TLC) and signed with Knight&#x27;s Death Row Records in January 2002, intending to record a second solo album under the pseudonym &quot;N.I.N.A.&quot; (New Identity Not Applicable). She had discussions about recording with David Bowie for the project, whom she was also trying to get involved with the fourth TLC album. The project was also planned to include collaborations with Ray J along with close friend Missy Elliott. After Lopes&#x27; death in April 2002, Death Row Records still had plans to complete and release the album (unfinished at the time of Lopes&#x27; death) in October 2002, but the album was cancelled for unknown reasons. Several tracks from the album were leaked online featuring artists from Tha Row Records. Lopes&#x27;s unreleased songs were also sampled by TLC for their fourth album &quot;3D&quot; after she died. Another track, &quot;Too Street 4 T.V&quot; (featuring Danny Boy), was released on the soundtrack to the 2003 film &quot;Dysfunktional Family&quot;.

=== 2008–2012: &quot;Eye Legacy&quot; ===
In 2008, Lopes&#x27; family decided to work with producers at Surefire Music Group to create a posthumous album in her honor, &quot;Eye Legacy&quot;. Originally set to be released October 28, 2008, the release date was pushed back to November 11, then to January 27, 2009. The song &#x27;Neva Will Eye Eva&#x27; and &quot;Crank It&quot;, both feature and were co-produced by Lopes&#x27; sister Raina &quot;Reigndrop&quot; Lopes. The first official single from the album, &quot;Let&#x27;s Just Do It&quot;, was released on January 13, 2009, and features Missy Elliott and TLC. The second official single, &quot;Block Party&quot;, features Lil Mama. The album largely consists of reworked versions of tracks from the &quot;Supernova&quot; album. In November 2009, &quot;Forever... The EP&quot; was released which contained international bonus tracks not used on the &quot;Eye Legacy&quot; album. The EP was only available to download.

In 2012, on the eve of the tenth anniversary of her death, &quot;Fantasies&quot;, an unreleased track by Bootleg featuring Lopes, was uploaded to SoundCloud.

== Personal life ==
Lopes was often vocal about her personal life and difficult past. She came from an abusive, alcoholic background and struggled with alcoholism herself. These issues became headline news in 1994, when she was arrested for setting fire to Andre Rison&#x27;s sneakers in a bathtub; the fire ultimately spread to the mansion they shared and destroyed it. She claimed that Rison had beaten her after a night out, and she set fire to his shoes to get back at him, but burning down the house was an accident. Lopes later revealed that she did not have a lot of freedom within the relationship and that Rison abused her emotionally and physically; she said that she released her frustrations about the relationship on the night of the fire.

Lopes was sentenced to five years&#x27; probation and therapy at a halfway house, and was unable to shake the incident from her reputation. Lopes revealed in &quot;The Last Days of Left Eye&quot; that her meeting with a struggling mother in rehab left a big impression on her. She subsequently adopted the woman&#x27;s 8-year-old daughter. She had adopted a 12-year-old boy ten years prior.

Lopes had several tattoos. Most prominent was a large eagle on her left arm, which she said represented freedom. Later, she added the number &quot;80&quot; around the eagle, which was Rison&#x27;s NFL number while in Atlanta. She also had a tattoo of a moon with a face on her foot in reference to Rison&#x27;s nickname, &quot;Bad Moon.&quot; On her upper right arm was a large tattoo of the name &quot;Parron&quot; for her late stepbrother who died in a boating accident, arching over a large tattoo of a pierced heart. Her smallest tattoo was on her left earlobe and consisted of an arrow pointing to her left over the symbol of an eye, a reference to her nickname. Lopes struggled with self-harm and even carved the words &quot;hate&quot; and &quot;love&quot; into her arm with a razor.

In September 2000, Lopes was reported missing after failing to attend a family gathering and a major press conference in Las Vegas.

Roughly two weeks before her own death, Lopes was a passenger in a traffic accident that resulted in the death of a 10-year-old Honduran boy. As reported in &quot;Philadelphia Weekly&quot;, &quot;It is commonplace for people to walk the roads that wind through Honduras, and it&#x27;s often difficult to see pedestrians.&quot; The boy, Bayron Isaul Fuentes Lopez, was following behind his brothers and sisters when he stepped off the median strip and was struck by a van driven by Stephanie, Lopes&#x27; personal assistant. Lopes&#x27; party stopped and loaded the boy into the car, and Lopes &quot;cradled the dying boy&#x27;s bleeding head in her arms&quot; while &quot;someone gave him mouth-to-mouth resuscitation as they rushed him to a nearby hospital.&quot; He died the next day. Lopes paid approximately $3,700 for his medical expenses and funeral, and she gave the family around $925 for any extra costs, although it was apparently agreed upon by the authorities and the boy&#x27;s family that his death was an &quot;unforeseeable tragedy&quot; and no blame was placed on the driver of the van or Lopes. In the documentary &quot;The Last Days of Left Eye&quot;, Lopes is shown choosing a casket for the child from a local funeral home. Earlier in the documentary, Lopes mentioned that she felt the presence of a &quot;spirit&quot; following her, and was struck by the fact that the child killed in the accident shared a similar last name, even thinking that the spirit may have made a mistake by taking his life instead of hers.

== Death and funeral ==

On April 25, 2002, Lopes was driving a rented Mitsubishi Montero SUV in La Ceiba, Honduras, when she swerved to avoid a truck then sharply to the left as she tried to avoid an oncoming car. The vehicle rolled several times after hitting two trees, 
throwing Lopes and three others out of the windows, and finally coming to rest in a ditch at the side of the road. She died instantly of &quot;fracture of the base of the cranium&quot; and &quot;open cerebral trauma&quot;, and was the only person fatally injured in the crash. She was not wearing a seat belt. The collision was recorded on video from inside the vehicle because a documentary film was in progress.

Lopes&#x27; funeral was held at New Birth Missionary Baptist Church in Lithonia, Georgia, on May 2, 2002. Thousands of people attended. Engraved upon her casket were the lyrics to her portion of &quot;Waterfalls&quot;, stating &quot;Dreams are hopeless aspirations, in hopes of coming true, believe in yourself, the rest is up to me and you.&quot; Gospel duo Mary Mary sang their song &quot;Shackles (Praise You)&quot; at the funeral. Lopes was buried at Hillandale Memorial Gardens in Lithonia.

== Legacy ==
In a statement to MTV, music producer Jermaine Dupri remembered Lopes: &quot;She was determined to be something in life. She was a true rock star. She didn&#x27;t care about no press. She was the rock star out of the group. She was the one that would curse on TV. She had the tattoos. You could expect the unexpected. When you see Lisa, you could expect something from her. That&#x27;s the gift she carried.&quot;

Lopes was in the process of setting up two educational centers for Honduran children. One was built on an 80-acre plot of land she called Camp YAC. The other center was called Creative Castle.

In 2003, shortly after Lopes&#x27; death, her family started the Lisa Lopes Foundation, a charitable group dedicated to providing neglected and abandoned youth with the resources necessary to increase their quality of life. Her spiritual motto was the one used for her foundation: &quot;Energy never dies... it just transforms.&quot; Her foundation went into various underdeveloped villages and gave new clothes to poor children and their families. In August 2007, the foundation hosted a charity auction, selling items donated by celebrities. It raised approximately $5,000 for the Hogar de Amor (&quot;Home of Love&quot;), an orphanage in Honduras. In 2012, the foundation began hosting an annual music festival, known as &quot;Left Eye Music Fest&quot;, in Decatur, Georgia.
In the 2018 Boots Riley film &quot;Sorry to Bother You&quot;, members of a fictional activist group called &quot;Left Eye&quot; use as their symbol a stripe of eye black under the left eye, in an unmentioned reference to Lopes.

=== Posthumous documentary ===
A documentary showing the final 27 days of Lopes&#x27; life, titled &quot;The Last Days of Left Eye&quot;, premiered at the Atlanta Film Festival in April 2007, for an audience that included many of Lopes&#x27; contemporaries, including Monica, Ronnie DeVoe, 112, Big Boi, India.Arie, and Cee Lo Green. VH1 and VH1 Soul broadcast the documentary on May 19, 2007. Most of the footage was shot with a handheld camera, often in the form of diary entries filmed by Lopes while on a 30-day spiritual retreat in Honduras with sister Reigndrop, brother Ronald and members of the R&amp;B group Egypt. In these entries, she reflected on her personal life and career. A calmer side of her personality was on display, showing interests in numerology and yoga. In January 2020, Lifetime aired an episode of &quot;Hopelessly In Love&quot;, a docuseries that captures the relationships of the rich and famous, about Lopes and Rison&#x27;s tumultuous relationship. It showcased the complexity of their relationship and how she ended up with a felony arson charge for burning down Rison&#x27;s Atlanta mansion.

==Discography==

=== Studio albums ===
* &quot;Supernova&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Eye Legacy&quot; (2009)

== Filmography ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* Lisa Lopes Foundation 
* Lisa &quot;Left Eye&quot; Lopes on Grammy Awards</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233541" start="0" end="17" title="Lisa Lopes" label="Lisa Nicole Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q233541" start="80" end="88" title="Lisa Lopes" label="Left Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="151" end="158" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q742804" start="170" end="173" title="TLC (group)" label="TLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q273981" start="185" end="217" title="Tionne Watkins" label="Tionne &amp;quot;T-Boz&amp;quot; Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q438366" start="222" end="255" title="Rozonda Thomas" label="Rozonda &amp;quot;Chilli&amp;quot; Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433514" start="473" end="485" title="FanMail Tour" label="FanMail Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="613" end="625" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062217" start="716" end="727" title="Not Tonight (song)" label="Not Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876216" start="744" end="765" title="U Know What&amp;#x27;s Up" label="U Know What&amp;#x27;s Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q373899" start="791" end="808" title="Chart-topper" label="number-one single"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579091" start="820" end="843" title="Never Be the Same Again" label="Never Be the Same Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q151830" start="883" end="892" title="Melanie C" label="Melanie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="919" end="930" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q374593" start="970" end="976" title="Blaque" label="Blaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="991" end="1005" title="platinum album" label="platinum album"/>
<link wikidata="Q775897" start="1162" end="1169" title="Jutiapa, Atlántida" label="Jutiapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745677" start="1388" end="1413" title="The Last Days of Left Eye" label="The Last Days of Left Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="1446" end="1449" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1526" end="1538" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="1577" end="1580" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034021" start="1592" end="1602" title="seamstress" label="seamstress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1628" end="1635" title="United States Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q281643" start="2242" end="2254" title="musical trio" label="musical trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="2313" end="2325" title="gospel songs" label="gospel songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182715" start="2373" end="2407" title="Philadelphia High School for Girls" label="Philadelphia High School for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="2436" end="2451" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112005" start="2513" end="2526" title="Queen Latifah" label="Queen Latifah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34084" start="2531" end="2541" title="Monie Love" label="Monie Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q273981" start="2879" end="2893" title="Tionne Watkins" label="Tionne Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6363428" start="2984" end="3014" title="Perri &amp;quot;Pebbles&amp;quot; Reid" label="Perri &amp;quot;Pebbles&amp;quot; Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212239" start="3026" end="3037" title="Damian Dame" label="Damian Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q438366" start="3052" end="3066" title="Rozonda Thomas" label="Rozonda Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370588" start="3460" end="3471" title="New Edition" label="New Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958243" start="3479" end="3493" title="Michael Bivins" label="Michael Bivins"/>
<link wikidata="Q318529" start="3748" end="3756" title="safe sex" label="safe sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060904" start="3898" end="3926" title="Ooooooohhh... On the TLC Tip" label="Ooooooohhh... On the TLC Tip"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="4082" end="4097" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754863" start="4114" end="4125" title="Andre Rison" label="Andre Rison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="4623" end="4633" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q869575" start="5292" end="5305" title="CrazySexyCool" label="CrazySexyCool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917619" start="5592" end="5611" title="How Do You Like It?" label="How Do You Like It?"/>
<link wikidata="Q946728" start="5628" end="5639" title="Keith Sweat" label="Keith Sweat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500464" start="5729" end="5736" title="Freedom (Theme from Panther)" label="Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172444" start="5750" end="5760" title="Panther (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="5770" end="5783" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172444" start="5806" end="5813" title="Panther (film)" label="Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112005" start="5863" end="5876" title="Queen Latifah" label="Queen Latifah"/>
<link wikidata="Q455292" start="5878" end="5885" title="MC Lyte" label="MC Lyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260588" start="5887" end="5892" title="Patra (singer)" label="Patra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413399" start="5894" end="5899" title="Yo-Yo (rapper)" label="Yo-Yo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545961" start="5901" end="5924" title="Salt &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Pepa" label="Salt &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Pepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q72720" start="5929" end="5948" title="Meshell Ndegeocello" label="Meshell Ndegeocello"/>
<link wikidata="Q229379" start="5994" end="6007" title="Lil&amp;#x27; Kim" label="Lil&amp;#x27; Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062217" start="6021" end="6032" title="Not Tonight (song)" label="Not Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="6050" end="6063" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q438271" start="6065" end="6079" title="Angie Martinez" label="Angie Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q449634" start="6084" end="6091" title="Da Brat" label="Da Brat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809486" start="6140" end="6178" title="Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group" label="Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542315" start="6186" end="6204" title="1998 Grammy Awards" label="1998 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q432240" start="6236" end="6243" title="FanMail" label="FanMail"/>
<link wikidata="Q233861" start="6729" end="6732" title="Musical notation" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248482" start="6827" end="6841" title="Debra Killings" label="Debra Killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q266786" start="6914" end="6918" title="Vibe (magazine)" label="Vibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q275033" start="7165" end="7185" title="Entertainment Weekly" label="Entertainment Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728513" start="8498" end="8505" title="The Cut (1997–99 U.S. TV series)" label="The Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="8792" end="8795" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246718" start="8803" end="8817" title="heavy rotation" label="heavy rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34584" start="8834" end="8843" title="Anastacia" label="Anastacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754168" start="8893" end="8904" title="Recording contract" label="record deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q374593" start="9075" end="9081" title="Blaque" label="Blaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="9125" end="9141" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925238" start="9149" end="9172" title="Blaque (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644397" start="9266" end="9269" title="808 (Blaque song)" label="808"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976820" start="9326" end="9330" title="I Do (Blaque song)" label="I Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="9707" end="9718" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q151830" start="9719" end="9728" title="Melanie C" label="Melanie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579091" start="9742" end="9765" title="Never Be the Same Again" label="Never Be the Same Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876216" start="9875" end="9896" title="U Know What&amp;#x27;s Up" label="U Know What&amp;#x27;s Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241173" start="9926" end="9938" title="Donell Jones" label="Donell Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993286" start="9965" end="9981" title="Where I Wanna Be (Donell Jones album)" label="Where I Wanna Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403940" start="10021" end="10033" title="No Strings Attached (NSYNC album)" label="Space Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154454" start="10045" end="10050" title="NSYNC" label="NSYNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403940" start="10078" end="10097" title="No Strings Attached (NSYNC album)" label="No Strings Attached"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670259" start="10155" end="10166" title="MOBO Awards" label="MOBO Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q14031868" start="10172" end="10185" title="Trevor Nelson" label="Trevor Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q155412" start="10309" end="10321" title="Toni Braxton" label="Toni Braxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q302771" start="10347" end="10355" title="The Heat (Toni Braxton album)" label="The Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q946728" start="10394" end="10405" title="Keith Sweat" label="Keith Sweat"/>
<link wikidata="Q420822" start="10511" end="10514" title="Gap Inc." label="Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795474" start="10583" end="10612" title="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire (U.S. game show)" label="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q740877" start="10630" end="10643" title="Joey McIntyre" label="Joey McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q311232" start="10645" end="10651" title="Tyrese Gibson" label="Tyrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q356109" start="10653" end="10664" title="Nick Lachey" label="Nick Lachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q454082" start="10670" end="10684" title="Lee Ann Womack" label="Lee Ann Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433514" start="11332" end="11344" title="FanMail Tour" label="FanMail Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644064" start="11384" end="11393" title="Supernova (Lisa Lopes album)" label="Supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107" start="11677" end="11689" title="Tupac Shakur" label="Tupac Shakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q664167" start="11902" end="11916" title="Arista Records" label="Arista Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q685692" start="12236" end="12238" title="3D (TLC album)" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q847018" start="12292" end="12309" title="Death Row Records" label="Death Row Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q455880" start="12314" end="12325" title="Suge Knight" label="Suge Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="12644" end="12655" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q542267" start="12801" end="12806" title="Ray J" label="Ray J"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="12831" end="12844" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q685692" start="13238" end="13240" title="3D (TLC album)" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q8353742" start="13318" end="13327" title="Danny Boy (singer)" label="Danny Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319412" start="13350" end="13360" title="Dysfunktional Family (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319411" start="13384" end="13404" title="Dysfunktional Family" label="Dysfunktional Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645791" start="13550" end="13560" title="List of works published posthumously" label="posthumous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422631" start="13587" end="13597" title="Eye Legacy" label="Eye Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422631" start="13777" end="13785" title="Crank It" label="Crank It"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532462" start="13932" end="13953" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Just Do It" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Just Do It"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="14008" end="14021" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q742804" start="14026" end="14029" title="TLC (group)" label="TLC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14065" end="14076" title="The Block Party (Lisa Lopes song)#2009 version" label="Block Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q232085" start="14093" end="14101" title="Lil Mama" label="Lil Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469330" start="14223" end="14240" title="Forever... The EP" label="Forever... The EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q568769" start="14535" end="14545" title="SoundCloud" label="SoundCloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754863" start="14805" end="14816" title="Andre Rison" label="Andre Rison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565622" start="15369" end="15382" title="halfway house" label="halfway house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745677" start="15466" end="15491" title="The Last Days of Left Eye" label="The Last Days of Left Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="15891" end="15894" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="16606" end="16615" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182847" start="16781" end="16800" title="Philadelphia Weekly" label="Philadelphia Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807837" start="17307" end="17335" title="mouth-to-mouth resuscitation" label="mouth-to-mouth resuscitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q374755" start="18228" end="18246" title="Mitsubishi Montero" label="Mitsubishi Montero"/>
<link wikidata="Q916536" start="18254" end="18262" title="La Ceiba" label="La Ceiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="18264" end="18272" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745677" start="18811" end="18827" title="The Last Days of Left Eye" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012224" start="18878" end="18913" title="New Birth Missionary Baptist Church" label="New Birth Missionary Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409037" start="18917" end="18934" title="Lithonia, Georgia" label="Lithonia, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121052" start="19047" end="19057" title="Waterfalls (TLC song)" label="Waterfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906374" start="19205" end="19214" title="Mary Mary" label="Mary Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958929" start="19237" end="19258" title="Shackles (Praise You)" label="Shackles (Praise You)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="19374" end="19377" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q349434" start="19394" end="19408" title="Jermaine Dupri" label="Jermaine Dupri"/>
<link wikidata="Q986200" start="20725" end="20741" title="Decatur, Georgia" label="Decatur, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944043" start="20755" end="20766" title="Boots Riley" label="Boots Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q32067450" start="20778" end="20797" title="Sorry to Bother You" label="Sorry to Bother You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153988" start="20903" end="20912" title="eye black" label="eye black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745677" start="21077" end="21102" title="The Last Days of Left Eye" label="The Last Days of Left Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816069" start="21127" end="21148" title="Atlanta Film Festival" label="Atlanta Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q231487" start="21240" end="21246" title="Monica (singer)" label="Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365846" start="21248" end="21260" title="Ronnie DeVoe" label="Ronnie DeVoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170487" start="21262" end="21265" title="112 (band)" label="112"/>
<link wikidata="Q371202" start="21267" end="21274" title="Big Boi" label="Big Boi"/>
<link wikidata="Q258750" start="21276" end="21286" title="India.Arie" label="India.Arie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042" start="21292" end="21304" title="Cee Lo Green" label="Cee Lo Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="21306" end="21309" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906939" start="21314" end="21322" title="BET Soul" label="VH1 Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="21731" end="21741" title="numerology" label="numerology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="21746" end="21750" title="yoga" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="21769" end="21777" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644064" start="22146" end="22155" title="Supernova (Lisa Lopes album)" label="Supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422631" start="22177" end="22187" title="Eye Legacy" label="Eye Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="22321" end="22333" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50477" wikidata="Q715625" url="?curid=50477" title="Martial law">
<text>Martial law is the replacement of civilian government by military rule and the suspension of civilian legal processes for military powers. Martial law can continue for a specified amount of time, or indefinitely, and standard civil liberties may be suspended for as long as martial law continues. Most often, martial law is declared in times of war or emergencies such as civil unrest and natural disasters. Alternatively, martial law may be declared in instances of military coups d&#x27;état.

== Overview ==
Despite the fact that it has been declared frequently throughout history, martial law is still often described as largely elusive as a legal entity. References to martial law date back to 1628 England, when Sir Matthew Hale described martial law as, &quot;no Law, but something indulged rather than allowed as a Law.&quot; Despite being centuries old, this quote remains true in many countries around the world today. Most often, the implementation of martial law arises from necessity rather than legal right, and while some countries have provisions explicitly permitting the use of martial law, many do not. For countries that do not explicitly permit the declaration of martial law, but where martial law has been declared, the legal justification for it is often the common law doctrine of necessity, or some variation of it.

=== Common law doctrine of necessity and martial law ===
One legal theory most frequently associated with martial law is the common law doctrine of necessity. While many countries, the United States for example, do not have the explicit constitutional right to declare martial law, scholars often interpret the law of the United States to allow for the implementation of martial law in times of necessity. Countries such as Pakistan have famously implemented this rationale as well.

==Use==
Martial law can be used by governments to enforce their rule over the public, as seen in multiple countries listed below. Such incidents may occur after a coup d&#x27;état (Thailand in 2006 and 2014, and Egypt in 2013); when threatened by popular protest (China, Tiananmen Square protests of 1989); to suppress political opposition (martial law in Poland in 1981); or to stabilize insurrections or perceived insurrections. Martial law may be declared in cases of major natural disasters; however, most countries use a different legal construct, such as a state of emergency.

Martial law has also been imposed during conflicts, and in cases of occupations, where the absence of any other civil government provides for an unstable population. Examples of this form of military rule include post World War II reconstruction in Germany and Japan, the recovery and reconstruction of the former Confederate States of America during Reconstruction Era in the United States of America following the American Civil War, and German occupation of northern France between 1871 and 1873 after the Treaty of Frankfurt ended the Franco-Prussian War.

Typically, the imposition of martial law accompanies curfews; the suspension of civil law, civil rights, and habeas corpus; and the application or extension of military law or military justice to civilians. Civilians defying martial law may be subjected to military tribunal (court-martial).

==By country==
===Armenia===
During the 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war, Armenian prime minister Nikol Pashinyan declared martial law.

===Australia===
The Black War was a period of violent conflict between British colonists and Aboriginal Australians in Tasmania from the mid-1820s to 1832. With an escalation of violence in the late 1820s, Lieutenant-Governor George Arthur declared martial law in November 1828—effectively providing legal immunity for killing Aboriginal people. It would remain in force for more than three years, the longest period of martial law in the history of the British colonies on the Australian continent. , martial law has never been declared since federation in 1901.

=== Azerbaijan ===
During the 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war, Azerbaijani president Ilham Aliyev declared martial law.

=== Bahrain ===
In 2011, King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa declared martial law during an anti-government uprising, granting authority to the police and military to crack down on protesters. It was lifted on 1 June amid a continuing crackdown on the uprising.

===Brunei===
Brunei has been under martial law since a rebellion occurred on 8 December 1962 and was put down by British troops from Singapore. The Sultan of Brunei, Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu&#x27;izzaddin Waddaulah, is presently the head of state and also the Minister of Defense and Commander in Chief of Royal Brunei Armed Forces.

===Bangladesh===
Bangladesh was under martial law several times, in the late 70s after Mujib was assassinated, Martial Law was declared temporarily under Chief Martial Law administrators including Ziaur Rahman and Hussain Muhammad Ershad declared Martial Law in the early 80s.

===Canada===
The &quot;War Measures Act&quot; was a Parliament of Canada statute that allowed the government to assume sweeping emergency powers, stopping short of martial law, i.e., the military did not administer justice, which remained in the hands of the courts. The act was invoked three times: During World War I, World War II, and the October Crisis of 1970. In 1988, the &quot;War Measures Act&quot; was replaced by the &quot;Emergencies Act&quot;, which saw its first invocation in February 2022 amidst the Freedom Convoy protests.

During the colonial era, martial law was proclaimed and applied in the territory of the Province of Quebec during the invasion of Canada by the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War in 1775–1776. It was also applied twice in the Province of Lower Canada during the 1837–1838 insurrections. On December 5, following the events of November 1837, martial law was proclaimed in the district of Montreal by Governor Gosford, without the support of the Legislative Assembly of Lower Canada. It was imposed until April 27, 1838. Martial law was proclaimed a second time on November 4, 1838, this time by acting Governor John Colborne, and was applied in the district of Montreal until August 24, 1839.

===China===

In China, martial law in the Beiyang government could be dated back to the final year of the Qing dynasty. The outline of a 1908 draft constitution—modeled on Japan&#x27;s Meiji Constitution—included provisions for martial law. The Provisional Government of the Republic of China promulgated the Provisional Constitution in March 1911, which authorized the President to declare martial law in times of emergency. The &quot;Martial Law Declaration Act&quot; were issued by the Nationalist Government later in 1920s and amended in 1940s. Following World War II, the island of Taiwan came back to China&#x27;s control given the impending withdrawal of Japanese forces and colonial government. Martial law was declared first in 1947 in Taiwan Province after the February 28 incident, then again in 1949 as the Chinese Civil War was also raging across the country despite the democracy promised in the Constitution of the Republic of China (the central government refused to implement the constitution on Taiwan until after 1949).

After the Nationalist-led central government of China lost control of the mainland to the Chinese Communist Party and retreated to Taiwan in 1949, the perceived need to suppress Communist activities in Taiwan was utilised as a rationale for not lifting martial law until thirty-eight years later in 1987, just prior to the death of then President Chiang Ching-kuo. Taiwan&#x27;s period of martial law was one of the longest in modern history, after that of Syria (1967–2011).

Martial law was imposed in Beijing in 1989 following the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 by the Communist-ruled government on mainland China.

===Egypt===

In Egypt, states of emergency were in effect almost continuously from 1967 to 2021. A state of emergency gives military courts the power to try civilians and allows the government to detain for renewable 45-day periods and without court orders anyone deemed to be threatening state security. Public demonstrations are banned under the legislation.

During Hosni Mubarak&#x27;s presidency, parliament had renewed emergency laws every three years since they were imposed. The legislation was extended in 2003 and were due to expire at the end of May 2006; plans were in place to replace it with new anti-terrorism laws. After the Dahab bombings in April of that year, it was renewed for another two years. In May 2008 there was a further extension to June 2010. In May 2010, the state of emergency was further extended, albeit with a promise from the government to be applied only to &#x27;Terrorism and Drugs&#x27; suspects. On 10 February 2011, during the uprising against his rule, Mubarak promised the deletion of the relevant constitutional article regarding the emergency law in an attempt to please the mass number of protesters that demanded him to resign. The following day, he stepped down and handed control of the country to the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces. It meant that the presidential executive powers, the parliamentary legislative powers and the judicial powers all transferred directly to the military system which may delegate powers back and forth to any civilian institution within its territory.

The military issued in its third announcement the &quot;end of the State of Emergency as soon as order is restored in Egypt&quot;. Before martial law, the Egyptian parliament under the constitution had the civilian power to declare a state of emergency. When in martial law, the military gained all powers of the state, including to dissolve the parliament and suspend the constitution as it did in its fifth announcement. Under martial law, the only legal framework within the Egyptian territory was the numbered announcements from the military. These announcements could for instance order any civilian laws to come back into force. The military announcements (communiqués) were the &quot;de facto&quot; only constitution and legal framework for the Egyptian territory. It meant that all affairs of the state were bound by the Geneva Conventions.

Under the current president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, a series of constitutional amendments passed in 2019 granted the military authority to intervene in national politics to &quot;preserve the constitution and democracy, protect the basic principles of the state and its civil nature, and protect the people&#x27;s rights and freedoms&quot;. The armed forces were separately granted policing responsibilities to arrest civilians and &quot;protect public and vital facilities&quot;.

=== Finland ===
The Preparedness Act (SDK 1552/2011, ) is a law in Finnish legislation, enacted in accordance with the constitutional procedure. The purpose of the Act is to give the authorities sufficient powers in times of war and other exceptional circumstances. During a state of defence (war), there is also the Defence Status Act, the provisions of which override the Preparedness Act. Together, the two laws form the Emergency Preparedness Act. The current Emergency Preparedness Act and its predecessor of the same name (1080/1991) were designed to replace the emergency provisions previously scattered over several different acts.

===Iceland===
The Icelandic constitution provides no mechanism for the declaration of war, martial law nor state of emergency.

=== India ===
The sole mention of Martial Law in the Indian constitution is in Article 34 which gives Parliament the power to indemnify persons in respect of acts done in territories where martial law was in force and to legitimize such actions. But in the text itself, there is no mention of any grants of power to declare martial law. The Supreme Court of India in Puttaswamy v. Union of India declared that certain rights of life and liberty are natural rights, which cannot be curbed by the state, but also upheld the inherent right of issuing writs by courts. As the power of martial law is given through an enabling act of the Parliament, it is inherently subject to the above decision. 
During the British Raj, martial law was effectively declared in the Defense of India Act, 1915 and the Defense of India Act, 1939. It was also declared in most of the Punjab during 1919 as a response to tensions caused by the Amritsar Massacre. These tensions were caused due to the controversial Rowlatt Act.

===Indonesia===
On 18 May 2003, during a military activity in Aceh, under the order of the president, Indonesian Army Chief imposed martial law for a period of six months to eliminate Acehnese separatists.

===Iran===
On 7 September 1978, in response to public demonstrations protesting the perceived government involvement in the death of the son of Ayatollah Khomeini, Mostafa Khomeini, Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi appointed Chief of Army Staff General Gholam Ali Oveisi as the military governor of the capital city of Tehran. On 8 September, the government effectively declared martial law on the capital along with several other cities throughout the country, after which further protests erupted that lead to the army opening fire on a group of protesters in Tehran&#x27;s Jaleh Square on the same day. Estimates on the number of casualties vary; However, according to Iranian human rights activist Emadeddin Baghi, the number of people killed was 88 of which 64 were gunned down in Jaleh Square. The day is often referred to as Black Friday. Unable to control the unrest, the Shah dissolved the civil government headed by Prime Minister Jafar Sharif-Emami on 6 November and appointed General Gholam Reza Azhari as the prime minister whom ultimately failed in his efforts to restore order to the country. As he was preparing to leave the country, the Shah dissolved the military government and appointed Shapour Bakhtiar, a reformist critic of his rule, as the new prime minister on 4 January 1979. Bakhtiar&#x27;s government fell on 11 February and gave rise to the Islamic Republic and the creation of a new constitution.

Article 79 of the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran forbids the proclamation of martial law without the approval of the Islamic Consultative Assembly.

===Ireland===
In 1916, during the Easter Rising, Lord Wimborne the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, declared martial law to maintain order in the streets of Dublin. This was later extended both in duration and geographical reach to the whole of the country with the consent of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland government. Much of Ireland was declared under martial law by the British authorities during the Irish War of Independence. A large portion of Ireland was also under de facto martial law during the Irish Civil War.

In late July 1921 Lord Cave (House of Lords) ruled on an appeal that:&quot;...the military court, the validity of whose sentence was called into question, was a body possessing no statutory or common law authority...&quot;. The Court of Chancery (Ireland) also ruled that the Restoration of Order in Ireland Act 1920 had superseded the power to declare martial law. Any sentences by military tribunals that were not in accordance with that Act were declared void.

The current Irish Constitution allows for martial law if the government declares a state of emergency; however capital punishment is prohibited in all circumstances, including a state of emergency.

===Israel===
Military administrative government was in effect from 1949 to 1966 over some geographical areas of Israel having large Arab populations, primarily the Negev, Galilee, and the Triangle. The residents of these areas were subject to martial law. The Israel Defense Forces enforced strict residency rules. Any Arab not registered in a census taken during November 1948 was deported. Permits from the military governor had to be procured to travel more than a given distance from a person&#x27;s registered place of residence, and curfew, administrative detentions, and expulsions were common. Although the military administration was officially for geographical areas, and not people, its restrictions were seldom enforced on the Jewish residents of these areas. In the early 1950s, martial law ceased to be in effect for those Arab citizens living in predominantly Jewish cities of Jaffa, Ramla, and Lod, constituting a total of approximately 15% of the Arab population of Israel. But military rule remained in place on the remaining Arab population elsewhere within Israel until 1966.

This period is remembered for its extreme crackdown on political rights, as well as unaccountable military brutality. Most political and civil organization was prohibited. Flying of Palestinian flag, as well as other expressions of Palestinian patriotism were prohibited. Furthermore, despite theoretical guarantee of full political rights, military government personnel frequently made threats against Arabs citizens if they did not vote in elections for the candidates favored by the authorities. Perhaps the most commemorated incidence of military brutality in this time period was the Kafr Qasim massacre in 1956, in which the Israel Border Police killed 48 people (19 men, 6 women and 23 children aged 8–17) as they were returning home from work in the evening. The Israeli army had ordered that all Arab villages in the proximity of the Green Line be placed under curfew. However, this order came into effect before the residents of these localities, including residents of Kafr Qasim, were notified.

Following the 1967 war, in which the Israeli army occupied the West Bank, Gaza Strip, the Golan Heights in Syria, and the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt, martial law over the Palestinian population as well as the Jordanian, Syrian, and Egyptian populations in these areas was put in place. In 1993, the Oslo I agreements facilitated limited self-rule for Palestinians under the Palestinian National Authority. Officially, only parts of Area C in the West Bank are under martial law.

During the 2006 Lebanon war, martial law was declared by Defense Minister Amir Peretz over the north of the country. The Israel Defense Forces were granted the authority to issue instructions to civilians, and to close down offices, schools, camps and factories in cities considered under threat of attack, as well as to impose curfews on cities in the north.

Instructions of the Home Front Command are obligatory under martial law, rather than merely recommended. The order signed by Peretz was in effect for 48 hours and was extended by the Cabinet and the Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee over the war&#x27;s duration.

===Mauritius===
Mauritius is known as being a &quot;Westminster&quot; style of democracy but a peculiar system that was imposed in Mauritius during a period of civil unrest in 1968 as an emergency measure, has never been repealed and is still used by the police force there to this day. The system, which has no apparent foundation in the constitution of Mauritius, enables the police to arrest without having to demonstrate reasonable suspicion that a crime has been carried out but simply on the submission of &quot;provisional information&quot; to the magistrate. The accused is then placed on remand or bail and required to report to the police or the court on a regular basis, sometimes every day. There are examples of this system being used to intimidate or coerce individuals in civil litigations.

=== Myanmar ===
On 1 February 2021, democratically elected members of Myanmar, known as the National League for Democracy, were overthrown by Myanmar&#x27;s military, called the Tatmadaw. This military placed their power in a military junta. Five days following the coup, factory workers around Yangon (a region in Myanmar) held protests against the coup regime. On 14 March, security forces killed upwards of sixty-five protestors in the town of Hlaingtharyar. As a result, the military junta declared martial law over the region of Yangon, including over the majority of industrial zones. As of 22 February 2023, Myanmar&#x27;s military junta has declared martial law over a total of 50 townships in the regions of Chin, Kachin, Karen, Karenni, Mon States, Yangon and Mandalay. News reports indicate that since the military coup in February 2021, and the subsequent declaration of martial law in Myanmar regions, military tribunals have sentenced more than 100 people to death. Reports further indicate that a total of three townships in Myanmar&#x27;s northwest reside under the &quot;executive and judicial jurisdiction of regional military commander Maj. Gen. Than Htike,&quot; who has since been sanctioned by the European Union for alleged human rights violations since Myanmar&#x27;s declaration of martial law.

===Pakistan===
Martial law was declared in Pakistan on 7 October 1958, by President Iskander Mirza who then appointed General Muhammad Ayub Khan as the Chief Martial Law Administrator and Aziz Ahmad as Secretary General and Deputy Chief Martial Law Administrator. However, three weeks later General Ayub—who had been openly questioning the authority of the government before the imposition of martial law—deposed Iskandar Mirza on 27 October 1958 and assumed the presidency that practically formalized the militarization of the political system in Pakistan. Four years later a new document, Constitution of 1962, was adopted. The second martial law was imposed on 25 March 1969 by Yahya Khan, when President Yahya Khan abrogated the Constitution of 1962 and Ayub Khan handed over power to the Army Commander-in-Chief, General Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan. On assuming the presidency, General Yahya Khan acceded to popular demands by abolishing the one-unit system in West Pakistan and ordered general elections on the principle of one man one vote.

The civilian martial law was imposed by Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, the first civilian to hold this post in Pakistan after the Bangladesh Liberation War. On 21 December 1971, Bhutto took this post as well as that of President. It was the first civilian martial law.

The third was imposed by the General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq on 5 July 1977. After several tumultuous years, which witnessed the secession of East Pakistan to form Bangladesh, politician Zulfikar Ali Bhutto took over in 1971 as the first civilian martial law administrator in recent history, imposing selective martial law in areas hostile to his rule, such as the country&#x27;s largest province, Balochistan. Following widespread civil disorder, General Zia overthrew Bhutto and imposed martial law in its totality on 5 July 1977, in a bloodless coup d&#x27;état. Unstable areas were brought under control through indirect military action, such as Balochistan under Martial Law Governor, General Rahimuddin Khan. Civilian government resumed in 1988 following General Zia&#x27;s death in an aircraft crash.

On 12 October 1999, the government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was dissolved, and the Army took control once more. A fourth martial law was imposed. General Pervez Musharraf took the title of Chief Executive until the President of Pakistan Rafiq Tarar resigned and General Musharraf became president. Elections were held in October 2002 and Mir Zafarullah Khan Jamali became Prime Minister of Pakistan. Jamali&#x27;s premiership was followed by Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain and Shaukat Aziz. While the government was supposed to be run by an elected prime minister, there was a common understanding that important decisions were made by the President General Musharraf.

General Pervez Musharraf pointed out it as an emergency, not Martial Law. The Constitution, Parliament and Provincial Assemblies were suspended and Musharraf issued &quot;Proclamation of Emergency&quot; on 14 October 1999.

On 3 November 2007, President General Musharraf declared the state of emergency in the country which is claimed to be equivalent to the state of martial law as the constitution of Pakistan of 1973 was suspended, and the Chief Justices of the Supreme Court were fired.

On 12 November 2007, Musharraf issued some amendments in the Military Act, which gave the armed forces some additional powers.

===Philippines===

During the Second World War, President José P. Laurel placed the Philippines (then a client state of Imperial Japan) under martial law via Proclamation № 29, dated 21 September 1944 and enforced the following day at 09:00 PST. Proclamation № 30 was issued on 23 September, declaring the existence of a state of war between the Philippines and the United States and the United Kingdom, effective 10:00 that day.

The country was under martial law again from 1972 to 1981 under President Ferdinand Marcos. Proclamation № 1081 (&quot;Proclaiming a State of Martial Law in the Philippines&quot;) was signed on 21 September 1972 and came into force on 23 September. The official reason behind the declaration was to suppress increasing civil strife and the threat of a communist takeover, particularly after a series of bombings (including the Plaza Miranda bombing) and an assassination attempt on Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile in Mandaluyong.

The policy of martial law was initially well received, but it eventually proved unpopular as the military&#x27;s human rights abuses (e.g. use of torture in intelligence gathering, forced disappearances), along with the decadence and excess of the Marcos family and their allies, had emerged. Coupled with economic downturns, these factors fermented dissent in various sectors (e.g. the urban middle class) that crystallised with the assassination of jailed oppositionist Senator Benigno Aquino Jr. in 1983, and widespread fraud in the 1986 snap elections. These eventually led to the 1986 People Power Revolution that ousted Marcos and forced him into exile in Hawaii where he died in 1989; his rival presidential candidate and Aquino&#x27;s widow, Corazon, was installed as his successor.

During this 9-year period, curfews were implemented as a safety measure. Majority of radio and television networks were suspended. Journalists who were accused of speaking against the government were taken as political prisoners, some of them to be physically abused and tortured by the authorities.

Others have stated that the implementation of Martial Law was taken advantage by the Marcos regime. Billion pesos worth of property and ill-gotten wealth was said to be acquired by Marcos&#x27; consort, First Lady Imelda Marcos. This alleged money laundering issue was brought back recently, particularly in the &quot;PiliPinas Debates 2016&quot; for the recently held Philippine Presidential Elections on May 9, 2016. Ferdinand &quot;Bongbong&quot; Marcos Jr., Marcos&#x27; son, ran for the vice presidency and lost.

There were rumours that President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo was planning to impose martial law to end military &quot;coup d&#x27;etat&quot; plots, general civilian dissatisfaction, and criticism of her legitimacy arising from the dubious results of the 2004 presidential elections. Instead, a State of National Emergency was imposed in 2006 from 24 February to 3 March, in order to quash a coup attempt and quell protesters.

On 4 December 2009, President Arroyo officially placed the Province of Maguindanao under a state of martial law through Proclamation № 1959. As with the last imposition, the declaration suspended the writ of habeas corpus in the province. The announcement came days after hundreds of government troops were sent to the province to raid the armories of the powerful Ampatuan clan. The Ampatuans were implicated in the massacre of 58 persons, including women from the rival Mangudadatu clan, human rights lawyers, and 31 media workers. Cited as one of the bloodiest incidents of political violence in Philippine history, the massacre was condemned worldwide as the worst loss of life of media professionals in one day.

On 23 May 2017, President Rodrigo Duterte declared martial law throughout the main southern island of Mindanao, through Proclamation No. 216, due to the attack of Maute Group in Marawi City, Lanao del Sur. It was announced in a briefing in Moscow by Secretary Ernesto Abella, and was in effect until December 2019.

===Poland===
Martial law was introduced in Polish People&#x27;s Republic on 13 December 1981, by General Wojciech Jaruzelski to prevent the extraparliamentary opposition from gaining popularity and political power in the country. Thousands of people linked to the Solidarity Movement, including Lech Wałęsa, were arbitrarily arrested and detained. Approximately 91 deaths are attributed to the martial law, including 9 miners shot by the police force during the pacification of striking Wujek Coal Mine. Curfews, censorship and food rationing were in place. A nationwide travel ban was imposed. The martial law was eventually lifted on 22 July 1983. Contemporary Polish society is divided in opinion on the necessity of introducing martial law in 1981. It is viewed by some as a lesser evil that was necessary to stop a potential Soviet military intervention as the Warsaw Pact, which Poland signed in 1955, enabled other Eastern Bloc countries to intervene if they believed that communism was in danger.

===Russian Federation===

In the Russian Federation recourse to martial law is governed by a document passed 30 January 2002 as No. 1-FKZ (1-ФКЗ).

===South Korea===
In October 1946, United States Army Military Government in Korea declared martial law as a result of the Daegu Riot. On 17 November 1948, President Syngman Rhee&#x27;s regime proclaimed martial law in order to quell the Jeju Uprising. On 19 April 1960, the Rhee government proclaimed martial law again in order to suppress the April Revolution.

Following the 12·12 Military Insurrection of 12 December 1979, General Chun Doo-hwan launched the Coup d&#x27;état of May Seventeenth in 1980 and forced the Cabinet to extend martial law nationwide, which set off the Gwangju Uprising of 18 May 1980.

On 3 December 2024, president Yoon Suk Yeol declared a state of emergency martial law to &quot;safeguard a liberal South Korea from the threats posed by North Korea&#x27;s communist forces and to eliminate anti-state elements&quot;. However, on 4 December 2024 at 01:01 AM KST, 190 lawmakers who were present at the National Assembly voted unanimously to lift martial law. Martial law was formally lifted by president Yoon around 4:50 a.m.; martial law was in effect for about six hours.

===Switzerland===
There are no provisions for martial law as such in Switzerland. Under the &quot;Army Law&quot; of 1995, the Army can be called upon by cantonal (state) authorities for assistance (&quot;Assistenzdienst&quot;). This regularly happens in the case of natural disasters or special protection requirements (e.g., for the World Economic Forum in Davos). This assistance generally requires parliamentary authorization, though, and takes place in the regular legal framework and under the civilian leadership of the cantonal authorities. On the other hand, the federal authorities are authorized to use the Army to enforce law and order when the Cantons no longer can or want to do so (&quot;Ordnungsdienst&quot;). With this came many significant points of reference. This power largely fell into disuse after World War II.

===Syria===
The martial law regime between the 1963 Syrian coup d&#x27;état and 2011 is the longest ranging period of active martial law. Similar to other countries, martial law in Syria was established as a response to the declaration of a state of emergency. When on 8 March 1963, the Baath Party seized power, the prime minister of Syria, acting as the martial law governor, was granted extraordinary powers through his declaration of a state of emergency. Syrian laws enabled the martial law governor to place many restrictions on freedoms of individuals, such as with respect to &quot;meetings, residence, travel and passage in specific places or at particular times; to preventatively arrest anyone suspected of endangering public security and order; to authorize investigation of persons and places; and to delegate any person to perform any of these tasks.&quot; However, the state of emergency declaration in Syria remained intact for nearly 50 consecutive years, prompting intervention and commentary from the international community.

International bodies declared such an extended state of emergency as against international law. Specifically, it was held to be in violation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (hereinafter &quot;ICCPR&quot;), which Syria is a party to. Article 4 of the ICCPR &quot;limits the application of emergency laws to a time of &#x27;public emergency which threatens the life of the nation and the existence of which is officially proclaimed.&#x27; It further stipulates that the state parties to the ICCPR may derogate from their obligations under the treaty only &#x27;to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation, provided that such measures are not inconsistent with their other obligations under international law.&#x27;&quot;

In 2000, Syria responded to the allegations from the ICCPR, and countered that it was in compliance with the ICCPR in a report to the United Nations Human Rights Committee. Syria justified this ongoing declaration of emergency through their concerns of ongoing threats of war by Israel.

On 28 July 2005, the United Nations responded: &quot;Noting with concern that the state of emergency declared some forty years ago is still in force and provides for many derogations in law or practice from the rights guaranteed under articles 9 14, 19, and 22, among others, of the Covenant, without any convincing explanation being given as to the relevance of these derogations to the conflict with Israel and as to the necessity of these derogations to meet the exigencies of the situation claimed to have been created by the conflict.&quot; In further response, Syria reiterated their position that the ongoing emergency declaration was due to a continued threat of war with Israel. Despite ongoing dialogue over a period of years between Syria, the ICCPR, and the United Nations, the declaration remained in effect for the next six years from the 2005 statement made by the United Nations advising of the invalidity of such an extensive state of emergency declaration.

Ultimately, after 48 years, in April 2011, President Bashar al-Assad ended Syria&#x27;s state of emergency, thereby signaling the end of the longest martial law ruling in history. This came as a response to protests demanding freedom from the historically long police rule over Syria.

===Taiwan===

Martial law was in force in Taiwan from 1949 to 1987, for a total of 38 consecutive years. Martial law in Taiwan refers to the periods in the history of Taiwan after World War II that are under the control by the Republic of China Armed Forces of the Kuomintang-led Government of the Republic of China regime. This qualified as &quot;the longest imposition of martial law by a regime anywhere in the world&quot; at that time, but has since been surpassed by Brunei and Syria.

===Thailand===
Martial law in Thailand derives statutory authority from the Act promulgated by King Vajiravudh following the abortive Palace Revolt of 1912, entitled &quot;Martial Law, B.E. 2457 (1914)&quot;. Many coups have been attempted or succeeded since then, but the Act governing martial law, amended in 1942, 1944, 1959 and 1972, has remained essentially the same. In January 2004, the Prime Minister of Thailand, Thaksin Shinawatra, declared a state of martial law in the provinces of Pattani, Yala, and Narathiwat in response to the growing South Thailand insurgency. On 19 September 2006, the Royal Thai Armed Forces declared martial law following a bloodless military coup in the Thai capital of Bangkok, declared while Prime Minister Shinawatra was in New York City to address the United Nations General Assembly. General Sonthi Boonyaratglin took the control of the government, and soon after handed the premiership to ex-Army Chief General Surayud. Sonthi himself is Chief of the Administrative Reform Council. At 3 am, on 20 May 2014, following seven months of civil and political unrest, Army Commander-in-Chief Gen. Prayut Chan-ocha, declared martial law nationwide.

===Turkey===

Since the foundation of the Republic of Turkey in 1923, the Turkish Armed Forces conducted three coups d&#x27;état and declared martial law. The first instance was established following the 1960 Turkish coup d&#x27;état, which toppled down the Democrat Party government and executed its leaders. The second was established after the 1971 Turkish military memorandum for a short period of time to impose reforms to confront escalated domestic violence, which proved unsuccessful. As a result of conflicts between far-left and far-right groups in Turkey growing, martial law was established for the third time in 1978, followed by the 1980 Turkish coup d&#x27;état that was kept in place until 1983. The martial law between 1978 and 1983 was replaced by a state of emergency in a limited number of provinces that lasted until November 2002. The Peace at Home Council&#x27;s official statement in a broadcast on TRT during the 2016 coup attempt included a declaration of martial law.

===Ukraine===
The restrictions from martial law were defined in a 2015 law &quot;On the Legal Regime of Martial Law&quot;. The President decides on the declaration of martial law and then Verkhovna Rada must approve it.

Martial law was first declared in Ukraine in 2018 and as a response to Russian hostilities. On 26 November 2018, lawmakers in the Verkhovna Rada overwhelmingly backed President Petro Poroshenko&#x27;s imposition of martial law along Ukraine&#x27;s coastal regions and those bordering the Russian Federation and Transnistria, an unrecognized breakaway state of Moldova which has Russian troops stationed in its territory, in response to the firing upon and seizure of Ukrainian naval ships by Russia near the Crimean Peninsula a day earlier. A total of 276 lawmakers in Kyiv backed the measure, which took effect on 28 November 2018 and automatically expired in 30 days.

This period of martial law was both intended to be, and ultimately was, limited in scope. Then-president Poroshenko proposed a 60-day martial law period, but ultimately a 30-day period of martial law was signed into effect. This period of martial law came to an end at its scheduled 30-day mark. This declaration was limited to specific areas of Ukraine, including territories along the Russia-Ukraine border, the Moldova-Ukraine border, the coasts of the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov, and the Azov – Kerch international waters.

On 24 February 2022, President Volodymyr Zelensky declared martial law in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Then, on 15 March, the Parliament of Ukraine adopted the Law of Ukraine &quot;On Organizing Labor Relations under Martial Law&quot; which came into effect on March 24, 2022, and &quot;clarified relevant restrictions of the constitutional right and freedoms and set out special rules applicable to labor relations to replace the &#x27;normal&#x27; rules of the Labour Code of Ukraine.&quot; Article 4(7) of the Law of Ukraine holds that the &quot;General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine shall direct, coordinate and control the activities of regional military administrations on defense, public safety, and order, and implement measures of martial law. The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine shall direct, coordinate and control the regional military administrations regarding other issues.&quot;

, there have been ten extensions to the Ukrainian declaration of martial law. This has led to the 2023 legislative and 2024 presidential elections being delayed, due to elections not being allowed to be held in times of martial law.

===United States===
In the United States, martial law has been declared for a state or other locality under various circumstances including after a direct foreign attack (Hawaii after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor; New Orleans during the Battle of New Orleans); after a major disaster (Chicago after the Great Chicago Fire of 1871; San Francisco after the earthquake of 1906); and in response to chaos associated with protests and mob action (San Francisco during the 1934 West Coast waterfront strike; Montgomery, Alabama, following the mob actions against the Freedom Riders). It has also been declared by renegade local leaders seeking to avoid arrest or challenges to their authority (Nauvoo, Illinois by Joseph Smith during the Illinois Mormon War and Utah by Governor Brigham Young during the Utah War).

The martial law concept in the United States is closely tied with the right of &quot;habeas corpus&quot;, which is in essence the right to a hearing on lawful imprisonment, or more broadly, the supervision of law enforcement by the judiciary. The ability to suspend &quot;habeas corpus&quot; is related to the imposition of martial law. Article 1, Section 9 of the U.S. Constitution states, &quot;The Privilege of the Writ of &quot;Habeas Corpus&quot; shall not be suspended, unless when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it.&quot; There have been many instances of the use of the military within the borders of the United States, such as during the Whiskey Rebellion and in the South during the Civil Rights Movement, but these acts are not tantamount to a declaration of martial law.

In United States law, martial law is limited by several court decisions handed down between the American Civil War and World War II. In 1878, Congress passed the Posse Comitatus Act, which, depending on the circumstances, can forbid U.S. military involvement in domestic law enforcement without congressional approval.(, original at )

The legality of the implementation of martial law was examined in 1866, in the court case &quot;Ex parte Milligan&quot;, 71 U.S. 2 (1866). Through this case, the Supreme Court established that trying civilians in military tribunals was unconstitutional unless there were no civilian courts available. Today, the ability to declare martial law over the United States is not explicitly granted in the Constitution. Despite this, martial law has been declared at least 68 times in the United States.

There are two main schools of thought regarding the declaration of martial law. First, some scholars argue that the ability to declare martial law is a constitutional power vested in Congress, and in some cases of emergency, the President. The second school of thought believes that the power to declare martial law in the United States is not expressed in any law, but rather arises as a matter of necessity and in the interests of &quot;national self-preservation.&quot; As it stands today, there is no explicit provision in the Constitution granting powers to any specific body of government to declare martial law.

Historically, martial law has been declared in response to national emergencies in the United States. In Hawaii, for example, martial law was instituted following the attack on Pearl Harbor. The Supreme Court evaluated the legality of declaring martial law in Hawaii in the court case &quot;Duncan v. Kahanamoku&quot;, 327 U.S. 304 (1946). Here, the Supreme Court held that although Hawaii was not yet a state, the legality of declaring martial law must be analyzed as though Hawaii was one. As a result, the United States determined that the safety of the residents of Hawaii was their responsibility, and martial law was implemented throughout the Hawaiian Islands.

===Yugoslavia===
During the Yugoslav Wars in 1991, a &quot;State of Direct War Threat&quot; was declared. Although forces from the whole SFRY were included in this conflict, martial law was never announced, but after secession, Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina declared martial law. On 23 March 1999, a &quot;State of Direct War Threat&quot; was declared in Yugoslavia, following the possibility of NATO air-strikes. The day after strikes began, martial law was declared, which lasted until June 1999, although strikes ended on 10 June, following Kumanovo Treaty.

==See also==
* DEFCON
* Gendarmerie
* Military rule (disambiguation)
* Stratocracy, a form of government headed by military generals.
* Military junta, a government led by a committee of military leaders.
* Military dictatorship, a form of autocratic rule led by the military.
* Authoritarianism, a form of government with strong central power and limited freedoms.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Macomb, Alexander, Major General of the United States Army, &quot;The Practice of Courts Martial&quot;, (New York: Harper &amp; Brothers, 1841) 154 pages.
* Macomb, Alexander, Major General of the United States Army, &quot;A Treatise on Martial Law, and Courts-Martial as Practiced in the United States&quot;. (Charleston: J. Hoff, 1809), republished (New York: Lawbook Exchange, 2007). .
* &quot;The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics&quot;. Edited by Iain McLean and Alistair McMillan, Oxford University Press, 2004. 
* &quot;Black&#x27;s Law Dictionary: Definitions of the Terms and Phrases of American and English Jurisprudence, Ancient and Modern&quot;. Henry Campbell Black. St. Paul: West Pub. Co., 1979. 

==External links==

* &#x27;Martial law&#x27; in the Encyclopædia Britannica
* Martial law in Thailand in 2005
* Full text of the 1972 Martial Law in the Philippines
* NSPD-51
* Emergency Rule of 3 November 2007 Pakistan </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="0" end="11" title="Martial law" label="Martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="467" end="493" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coups d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q130059" start="718" end="734" title="Matthew Hale (jurist)" label="Sir Matthew Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287601" start="1294" end="1315" title="doctrine of necessity" label="doctrine of necessity"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="1990" end="2006" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q860423" start="2008" end="2024" title="2006 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Thailand in 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q16914766" start="2029" end="2033" title="2014 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q13605743" start="2039" end="2052" title="2013 Egyptian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="Egypt in 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="2098" end="2131" title="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989" label="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q718605" start="2168" end="2197" title="Martial law in Poland" label="martial law in Poland in 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="2390" end="2408" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2629" end="2641" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="2725" end="2754" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="2762" end="2780" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2827" end="2845" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q158021" start="2920" end="2939" title="Treaty of Frankfurt (1871)" label="Treaty of Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="2950" end="2969" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q223625" start="3025" end="3031" title="curfew" label="curfew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="3052" end="3061" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="3063" end="3075" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="3081" end="3094" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28737" start="3132" end="3144" title="military law" label="military law"/>
<link wikidata="Q28737" start="3148" end="3164" title="military justice" label="military justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q28737" start="3229" end="3246" title="military tribunal" label="military tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="3248" end="3261" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q99659280" start="3305" end="3330" title="2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war" label="2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7035479" start="3356" end="3371" title="Nikol Pashinyan" label="Nikol Pashinyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q880629" start="3415" end="3424" title="Black War" label="Black War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800505" start="3466" end="3483" title="1820 Settlers" label="British colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="3488" end="3510" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="3514" end="3522" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q826766" start="3621" end="3634" title="George Arthur" label="George Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="3939" end="3949" title="Federation of Australia" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q57371" start="4039" end="4051" title="Ilham Aliyev" label="Ilham Aliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q57352" start="4105" end="4129" title="Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa" label="Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q242864" start="4161" end="4185" title="2011 Bahraini uprising" label="anti-government uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299246" start="4385" end="4396" title="Brunei revolt" label="a rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q57327" start="4498" end="4553" title="Hassanal Bolkiah" label="Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu&amp;#x27;izzaddin Waddaulah"/>
<link wikidata="Q850263" start="4645" end="4670" title="Royal Brunei Armed Forces" label="Royal Brunei Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808521" start="4760" end="4782" title="Assassination of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Mujib was assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q461816" start="4887" end="4910" title="Hussain Muhammad Ershad" label="Hussain Muhammad Ershad"/>
<link wikidata="Q475689" start="5003" end="5023" title="Parliament of Canada" label="Parliament of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="5024" end="5031" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5258" end="5269" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5271" end="5283" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q27702" start="5293" end="5315" title="October Crisis of 1970" label="October Crisis of 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370537" start="5385" end="5400" title="Emergencies Act" label="Emergencies Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q110685226" start="5467" end="5490" title="Canada convoy protest" label="Freedom Convoy protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="5504" end="5516" title="British Empire" label="colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="5581" end="5599" title="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)" label="Province of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q952774" start="5611" end="5629" title="Invasion of Canada (1775)" label="invasion of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="5637" end="5653" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="5665" end="5691" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134180" start="5739" end="5763" title="Lower Canada" label="Province of Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466441" start="5775" end="5798" title="Lower Canada Rebellion" label="1837–1838 insurrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="5900" end="5908" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860082" start="5921" end="5928" title="Archibald Acheson, 2nd Earl of Gosford" label="Gosford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812880" start="5957" end="5993" title="Legislative Assembly of Lower Canada" label="Legislative Assembly of Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q335402" start="6123" end="6136" title="John Colborne" label="John Colborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q814959" start="6248" end="6266" title="Beiyang government" label="Beiyang government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="6312" end="6324" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6378" end="6383" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q122804" start="6391" end="6409" title="Meiji Constitution" label="Meiji Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252740" start="6451" end="6498" title="Provisional Government of the Republic of China (1912)" label="Provisional Government of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q833889" start="6515" end="6539" title="Provisional Constitution of the Republic of China" label="Provisional Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="6576" end="6585" title="President of the Republic of China" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="6695" end="6717" title="Nationalist Government" label="Nationalist Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6765" end="6777" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="6813" end="6818" title="Republic of China (1912-1949)" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="6868" end="6883" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Japanese forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q137816" start="6888" end="6907" title="Taiwan under Japanese rule" label="colonial government"/>
<link wikidata="Q32081" start="6951" end="6966" title="Taiwan Province" label="Taiwan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q244939" start="6977" end="6997" title="February 28 incident" label="February 28 incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="7025" end="7042" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q213099" start="7116" end="7153" title="Constitution of the Republic of China" label="Constitution of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="7256" end="7267" title="Kuomintang" label="Nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="7336" end="7359" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q313598" start="7593" end="7609" title="Chiang Ching-kuo" label="Chiang Ching-kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="7750" end="7757" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="7780" end="7813" title="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989" label="Tiananmen Square protests of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q12150" start="7891" end="7910" title="Emergency law in Egypt" label="states of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q34105" start="8237" end="8250" title="Hosni Mubarak" label="Hosni Mubarak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870026" start="8509" end="8523" title="2006 Dahab bombings" label="Dahab bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q29198" start="8837" end="8862" title="2011 Egyptian revolution" label="uprising against his rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q386160" start="9120" end="9155" title="Supreme Council of the Armed Forces" label="Supreme Council of the Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="10236" end="10254" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q307871" start="10285" end="10305" title="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi" label="Abdel Fattah el-Sisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q63197808" start="10319" end="10359" title="2019 Egyptian constitutional referendum" label="constitutional amendments passed in 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508765" start="11396" end="11418" title="Constitution of Iceland" label="Icelandic constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="11559" end="11578" title="Constitution of India" label="Indian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="11847" end="11869" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074225" start="11873" end="11901" title="Puttaswamy v. Union of India" label="Puttaswamy v. Union of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="11955" end="11969" title="natural law" label="natural rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357989" start="12119" end="12131" title="Enabling Act" label="enabling act"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="12211" end="12222" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251293" start="12268" end="12294" title="Defence of India Act 1915" label="Defense of India Act, 1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020040" start="12303" end="12329" title="Defence of India Act, 1939" label="Defense of India Act, 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="12426" end="12443" title="Jallianwala Bagh massacre" label="Amritsar Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006357" start="12497" end="12508" title="Rowlatt Act" label="Rowlatt Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823" start="12573" end="12577" title="Aceh" label="Aceh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11755916" start="12602" end="12611" title="President of Indonesia" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862927" start="12613" end="12628" title="Indonesian Army" label="Indonesian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q340520" start="12695" end="12703" title="Acehnese people" label="Acehnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960285" start="12882" end="12898" title="Mostafa Khomeini" label="Mostafa Khomeini"/>
<link wikidata="Q184299" start="12900" end="12904" title="Shah" label="Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="12905" end="12926" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556852" start="12965" end="12982" title="Gholam Ali Oveisi" label="Gholam Ali Oveisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="13031" end="13037" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368789" start="13414" end="13429" title="Emadeddin Baghi" label="Emadeddin Baghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899132" start="13544" end="13556" title="Black Friday (1978)" label="Black Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q951044" start="13653" end="13671" title="Jafar Sharif-Emami" label="Jafar Sharif-Emami"/>
<link wikidata="Q700668" start="13708" end="13726" title="Gholam Reza Azhari" label="Gholam Reza Azhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q471787" start="13919" end="13935" title="Shapour Bakhtiar" label="Shapour Bakhtiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388932" start="14158" end="14202" title="Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran" label="Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q378605" start="14271" end="14300" title="Islamic Consultative Assembly" label="Islamic Consultative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="14337" end="14350" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q17322488" start="14352" end="14365" title="Ivor Guest, 1st Viscount Wimborne" label="Lord Wimborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="14370" end="14396" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="14455" end="14461" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="14579" end="14622" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="14720" end="14745" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="14821" end="14836" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="14868" end="14882" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178347" start="15067" end="15094" title="Court of Chancery (Ireland)" label="Court of Chancery (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316221" start="15115" end="15155" title="Restoration of Order in Ireland Act 1920" label="Restoration of Order in Ireland Act 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="15316" end="15334" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Irish Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="15615" end="15621" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q204333" start="15635" end="15639" title="Arab citizens of Israel" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="15667" end="15672" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="15674" end="15681" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611002" start="15691" end="15699" title="Triangle (Israel)" label="Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="15763" end="15784" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q223625" start="16042" end="16048" title="curfew" label="curfew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438166" start="16050" end="16074" title="administrative detention" label="administrative detention"/>
<link wikidata="Q180294" start="16395" end="16400" title="Jaffa" label="Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q221447" start="16402" end="16407" title="Ramla" label="Ramla"/>
<link wikidata="Q207540" start="16413" end="16416" title="Lod" label="Lod"/>
<link wikidata="Q191731" start="16782" end="16798" title="Flag of Palestine" label="Palestinian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642045" start="17189" end="17208" title="Kafr Qasim massacre" label="Kafr Qasim massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q74484" start="17231" end="17251" title="Israel Border Police" label="Israel Border Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132137" start="17443" end="17453" title="Green Line (Israel)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q152659" start="17580" end="17590" title="Kafr Qasim" label="Kafr Qasim"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="17671" end="17680" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="17682" end="17692" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q83210" start="17698" end="17711" title="Golan Heights" label="Golan Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="17730" end="17745" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="17777" end="17788" title="Palestinians" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49107" start="17905" end="17911" title="Oslo I Accord" label="Oslo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="17980" end="18010" title="Palestinian National Authority" label="Palestinian National Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974492" start="18038" end="18044" title="Area C (West Bank)" label="Area C"/>
<link wikidata="Q49104" start="18097" end="18113" title="2006 Lebanon war" label="2006 Lebanon war"/>
<link wikidata="Q472117" start="18160" end="18171" title="Amir Peretz" label="Amir Peretz"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="18207" end="18228" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q785287" start="18467" end="18485" title="Home Front Command" label="Home Front Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578249" start="18630" end="18637" title="Cabinet of Israel" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q849603" start="19622" end="19651" title="National League for Democracy" label="National League for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q728190" start="19708" end="19716" title="Tatmadaw" label="Tatmadaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q105234803" start="19756" end="19770" title="State Administration Council" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="20894" end="20902" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155111" start="20935" end="20949" title="Iskander Mirza" label="Iskander Mirza"/>
<link wikidata="Q190071" start="20977" end="20995" title="Ayub Khan (general)" label="Muhammad Ayub Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333981" start="21677" end="21701" title="Yahya Khan" label="Agha Mohammad Yahya Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131355" start="21937" end="21956" title="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto" label="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="22017" end="22042" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="22194" end="22213" title="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq" label="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="22295" end="22308" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131355" start="22340" end="22359" title="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto" label="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q163239" start="22551" end="22562" title="Balochistan (Pakistan)" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q686984" start="22585" end="22599" title="civil disorder" label="civil disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="22701" end="22717" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="22778" end="22793" title="military action" label="military action"/>
<link wikidata="Q373635" start="22851" end="22866" title="Rahimuddin Khan" label="Rahimuddin Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134068" start="23015" end="23027" title="Nawaz Sharif" label="Nawaz Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q40495" start="23122" end="23138" title="Pervez Musharraf" label="Pervez Musharraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="23157" end="23172" title="Chief Executive" label="Chief Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q473984" start="23183" end="23204" title="President of Pakistan" label="President of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34935" start="23205" end="23216" title="Rafiq Tarar" label="Rafiq Tarar"/>
<link wikidata="Q140144" start="23306" end="23332" title="Zafarullah Khan Jamali" label="Mir Zafarullah Khan Jamali"/>
<link wikidata="Q735575" start="23340" end="23366" title="Prime Minister of Pakistan" label="Prime Minister of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265796" start="23410" end="23434" title="Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain" label="Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q223555" start="23439" end="23451" title="Shaukat Aziz" label="Shaukat Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880204" start="24283" end="24299" title="World War II in the Philippines" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="24301" end="24310" title="President of the Philippines" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q360113" start="24311" end="24325" title="Jose P. Laurel" label="José P. Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027229" start="24337" end="24348" title="Second Philippine Republic" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="24357" end="24369" title="client state" label="client state"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="24373" end="24387" title="Empire of Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543509" start="24494" end="24497" title="Philippine Standard Time" label="PST"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="24574" end="24586" title="war" label="state of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="24599" end="24610" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="24619" end="24632" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="24641" end="24655" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="24758" end="24774" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247438" start="24776" end="24795" title="Proclamation № 1081" label="Proclamation № 1081"/>
<link wikidata="Q27791637" start="25036" end="25054" title="Communist rebellion in the Philippines" label="communist takeover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354181" start="25111" end="25132" title="Plaza Miranda bombing" label="Plaza Miranda bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444318" start="25166" end="25182" title="Secretary of National Defense (Philippines)" label="Defense Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q145881" start="25183" end="25200" title="Juan Ponce Enrile" label="Juan Ponce Enrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q9085" start="25204" end="25215" title="Mandaluyong" label="Mandaluyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408549" start="25331" end="25343" title="Human rights in the Philippines" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="25364" end="25371" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288449" start="25399" end="25419" title="forced disappearance" label="forced disappearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="25611" end="25623" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808502" start="25652" end="25665" title="assassination of Benigno Aquino Jr." label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418426" start="25690" end="25697" title="Senate of the Philippines" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q222805" start="25698" end="25716" title="Benigno Aquino Jr." label="Benigno Aquino Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2345417" start="25754" end="25773" title="1986 Philippine presidential election" label="1986 snap elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274389" start="25803" end="25831" title="1986 People Power Revolution" label="1986 People Power Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="25880" end="25886" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480" start="25968" end="25975" title="Corazon Aquino" label="Corazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545900" start="26514" end="26524" title="First Lady of the Philippines" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q285536" start="26525" end="26538" title="Imelda Marcos" label="Imelda Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905747" start="26629" end="26651" title="PiliPinas Debates 2016" label="PiliPinas Debates 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161898" start="26680" end="26728" title="2016 Philippine presidential election" label="Philippine Presidential Elections on May 9, 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q123665" start="26864" end="26887" title="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo" label="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="26945" end="26961" title="coup d&amp;#x27;etat" label="coup d&amp;#x27;etat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185383" start="27081" end="27108" title="2004 Philippine presidential election" label="2004 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q473215" start="27121" end="27148" title="2006 state of emergency in the Philippines" label="State of National Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q24746" start="27313" end="27321" title="Provinces of the Philippines" label="Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13845" start="27325" end="27336" title="Maguindanao" label="Maguindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="27454" end="27475" title="writ of habeas corpus" label="writ of habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518023" start="27671" end="27693" title="Maguindanao Massacre" label="massacre of 58 persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q126116" start="27726" end="27742" title="Esmael Mangudadatu" label="Mangudadatu clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399774" start="27831" end="27849" title="political violence" label="political violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q457786" start="27998" end="28013" title="Rodrigo Duterte" label="Rodrigo Duterte"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="28074" end="28082" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q30056376" start="28092" end="28112" title="Proclamation No. 216" label="Proclamation No. 216"/>
<link wikidata="Q30041564" start="28125" end="28131" title="Marawi crisis" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q24910076" start="28135" end="28146" title="Maute Group" label="Maute Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q592338" start="28150" end="28161" title="Marawi City" label="Marawi City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13843" start="28163" end="28176" title="Lanao del Sur" label="Lanao del Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25136935" start="28232" end="28246" title="Ernesto Abella" label="Ernesto Abella"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="28331" end="28360" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55834" start="28393" end="28412" title="Wojciech Jaruzelski" label="Wojciech Jaruzelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723851" start="28428" end="28446" title="Extra-parliamentary opposition" label="extraparliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="28552" end="28571" title="Solidarity Movement" label="Solidarity Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="28583" end="28594" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783873" start="28775" end="28790" title="Wujek Coal Mine" label="Wujek Coal Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="29118" end="29124" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="29154" end="29165" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="29210" end="29222" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q484104" start="29477" end="29524" title="United States Army Military Government in Korea" label="United States Army Military Government in Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q484437" start="29565" end="29575" title="Daegu Riot" label="Daegu Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296418" start="29598" end="29607" title="President of South Korea" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q171684" start="29608" end="29620" title="Syngman Rhee" label="Syngman Rhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q483458" start="29680" end="29693" title="Jeju Uprising" label="Jeju Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q489416" start="29787" end="29803" title="April Revolution" label="April Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q14362" start="29877" end="29890" title="Chun Doo-hwan" label="Chun Doo-hwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485728" start="29904" end="29939" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état of May Seventeenth" label="Coup d&amp;#x27;état of May Seventeenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q174990" start="30023" end="30039" title="Gwangju Uprising" label="Gwangju Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090635" start="30087" end="30100" title="Yoon Suk Yeol" label="Yoon Suk Yeol"/>
<link wikidata="Q131380778" start="30121" end="30142" title="2024 South Korean martial law" label="emergency martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q76133" start="30330" end="30333" title="Korean Standard Time" label="KST"/>
<link wikidata="Q494162" start="30373" end="30390" title="National Assembly (South Korea)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="30615" end="30626" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q332844" start="30672" end="30676" title="Swiss Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="30699" end="30707" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="cantonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="30880" end="30900" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q68097" start="30904" end="30909" title="Davos" label="Davos"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31366" end="31378" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475925" start="31428" end="31456" title="1963 Syrian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1963 Syrian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q14746872" start="34669" end="34677" title="Syrian revolution" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q458428" start="34975" end="35005" title="Republic of China Armed Forces" label="Republic of China Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="35269" end="35277" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q161389" start="35339" end="35349" title="Vajiravudh" label="Vajiravudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407111" start="35373" end="35394" title="Palace Revolt of 1912" label="Palace Revolt of 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q164373" start="35661" end="35679" title="Thaksin Shinawatra" label="Thaksin Shinawatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q236781" start="35733" end="35740" title="Pattani Province" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q242977" start="35742" end="35746" title="Yala Province" label="Yala"/>
<link wikidata="Q271442" start="35752" end="35762" title="Narathiwat Province" label="Narathiwat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094356" start="35790" end="35815" title="South Thailand insurgency" label="South Thailand insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q947702" start="35843" end="35866" title="Royal Thai Armed Forces" label="Royal Thai Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q860423" start="35910" end="35923" title="2006 Thai coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="35931" end="35935" title="Thailand" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="35947" end="35954" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="36004" end="36017" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="36033" end="36064" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q334722" start="36066" end="36094" title="General Sonthi Boonyaratglin" label="General Sonthi Boonyaratglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q298079" start="36186" end="36201" title="General Surayud" label="General Surayud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192601" start="36221" end="36263" title="Chief of the Administrative Reform Council" label="Chief of the Administrative Reform Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108126" start="36373" end="36389" title="Prayut Chan-ocha" label="Prayut Chan-ocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="36467" end="36485" title="Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q501053" start="36499" end="36519" title="Turkish Armed Forces" label="Turkish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="36536" end="36553" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coups d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859259" start="36629" end="36658" title="1960 Turkish coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1960 Turkish coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186034" start="36683" end="36697" title="Democrat Party (Turkey, 1946–1961)" label="Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q931943" start="36772" end="36804" title="1971 Turkish military memorandum" label="1971 Turkish military memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129409" start="36951" end="36959" title="Far-left politics" label="far-left"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="36964" end="36973" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758028" start="37072" end="37101" title="1980 Turkish coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1980 Turkish coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="37193" end="37211" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q25906530" start="37282" end="37303" title="Peace at Home Council" label="Peace at Home Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q967294" start="37348" end="37351" title="TRT 1" label="TRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q25906338" start="37363" end="37380" title="2016 Turkish coup attempt" label="2016 coup attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q579677" start="37548" end="37557" title="President of Ukraine" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q176296" start="37609" end="37623" title="Verkhovna Rada" label="Verkhovna Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q58077" start="37819" end="37835" title="Petro Poroshenko" label="Petro Poroshenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="37930" end="37948" title="Russia" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="37953" end="37965" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="38002" end="38009" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942756" start="38020" end="38061" title="Russian military presence in Transnistria" label="Russian troops stationed in its territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q59199697" start="38082" end="38105" title="2018 Kerch Strait incident" label="firing upon and seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="38150" end="38167" title="Crimea" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="38211" end="38215" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874799" start="38872" end="38890" title="Volodymyr Zelenskyy" label="Volodymyr Zelensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="38931" end="38958" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q78140346" start="39857" end="39873" title="Next Ukrainian parliamentary election" label="2023 legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q63253107" start="39878" end="39905" title="Next Ukrainian presidential election" label="2024 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="40181" end="40212" title="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41894" start="40237" end="40258" title="Battle of New Orleans" label="Battle of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q70520" start="40303" end="40321" title="Great Chicago Fire" label="Great Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q211386" start="40355" end="40373" title="earthquake of 1906" label="earthquake of 1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563463" start="40467" end="40500" title="1934 West Coast waterfront strike" label="1934 West Coast waterfront strike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40561" end="40575" title="Freedom Riders#Mob violence in Montgomery" label="Freedom Riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q576110" start="40688" end="40704" title="Nauvoo, Illinois" label="Nauvoo, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302809" start="40732" end="40751" title="Illinois Mormon War" label="Illinois Mormon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="40756" end="40760" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501025" start="40798" end="40806" title="Utah War" label="Utah War"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="40895" end="40908" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="41175" end="41192" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q377542" start="41490" end="41507" title="Whiskey Rebellion" label="Whiskey Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="41536" end="41557" title="Civil Rights Movement" label="Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q692218" start="41630" end="41647" title="Law of the United States" label="United States law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="41723" end="41741" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="41746" end="41758" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="41769" end="41777" title="Congress of the United States" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q931267" start="41789" end="41808" title="Posse Comitatus Act" label="Posse Comitatus Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="43778" end="43791" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="43887" end="43891" title="SFRY" label="SFRY"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="43978" end="43985" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="43990" end="44012" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="44110" end="44120" title="Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="44151" end="44155" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q28479" start="44299" end="44314" title="Kumanovo Treaty" label="Kumanovo Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695" start="44332" end="44338" title="DEFCON" label="DEFCON"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="44341" end="44352" title="Gendarmerie" label="Gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857855" start="44355" end="44385" title="Military rule (disambiguation)" label="Military rule (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975904" start="44388" end="44399" title="Stratocracy" label="Stratocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424534" start="44453" end="44467" title="Military junta" label="Military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="44524" end="44545" title="Military dictatorship" label="Military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="44596" end="44612" title="Authoritarianism" label="Authoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q328356" start="44878" end="44895" title="Alexander Macomb (American general)" label="Macomb, Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115127" start="44897" end="44910" title="Commanding General of the United States Army" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="44918" end="44936" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50478" wikidata="Q436161" url="?curid=50478" title="Han van Meegeren">
<text>Henricus Antonius &quot;Han&quot; van Meegeren (; 10 October 1889 – 30 December 1947) was a Dutch painter and portraitist, considered one of the most ingenious art forgers of the 20th century. Van Meegeren became a national hero after World War II when it was revealed that he had sold a forged painting to &quot;Reichsmarschall&quot; Hermann Göring during the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands.

Van Meegeren attempted to make a career as an artist, but art critics dismissed his work. He decided to prove his talent by forging paintings from the Dutch Golden Age. Leading experts of the time accepted his paintings as genuine 17th-century works, including art collector Abraham Bredius.

During World War II, Göring purchased one of Meegeren&#x27;s &quot;Vermeers&quot;, which became one of his most prized possessions. Following the war, van Meegeren was arrested on a charge of selling cultural property to the Nazis. Facing a possible death penalty, he confessed that the painting was a forgery, and was subsequently convicted and sentenced to one year in prison. However, he died less than two months later after suffering from two heart attacks. A biography in 1967 estimated that van Meegeren duped buyers out of more than US$30million, his victims including the Dutch government.

==Early years==
Han (diminutive for Henri or Henricus) van Meegeren was born 10 October 1889, the third of five children of Augusta Louisa Henrietta Camps and Hendrikus Johannes van Meegeren, a French and history teacher at the Kweekschool (training college for schoolteachers) in the provincial city of Deventer.

While attending the Higher Burger School, Han met teacher and painter Bartus Korteling (1853–1930) who became his mentor. Korteling had been inspired by Johannes Vermeer and taught Van Meegeren Vermeer&#x27;s techniques. Korteling had rejected the Impressionist movement and other modern trends as decadent, degenerate art, and his strong personal influence may have led van Meegeren to do likewise.
Van Meegeren&#x27;s father did not share his son&#x27;s love of art; he often forced Han to write a hundred times, &quot;I know nothing, I am nothing, I am capable of nothing.&quot; Instead, Han&#x27;s father compelled him to study architecture at the Delft University of Technology in 1907. He received drawing and painting lessons, as well. He easily passed his preliminary examinations but never took the &quot;Ingenieurs&quot; (final) examination because he did not want to become an architect. He nevertheless proved to be an apt architect and designed the clubhouse for his rowing club in Delft which still exists (see image).

In 1913, Van Meegeren gave up his architecture studies and concentrated on drawing and painting at the art school in The Hague. On 8 January 1913, he received the prestigious Gold Medal from the Technical University in Delft for his &quot;Study of the Interior of the Church of Saint Lawrence&quot; (Laurenskerk) in Rotterdam. The award was given every five years to an art student who created the best work, and was accompanied by a gold medal.

On 18 April 1912, Van Meegeren married fellow art student Anna de Voogt who was pregnant with their first child. The couple initially lived with Anna&#x27;s grandmother in Rijswijk, and their son Jacques Henri Emil van Meegeren was born there on 26 August 1912.

==Career as a legitimate painter==

In 1914, Van Meegeren moved his family to Scheveningen and completed the diploma examination at the Royal Academy of Art in The Hague, which allowed him to teach. He took a position as the assistant to the Professor of Drawing and Art History. In March 1915, his daughter Pauline was born, later called Inez. To supplement his small salary of 75 guldens per month, Han sketched posters and painted pictures for Christmas cards, still-life, landscapes, and portraits for the commercial art trade. Many of these paintings are quite valuable today.

Van Meegeren&#x27;s first exhibition was held from April to May 1917 at the Kunstzaal Pictura in the Hague. In December 1919, he was accepted as a member by the Haagse Kunstkring, an exclusive society of writers and painters who met weekly on the premises of the Ridderzaal. Although he had been accepted, he was ultimately denied the position of chairman. He painted the tame roe deer belonging to Princess Juliana. The painting, &quot;Hertje&quot; (&quot;The Fawn&quot; or &quot;The Deer&quot;), was completed in 1921, and became popular in the Netherlands. He undertook numerous journeys to Belgium, France, Italy, and England, and acquired a name for himself as a portraitist, earning commissions from English and American socialites who spent their winter vacations on the Côte d&#x27;Azur. His clients were impressed by his understanding of the 17th-century techniques of the Dutch masters. Throughout his life, Van Meegeren signed his own paintings with his own signature.

By all accounts, infidelity was responsible for the breakup of Van Meegeren&#x27;s marriage to Anna de Voogt; the couple divorced on 19 July 1923. Anna moved to Paris, where Van Meegeren visited his children from time to time. He dedicated himself to portraiture and began producing forgeries to increase his income.

He married actress Johanna Theresia Oerlemans in Woerden in 1928, with whom he had been living for the past three years. Johanna&#x27;s stage name was Jo van Walraven, and she had previously been married to art critic and journalist Dr. C H. de Boer (Carel de Boer). She brought their daughter Viola into the Van Meegeren household.

==Rejection by the critics==

Van Meegeren had become a well-known painter in the Netherlands with the success of &quot;Hertje&quot; (1921) and &quot;Straatzangers&quot; (1928). His first legitimate copies were painted in 1923, his &quot;Laughing Cavalier&quot; and &quot;Happy Smoker&quot;, both in the style of Frans Hals. By 1928, the similarity of Van Meegeren&#x27;s paintings to those of the Old Masters began to draw the reproach of Dutch art critics, who said that his talent was limited outside of copying other artists&#x27; work.

One critic wrote that he was &quot;a gifted technician who has made a sort of composite facsimile of the Renaissance school, he has every virtue except originality&quot;. Van Meegeren responded in a series of aggressive articles in &quot;De Kemphaan&quot; (&quot;The Ruff&quot;), a monthly periodical published by van Meegeren and journalist Jan Ubink from April 1928 until March 1930. Jonathan Lopez writes that Van Meegeren &quot;denounced modern painting as &#x27;art-Bolshevism&#x27; in the articles, described its proponents as a &#x27;slimy bunch of woman-haters and negro-lovers,&#x27; and invoked the image of &#x27;a Jew with a handcart&#x27; as a symbol for the international art market&quot;.

Van Meegeren set out to prove to the art critics that he could more than &quot;copy&quot; the Dutch Masters; he would produce a work to rival theirs.

==The &quot;perfect forgery&quot;==
In 1932, Van Meegeren moved to the southern French village of Roquebrune-Cap-Martin with his wife. There he rented a furnished mansion called &quot;Primavera&quot; and set out to define the chemical and technical procedures that would be necessary to create his perfect forgeries. He bought authentic 17th-century canvases and mixed his own paints from raw materials (such as lapis lazuli, white lead, indigo, and cinnabar) using old formulas to ensure that they could pass as authentic. In addition, he created his own badger-hair paintbrushes similar to those that Vermeer was known to have used.

He came up with a scheme of using phenol formaldehyde (Bakelite) to cause the paints to harden after application, making the paintings appear as if they were 300 years old. Van Meegeren would first mix his paints with lilac oil, to stop the colours from fading or yellowing in heat. (This caused his studio to smell so strongly of lilacs that he kept a vase of fresh lilacs nearby so that visitors would not be suspicious.) Then, after completing a painting, he would bake it at to to harden the paint, and then roll it over a cylinder to increase the cracks. Later, he would wash the painting in black India ink to fill in the cracks.
It took Van Meegeren six years to work out his techniques, but ultimately he was pleased with his work on both artistic and deceptive levels. Two of these trial paintings were painted as if by Vermeer: &quot;Lady Reading Music&quot;, after the genuine paintings &quot;Woman in Blue Reading a Letter&quot; at the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam; and &quot;Lady Playing Music&quot;, after Vermeer&#x27;s &quot;Woman With a Lute Near a Window&quot; hanging in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City. Van Meegeren did not sell these paintings; both are now at the Rijksmuseum.

Following a journey to the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin, Van Meegeren painted &quot;The Supper at Emmaus&quot;. In 1934 Van Meegeren had bought a seventeenth century mediocre Dutch painting, &quot;The Awakening of Lazarus&quot;, and on this foundation he created his masterpiece &quot;à la Vermeer&quot;. The experts assumed that Vermeer had studied in Italy, so Van Meegeren used the version of Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio&#x27;s &quot;Supper at Emmaus&quot;, located at Milan&#x27;s Pinacoteca di Brera, as a model. He gave the painting to his friend, attorney C. A. Boon, telling him that it was a genuine Vermeer, and asked him to show it to Dr. Abraham Bredius, the art historian, in Monaco. In October 1932, Bredius had already published an article about two recently discovered alleged Vermeer paintings, which he defined as &quot;Landscape&quot; and &quot;Man and Woman at a Spinet&quot;. He claimed the former to be a fake, and described it as &quot;a landscape of the eighteenth century into which had been imported scraps of the &#x27;View of Delft&#x27;&quot; (mostly the Delft New Church&#x27;s tower). The &quot;Man and Woman at a Spinet&quot;, instead, not only was judged as an &quot;authentic Vermeer&quot;, but also &quot;very beautiful&quot;, and &quot;one of the finest gems of the master&#x27;s œuvre&quot;. In September 1937, Bredius examined &quot;The Supper at Emmaus&quot; and, writing in &quot;The Burlington Magazine&quot;, he accepted it as a genuine Vermeer and praised it very highly as &quot;&quot;the&quot; masterpiece of Johannes Vermeer of Delft&quot;. The usually required evidences, such as resilience of colours against chemical solutions, white lead analysis, x-rays images, micro-spectroscopy of the colouring substances, confirmed it to be an authentic Vermeer.

The painting was purchased by The Rembrandt Society for fl.520,000 (€235,000 or about €4,640,000 today), with the aid of wealthy shipowner Willem van der Vorm, and donated to the Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen in Rotterdam. In 1938, the piece was highlighted in a special exhibition in occasion of Queen Wilhelmina&#x27;s Jubilee at a Rotterdam museum, along with 450 Dutch old masters dating from 1400 to 1800. A. Feulner wrote in the &quot;Magazine for [the] History of Art&quot;, &quot;In the rather isolated area in which the Vermeer picture hung, it was as quiet as in a chapel. The feeling of the consecration overflows on the visitors, although the picture has no ties to ritual or church&quot;, and despite the presence of masterpieces of Rembrandt and Grünewald, it was defined as &quot;the spiritual centre&quot; of the whole exhibition.
In 1938, Van Meegeren moved to Nice, buying a 12-bedroom estate at Les Arènes de Cimiez with the proceeds from the sale of the painting. On the walls of the estate hung several genuine Old Masters. Two of his better forgeries were made here, &quot;Interior with Card Players&quot; and &quot;Interior with Drinkers&quot;, both displaying the signature of Pieter de Hooch. During his time in Nice, he painted his &quot;Last Supper I&quot; in the style of Vermeer.

He returned to the Netherlands in September 1939 as the Second World War threatened. After a short stay in Amsterdam, he moved to the village of Laren in 1940. Throughout 1941, Van Meegeren issued his designs, which he published in 1942 as a large and luxurious book entitled &quot;Han van Meegeren: Teekeningen I (Drawings nr I)&quot;. He also created several forgeries during this time, including &quot;The Head of Christ&quot;, &quot;The Last Supper II&quot;, &quot;The Blessing of Jacob&quot;, &quot;The Adulteress&quot;, and &quot;The Washing of the Feet&quot;—all in the manner of Vermeer. On 18 December 1943, he divorced his wife, but this was only a formality; the couple remained together, but a large share of his capital was transferred to her accounts as a safeguard against the uncertainties of the war.

In December 1943, the Van Meegerens moved to the exclusive Keizersgracht 321 in Amsterdam. His forgeries had earned him between 5.5 and 7.5 million guilders (or about US$25–30 million today). He used this money to purchase a large amount of real estate, jewellery, and works of art, and to further his luxurious lifestyle. In a 1946 interview, he told Marie Louise Doudart de la Grée that he owned 52 houses and 15 country houses around Laren, among them &quot;grachtenhuizen&quot;, mansions along Amsterdam&#x27;s canals.

===Hermann Göring===
In 1942, during the German occupation of the Netherlands, one of Van Meegeren&#x27;s agents sold the Vermeer forgery &quot;Christ with the Adulteress&quot; to Nazi banker and art dealer Alois Miedl. Experts could probably have identified it as a forgery; as Van Meegeren&#x27;s health declined, so did the quality of his work. He chain-smoked, drank heavily, and became addicted to morphine-laced sleeping pills. However, there were no genuine Vermeers available for comparison, since most museum collections were in protective storage as a prevention against war damage.

Nazi &quot;Reichsmarschall&quot; Hermann Göring traded 137 looted paintings for &quot;Christ with the Adulteress&quot;. On 25 August 1943, Göring hid his collection of looted artwork, including &quot;Christ with the Adulteress&quot;, in an Austrian salt mine, along with 6,750 other pieces of artwork looted by the Nazis. On 17 May 1945, Allied forces entered the salt mine and Captain Harry Anderson discovered the painting.

In May 1945, the Allied forces questioned Miedl regarding the newly discovered Vermeer. Based on Miedl&#x27;s confession, the painting was traced back to Van Meegeren. On 29 May 1945, he was arrested and charged with fraud and aiding and abetting the enemy. He was remanded to the Weteringschans prison as an alleged Nazi collaborator and plunderer of Dutch cultural property, threatened by the authorities with the death penalty. He labored over his predicament, but eventually confessed to forging paintings attributed to Vermeer and Pieter de Hooch. He exclaimed, &quot;The painting in Göring&#x27;s hands is not, as you assume, a Vermeer of Delft, but a Van Meegeren! I painted the picture!&quot; It took some time to verify this, and Van Meegeren was detained for several months in the Headquarters of the Military Command at Herengracht 458 in Amsterdam.

Van Meegeren painted his last forgery between July and December 1945 in the presence of reporters and court-appointed witnesses: &quot;Jesus among the Doctors&quot;, also called &quot;Young Christ in the Temple&quot; in the style of Vermeer. After completing the painting, he was transferred to the fortress prison &quot;Blauwkapel&quot;. Van Meegeren was released from prison in January or February 1946.

===Trial and prison sentence===
The trial of Han van Meegeren began on 29 October 1947 in Room 4 of the Regional Court in Amsterdam. The collaboration charges had been dropped, since the expert panel had found that the supposed Vermeer sold to Hermann Göring had been a forgery and was, therefore, not the cultural property of the Netherlands. Public prosecutor H. A. Wassenbergh brought charges of forgery and fraud and demanded a sentence of two years in prison.
The court commissioned an international group of experts to address the authenticity of Van Meegeren&#x27;s paintings. The commission included curators, professors, and doctors from the Netherlands, Belgium, and England, and was led by the director of the chemical laboratory at the Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium, Paul B. Coremans. The commission examined the eight Vermeer and Frans Hals paintings which Van Meegeren had identified as forgeries. With the help of the commission, Dr. Coremans was able to determine the chemical composition of van Meegeren&#x27;s paints.

He found that the paint contained the phenolformaldehyde resins Bakelite and Albertol as paint hardeners. A bottle had been found in Van Meegeren&#x27;s studio. As Bakelite was not discovered until the 20th century, this proved that the paintings could not be genuine.

The commission also suggested that the dust in the craquelure was too homogeneous to be of natural origin. It appeared to come from India ink, which had accumulated even in areas that natural dirt or dust would never have reached. The paint had become so hard that alcohol, strong acids, and bases did not attack the surface, a clear indication that the surface had not been formed in a natural manner. The craquelure on the surface did not always match that in the ground layer, which would certainly have been the case with a natural craquelure. Thus, the test results obtained by the commission appeared to confirm that the works were forgeries created by Van Meegeren, but their authenticity continued to be debated by some of the experts until 1967 and 1977, when new investigative techniques were used to analyze the paintings (see below).

On 12 November 1947, the Fourth Chamber of the Amsterdam Regional Court found Han van Meegeren guilty of forgery and fraud, and sentenced him to one year in prison. The trial was widely covered in the media, and van Meegeren became a folk hero.

==Death==
While waiting to be moved to prison, Van Meegeren returned to his home, where his health continued to decline. During this last month of his life, he strolled freely around his neighbourhood.

Van Meegeren suffered a heart attack on 26 November 1947, the last day to appeal the ruling, and was rushed to the Valeriuskliniek, a hospital in Amsterdam. While at the hospital, he suffered a second heart attack on 29 December, and was pronounced dead at 5:00 pm on 30 December 1947 at the age of 58. Soon after his death, a plaster death mask was made, which was acquired by the Rijksmuseum in 2014. His family and several hundred of his friends attended his funeral at the Driehuis Westerveld Crematorium chapel. In 1948, his urn was buried in the general cemetery in the village of Diepenveen (municipality of Deventer).

==Aftermath==

After his death, the court ruled that Van Meegeren&#x27;s estate be auctioned and the proceeds from his property and the sale of his counterfeits be used to refund the buyers of his works and to pay income taxes on the sale of his paintings. Van Meegeren had filed for bankruptcy in December 1945. On 5 and 6 September 1950, the contents of his Amsterdam house were auctioned, along with 738 other pieces of furniture and works of art, including numerous paintings by old and new masters from his private collection. The house was auctioned separately on 4 September.

The proceeds amounted to 123,000 guilders. Van Meegeren&#x27;s unsigned &quot;The Last Supper I&quot; was bought for 2,300 guilders, while &quot;Jesus among the Doctors&quot; (which Van Meegeren had painted while in detention) sold for 3,000 guilders (about US$800, or about US$7,000 today). Today the painting hangs in a Johannesburg church. The sale of the entire estate amounted to 242,000 guilders (about US$60,000, or about US$500,000 today).

Throughout his trial and bankruptcy, Van Meegeren maintained that his second wife Jo had nothing to do with his forgeries. A large part of his considerable wealth had been transferred to her when they divorced, and the money would have been confiscated if she had been ruled to be an accomplice. Though some biographers believe she must have known the truth, her involvement was never proven and she was able to keep her substantial capital. Jo outlived her husband by many years, in luxury, until her death at the age of 91.

===M. Jean Decoen&#x27;s objection===
M. Jean Decoen, a Brussels art expert and restorer, stated in his 1951 book he believed &quot;The Supper at Emmaus&quot; and &quot;The Last Supper II&quot; to be genuine Vermeers, and demanded that the paintings should again be examined. He also claimed that Van Meegeren used these paintings as a model for his forgeries. Daniel George Van Beuningen, the buyer of &quot;The Last Supper II&quot;, &quot;Interior with Drinkers&quot;, and &quot;The Head of Christ&quot;, demanded that Dr. Paul Coremans publicly admit that he had erred in his analysis. Coremans refused and Van Beuningen sued him, alleging that Coremans&#x27;s wrongful branding of &quot;The Last Supper II&quot; diminished the value of his &quot;Vermeer&quot; and asking for compensation of £500,000 (about US$1.3 million, or about US$10 million today).

The first trial in Brussels was won by Coremans, because the court adopted the same reasoning of the court ruling at Van Meegeren&#x27;s trial. A second trial was delayed owing to Van Beuningen&#x27;s death on 29 May 1955. 
In 1958 the court heard the case on behalf of Van Beuningen&#x27;s heirs. Coremans managed to give the definitive evidence of the forgeries by showing a photograph of a &quot;Hunting Scene&quot;, attributed to A. Hondius, exactly the same scene which was visible with X-ray under the surface of the alleged Vermeer&#x27;s &quot;Last Supper&quot;. Moreover, Coremans brought a witness to the courtroom who confirmed that Van Meegeren bought the &quot;Hunt scene&quot; in 1940. The court found in favour of Coremans, and the findings of his commission were upheld.

===Further investigations===
In 1967, the Artists Material Center at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh examined several of the &quot;Vermeers&quot; in their collection, under the direction of Robert Feller and Bernard Keisch. The examination confirmed that several of their paintings were in fact created using materials invented in the 20th century. They concluded that they could be Van Meegeren forgeries. The test results obtained by the Carnegie Mellon team are summarized below.

Han van Meegeren knew that white lead was used during Vermeer&#x27;s time, but he had to obtain his stocks through the modern colour trade. In the 17th century, lead was mined from deposits located in the Low Countries; however, by the 19th century, most lead was imported from Australia and the Americas, and differed both in isotope composition and in the content of trace elements. Dutch white lead was extracted from ores containing high levels of trace elements of silver and antimony, while the modern white lead used by Van Meegeren contained neither, as those elements are separated from the lead during the modern smelting process.

Forgeries in which modern lead or white lead pigment has been used can be recognized by using a technique called Pb(Lead)-210-Dating. Pb-210 is a naturally occurring radioactive isotope of lead that is part of the uranium-238 Radioactive decay series, and has a half-life of 22.3 years. To determine the amount of Pb-210, the alpha radiation emitted by another element, polonium-210 (Po-210), is measured. Thus it is possible to estimate the age of a painting, within a few years&#x27; span, by extrapolating the Pb-210 content present in the paint used to create the painting.

The white lead in the painting &quot;The Supper at Emmaus&quot; had polonium-210 values of 8.5±1.4 and radium-226 (part of the uranium-238 radioactive decay series) values of 0.8±0.3. In contrast, the white lead found in Dutch paintings from 1600 to 1660 had polonium-210 values of 0.23±0.27 and radium-226 values of 0.40±0.47.

In 1977, another investigation was undertaken by the States forensic labs of the Netherlands using up-to-date techniques, including gas chromatography, to formally confirm the origin of six van Meegeren forgeries that had been alleged to be genuine Vermeers, including the &quot;Emmaus&quot; and the &quot;Last Supper&quot;. The conclusions of the 1946 commission were again reaffirmed and upheld by the Dutch judicial system.

In 1998, A&amp;E ran a TV program called &quot;Scams, Schemes &amp; Scoundrels&quot; highlighting Van Meegeren&#x27;s life and art forgeries, many of which had been confiscated as Nazi loot. The program was hosted by skeptic James Randi.

In July 2011, the BBC TV programme &quot;Fake or Fortune&quot; investigated a copy of Dirck van Baburen&#x27;s &quot;The Procuress&quot; owned by the Courtauld Institute. Opinion had been divided as to whether it was a 17th-century studio work or a Van Meegeren fake. The programme used chemical analysis of the paint to show that it contained bakelite and thus confirmed that the painting was a 20th-century fake.

==Legacy==
In 2008, Harvard-educated art historian Jonathan Lopez published &quot;The Man Who Made Vermeers, Unvarnishing the Legend of Master Forger Han Van Meegeren&quot;. His extensive research confirmed that Van Meegeren started to make forgeries, not so much because of feeling misunderstood and undervalued by art critics as some maintain, but for the income that it generated, which he needed to support his addictions and lavish lifestyle.

Van Meegeren&#x27;s father was said to have once told Van Meegeren, &quot;You are a cheat and always will be.&quot; Van Meegeren sent a signed copy of his own art book to Adolf Hitler, which turned up in the Reich Chancellery in Berlin complete with an inscription (in German): &quot;To my beloved Führer in grateful tribute, from H. van Meegeren, Laren, North Holland, 1942&quot;. He only admitted the signature was his own, although the entire inscription was by the same hand. He bought up homes of several departed Jewish families in Amsterdam and held lavish parties while much of the country was hungry. On the other hand, his brothers and sisters perceived him as loyal, generous, and affectionate, and he was always loving and helpful to his own children.

Van Meegeren continued to paint after he was released from prison, signing his works with his own name. His new-found profile ensured quick sales of his new paintings, often selling at prices that were many times higher than before he had been unmasked as a forger. Van Meegeren also told the news media that he had &quot;an offer from a Manhattan gallery to come to the U.S. and paint portraits &#x27;in the 17th-century manner&#x27; at US$6,000 a throw&quot;.

A Dutch opinion poll conducted in October 1947 placed Han van Meegeren&#x27;s popularity second in the nation, behind only the Prime Minister&#x27;s and slightly ahead of Prince Bernhard, the husband of Princess Juliana. The Dutch people viewed Van Meegeren as a cunning trickster who had successfully fooled the Dutch art experts and, more importantly, Hermann Göring himself. In fact, according to a contemporary account, Göring was informed that his &quot;Vermeer&quot; was actually a forgery and &quot;[Göring] looked as if for the first time he had discovered there was evil in the world&quot;. Lopez, however, suggests Göring may never have known the painting was a fake.

Lopez argued that Han van Meegeren&#x27;s defence during his trial in Amsterdam was a masterpiece of trickery, forging his own personality into a true Dutchman eager to trick his critics and also the Dutch people by pretending that he sold his fake Vermeer to Göring because he wanted to teach the Nazi a lesson. Van Meegeren remains one of the most ingenious art counterfeiters of the 20th century. After his trial, however, he declared, &quot;My triumph as a counterfeiter was my defeat as [a] creative artist.&quot;

==List of forgeries==

===Known forgeries===

List of known forgeries by Han van Meegeren (unless specified differently, they are after Vermeer):
* A counterpart to &quot;Laughing Cavalier&quot; after Frans Hals (1923) once the subject of a scandal in The Hague in 1923, its present whereabouts is unknown.
*&quot;The Happy Smoker&quot; after Frans Hals (1923) hangs in the Groninger Museum in the Netherlands
*&quot;Man and Woman at a Spinet&quot; 1932 (perhaps without misleading intentions, sold to Amsterdam banker, Dr. Fritz Mannheimer)
*&quot;Lady reading a letter&quot; 1935–1936 (unsold, on display at the Rijksmuseum)
*&quot;Lady playing a lute and looking out the window&quot; 1935–1936 (unsold, on display at the Rijksmuseum)
*&quot;Portrait of a Man&quot; 1935–1936 in the style of Gerard ter Borch (unsold, on display at the Rijksmuseum)
*&quot;Woman Drinking&quot; after Frans Hals (version of Malle Babbe) 1935–1936 (unsold, on display at the Rijksmuseum.)
*&quot;The Supper at Emmaus&quot;, 1936–1937 (sold to the Boymans for 520,000–550,000 guldens, about US$300,000 or US$4 Million today)
*&quot;Interior with Drinkers&quot; 1937–1938 (sold to D G. van Beuningen for 219,000–220,000 guldens about US$120,000 or US$1.6 million today)
*&quot;The Last Supper I&quot;, 1938–1939
*&quot;Interior with Cardplayers&quot; 1938–1939 (sold to W. van der Vorm for 219,000–220,000 guldens US$120,000 or US$1.6 million today)
*&quot;The Head of Christ&quot;, 1940–1941 (sold to D G. van Beuningen for 400,000–475,000 guldens about US$225,000 or US$3.25 million today)
*&quot;The Last Supper II&quot;, 1940–1942 (sold to D G. van Beuningen for 1,600,000 guldens about US$600,000 or US$7 million today)
*&quot;The Blessing of Jacob&quot; 1941–1942 (sold to W. van der Vorm for 1,270,000 guldens about US$500,000 or US$5.75 million today)
*&quot;Christ with the Adulteress&quot; 1941–1942 (sold to Hermann Göring for 1,650,000 guldens about US$624,000 or US$6.75 million today, now in the public collection of Museum de Fundatie)
*&quot;The Washing of the Feet&quot; 1941–1943 (sold to the Netherlands state for 1,250,000–1,300,000 guldens about US$500,000 or US$5.3 million today, on display at the Rijksmuseum)
*&quot;Jesus among the Doctors&quot; September 1945 (painted during trial under Court&#x27;s control, and sold at auction for 3,000 guldens, about US$800 or US$7,000 today)
*&quot;The Procuress&quot; given to the Courtauld Institute as a fake in 1960 and confirmed as such by chemical analysis in 2011.

Posthumously, Van Meegeren&#x27;s forgeries have been shown in exhibitions around the world, including exhibitions in Amsterdam (1952), Basel (1953), Zürich (1953), Haarlem in the Kunsthandel de Boer (1958), London (1961), Rotterdam (1971), Minneapolis (1973), Essen (1976–1977), Berlin (1977), (1985), New York (1987), Berkeley, CA (1990), Munich (1991), Rotterdam (1996), The Hague (1996) and more recently at the Haagse Kunstkring, The Hague (2004) and Stockholm (2004), and have thus been made broadly accessible to the public.

===Potential forgeries===
It is possible that other fakes hang in art collections all over the world.  Jacques van Meegeren suggested that his father had created a number of other forgeries, during interviews with journalists regarding discussions with his father. Some of these possible forgeries include:

*&quot;Boy with a Little Dog&quot; and &quot;The Rommelpotspeler&quot; after Frans Hals. The Frans Hals catalogue by Frans L. M. Dony mentions four paintings by this name attributed to Frans Hals or the &quot;school of Frans Hals&quot;. 
*A counterpart to Vermeer&#x27;s &quot;Girl with a Pearl Earring&quot;. A painting called &quot;Smiling Girl&quot; hangs in the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. (bequest Andrew W. Mellon) which has been recognized by the museum as a fake. It was attributed to Theo van Wijngaarden, friend and partner of Van Meegeren, but may have been painted by Van Meegeren.
*&quot;The Lacemaker&quot;, c. 1925, owned by the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. (bequest Andrew W. Mellon) which has been recognized by the museum as a fake. It may have been painted by Van Meegeren or Theo van Wijngaarde.
*&quot;Lady with a Blue Hat&quot; after Vermeer which was sold to Baron Heinrich Thyssen in 1930. Its present whereabouts are unknown. It is often referred to as the “Greta Garbo” Vermeer.

==Original artwork==
Van Meegeren was a prolific artist and produced thousands of original paintings in a number of diverse styles. This wide range in painting and drawing styles often irritated art critics. Some of his typical works are classical still lifes in convincing 17th-century manner, Impressionistic paintings of people frolicking on lakes or beaches, jocular drawings where the subject is drawn with rather odd features, and Surrealistic paintings with combined fore- and backgrounds. Van Meegeren&#x27;s portraits, however, are probably his finest works.

Among his original works is his famous &quot;Deer&quot;, pictured above. Other works include his prize-winning &quot;St. Laurens Cathedral&quot;; a &quot;Portrait of the actress Jo Oerlemans&quot; (his second wife); his &quot;Night Club&quot;; from the Roaring Twenties; the cheerful watercolor &quot;A Summer Day on the Beach&quot; and many others.

===The forger, forged===

Van Meegeren&#x27;s own work rose in price after he had become known as a forger, and it consequently became worthwhile to fake his paintings, as well. Existing paintings obtained a signature &quot;H. van Meegeren&quot;, or new pictures were made in his style and falsely signed. When Van Meegeren saw a fake like that, he ironically remarked that he would have adopted them if they had been good enough, but regrettably he had not yet seen one.

Later on, however, his son Jacques van Meegeren started to fake his father&#x27;s work. He made paintings in his father&#x27;s style – although of much lower quality – and was able to place a perfect signature on these imitations. Many fakes – both by Jacques and by others – are still on the market.

==In media==
Han van Meegeren was played by Guy Pearce in the movie &quot;The Last Vermeer&quot;, which tells the story of the investigation into his sale of the painting &quot;Jesus and the Adulteress&quot; to Nazi officer Hermann Göring.&quot; &quot;The movie was based on the book &quot;The Man Who Made Vermeers, Unvarnishing the Legend of Master Forger Han Van Meegeren&quot;, by Jonathan Lopez.&quot;&quot;

== Footnotes ==
==References==
=== Sources ===
*
*
* 
* 

==Further reading==

List of Works
* Kreuger, Frederik H. (2013). &quot;Han van Meegeren Revisited. His Art &amp; a List of his Works&quot;, Fourth enlarged edition. Quantes Publishers Rijswijk, Delft 2013. 

Source
* Arend Hendrik Huussen Jr.: &quot;Henricus (Han) Antonius van Meegeren (1889 - 1945). Documenten betreffende zijn leven en strafproces&quot;. (Cahiers uit het noorden 20), Zoetermeer, Huussen 2009.
* Arend Hendrik Huussen Jr.: &quot;Henricus (Han) Antonius van Meegeren (1889 - 1945). Documenten, supplement&quot;. (Cahiers uit het noorden 21), Zoetermeer, Huussen 2010.

Han van Meegeren biographies
*Baesjou, Jan (1956). &quot;The Vermeer forgeries: The story of Han van Meegeren&quot;. G. Bles. A biography/novel based on the author&#x27;s conversations with van Meegeren&#x27;s second wife. 
*Brandhof, Marijke van den (1979): &quot;Een vroege Vermeer uit 1937: Achtergronden van leven en werken van de schilder/vervalser Han van Meegeren&quot;. Utrecht: Spectrum, 1979. The only scholarly biography of van Meegeren. An English-language summary is offered by Werness (1983).
*Godley, John Raymond Lord Kilbracken (1967). &quot;Van Meegeren: A case history&quot;. London: Thomas Nelson and Sons, Ltd. 1967, New York: Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons. The standard English-language account, based on the author&#x27;s literature research and conversations with van Meegeren&#x27;s son and daughter.
* This &quot;novel&quot; (&quot;romanzo&quot;) itself is a sort of forgery. As Henry Keazor in the German newspaper &quot;Frankfurter Rundschau&quot; could show in 2005 (see: &quot;Gefälscht!&quot;, April 12, 2005, No. 84, Forum Humanwissenschaften, p. 16), Guarnieri has copied large parts of his book (sometime word by word) from Lord Kilbracken&#x27;s 1967-biography. Since Guarnieri&#x27;s brother Giovanni works as a translator, [see: ] Luigi easily could have had the English text translated into the Italian. Keazor shows that Guarnieri tried to cover his tracks by not referring to the book by Kilbracken – he only mentions (p. 212) his earlier and different book (&quot;Master Art Forger. The story of Han van Meegeren&quot;, New York 1951) which, however, was published under Kilbracken&#x27;s civil name &quot;John Godley&quot;.
*Isheden, Per-Inge (2007). van Meegeren—konstförfalskarnas konung [van Meegeren—king of art forgeries]. &quot;Kvällsstunden: Hemmets och familjens veckotidning 69&quot;(38), 3, 23. (In Swedish, with side-by-side examples of originals and van Meegeren&#x27;s forgeries.)
*Kreuger, Frederik H. (2007). &quot;A New Vermeer: Life and Work of Han van Meegeren&quot;. Quantes Publishers, Rijswijk 2007. 
*Moiseiwitsch, Maurice (1964). &quot;The Van Meegeren mystery; a biographical study&quot;. London: A. Barker. 

Novels about or inspired by Han van Meegeren
*

Films about or inspired by Han van Meegeren
*Peter Greenaway&#x27;s &quot;A Zed &amp; Two Noughts&quot; (1985). In this film Gerard Thoolen plays &quot;Van Meegeren&quot;, a surgeon and painter modeled after Han van Meegeren.
*Jan Botermans and Gustav Maguel (1951). &quot;Van Meegeren&#x27;s false Vermeers&quot; [Film]. (See Sepp Schueller, p. 57.)
*
*Dan Friedkin&#x27;s &quot;The Last Vermeer&quot; (2019), in which Han van Meegeren is played by Guy Pearce.

Plays inspired by Han van Meegeren
*Bruce J. Robinson (2007). &quot;Another Vermeer&quot; [Play]. Produced by the Abingdon Theatre Company of New York City
*Ian Walker (playwright). &quot;Ghost in the Light&quot; [Play]. Produced by Second Wind Productions of San Francisco.
* David Jon Wiener. &quot;The Master Forger&quot; [Play]. Produced by Octad-One Productions Lakeside, CA and The Tabard Theatre London, England.
==External links==

*Pictures in the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam
*Photo from Van Meegeren&#x27;s trial
*The Meegeren website with many examples of Van Meegeren&#x27;s own paintings, as well as updated information regarding his personal and professional life, compiled by Frederik H. Kreuger.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q436161" start="0" end="17" title="Han van Meegeren" label="Henricus Antonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q436161" start="24" end="27" title="Han van Meegeren" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q436161" start="34" end="46" title="Han van Meegeren" label="van Meegeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400612" start="160" end="171" title="Art forgery" label="art forgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="235" end="247" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q170168" start="313" end="328" title="Reichsmarschall" label="Reichsmarschall"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="335" end="349" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q706454" start="361" end="395" title="Nazi occupation of the Netherlands" label="Nazi occupation of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352880" start="549" end="565" title="Dutch Golden Age painting" label="Dutch Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q329815" start="673" end="688" title="Abraham Bredius" label="Abraham Bredius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41264" start="758" end="766" title="Johannes Vermeer" label="Vermeers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="1854" end="1867" title="Impressionist" label="Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q752663" start="2258" end="2288" title="Delft University of Technology" label="Delft University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="2757" end="2766" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q506745" start="3259" end="3267" title="Rijswijk" label="Rijswijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120984" start="3283" end="3314" title="Jacques van Meegeren" label="Jacques Henri Emil van Meegeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q837211" start="3428" end="3440" title="Scheveningen" label="Scheveningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q511291" start="3486" end="3506" title="Royal Academy of Art (The Hague)" label="Royal Academy of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q788472" start="3732" end="3739" title="Dutch gulden" label="guldens"/>
<link wikidata="Q622508" start="3797" end="3811" title="Christmas card" label="Christmas card"/>
<link wikidata="Q170571" start="3814" end="3824" title="still-life" label="still-life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4009" end="4026" title="Kunstzaal Pictura" label="Kunstzaal Pictura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678151" start="4094" end="4111" title="Haagse Kunstkring" label="Haagse Kunstkring"/>
<link wikidata="Q863935" start="4196" end="4206" title="Binnenhof" label="Ridderzaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q122069" start="4310" end="4318" title="roe deer" label="roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q154946" start="4332" end="4348" title="Juliana of the Netherlands" label="Princess Juliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="4711" end="4727" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352880" start="4815" end="4828" title="Dutch masters" label="Dutch masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5075" end="5080" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="5165" end="5173" title="portrait" label="portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128" start="5281" end="5288" title="Woerden" label="Woerden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164507" start="5439" end="5449" title="art critic" label="art critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q167654" start="5879" end="5889" title="Frans Hals" label="Frans Hals"/>
<link wikidata="Q435989" start="5964" end="5974" title="Old Master" label="Old Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q194070" start="6196" end="6205" title="facsimile" label="facsimile"/>
<link wikidata="Q220668" start="7062" end="7083" title="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin" label="Roquebrune-Cap-Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216798" start="7376" end="7388" title="lapis lazuli" label="lapis lazuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q656004" start="7390" end="7400" title="white lead" label="white lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967009" start="7402" end="7408" title="indigo" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q104614" start="7414" end="7422" title="cinnabar" label="cinnabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q145897" start="7634" end="7653" title="phenol formaldehyde" label="phenol formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981547" start="8203" end="8212" title="India ink" label="India ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q166937" start="8504" end="8534" title="Woman in Blue Reading a Letter" label="Woman in Blue Reading a Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q190804" start="8548" end="8559" title="Rijksmuseum" label="Rijksmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q839359" start="8637" end="8668" title="Woman With a Lute Near a Window" label="Woman With a Lute Near a Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="8690" end="8716" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="8720" end="8733" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q190804" start="8798" end="8809" title="Rijksmuseum" label="Rijksmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8150" start="8839" end="8859" title="1936 Summer Olympics" label="1936 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="8863" end="8869" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="9210" end="9250" title="Caravaggio" label="Michelangelo Merisi da Caravaggio&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097931" start="9257" end="9273" title="Supper at Emmaus (Caravaggio, Milan)" label="Supper at Emmaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="9292" end="9297" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150066" start="9305" end="9324" title="Pinacoteca di Brera" label="Pinacoteca di Brera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9383" end="9393" title="C. A. Boon" label="C. A. Boon"/>
<link wikidata="Q329815" start="9470" end="9485" title="Abraham Bredius" label="Abraham Bredius"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="9509" end="9515" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q523974" start="9866" end="9879" title="View of Delft" label="View of Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q678611" start="9910" end="9920" title="Nieuwe Kerk (Delft)" label="New Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016639" start="10240" end="10263" title="The Burlington Magazine" label="The Burlington Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12037087" start="10533" end="10551" title="Micro-spectrophotometry" label="micro-spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203607" start="10679" end="10682" title="guilders" label="fl."/>
<link wikidata="Q679527" start="10802" end="10831" title="Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen" label="Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="10835" end="10844" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q150747" start="10920" end="10936" title="Wilhelmina of the Netherlands" label="Queen Wilhelmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="11369" end="11378" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154338" start="11383" end="11392" title="Matthias Grünewald" label="Grünewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="11501" end="11505" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092126" start="11551" end="11557" title="Cimiez" label="Cimiez"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11989" end="12005" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9945" start="12078" end="12083" title="Laren, North Holland" label="Laren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622759" start="12811" end="12824" title="Keizersgracht" label="Keizersgracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q523166" start="13213" end="13219" title="gracht" label="gracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="13267" end="13272" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q706454" start="13317" end="13353" title="German occupation of the Netherlands" label="German occupation of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639521" start="13483" end="13494" title="Alois Miedl" label="Alois Miedl"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="13679" end="13687" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170168" start="13881" end="13896" title="Reichsmarschall" label="Reichsmarschall"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="13903" end="13917" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q328376" start="13929" end="13945" title="Nazi plunder" label="looted paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="14110" end="14117" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820490" start="14248" end="14270" title="List of Monuments, Fine Arts, and Archives personnel" label="Captain Harry Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="14514" end="14519" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667245" start="14524" end="14543" title="aiding and abetting" label="aiding and abetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261588" start="14614" end="14631" title="Pursuit of Nazi collaborators" label="Nazi collaborator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780299" start="16103" end="16115" title="Authenticity in art" label="authenticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q377500" start="16314" end="16351" title="Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium" label="Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647037" start="16353" end="16369" title="Paul B. Coremans" label="Paul B. Coremans"/>
<link wikidata="Q145897" start="16649" end="16674" title="phenol formaldehyde resin" label="phenolformaldehyde resins"/>
<link wikidata="Q146578" start="16675" end="16683" title="Bakelite" label="Bakelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329067" start="16932" end="16942" title="craquelure" label="craquelure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="18201" end="18213" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q190804" start="18559" end="18570" title="Rijksmuseum" label="Rijksmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905573" start="18764" end="18774" title="Diepenveen" label="Diepenveen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="19018" end="19028" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="19088" end="19098" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="19710" end="19722" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q538840" start="21657" end="21667" title="Abraham Hondius" label="A. Hondius"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="21715" end="21720" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="22080" end="22106" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="22110" end="22120" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q656004" start="22531" end="22541" title="white lead" label="white lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="22831" end="22838" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="22974" end="22980" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="22985" end="22993" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="23127" end="23135" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372384" start="23280" end="23286" title="Pb-210" label="Pb-210"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="23360" end="23371" title="uranium-238" label="uranium-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="23372" end="23396" title="Decay chain" label="Radioactive decay series"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="23408" end="23417" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="23472" end="23487" title="alpha radiation" label="alpha radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395430" start="23516" end="23528" title="polonium-210" label="polonium-210"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387321" start="23828" end="23838" title="radium-226" label="radium-226"/>
<link wikidata="Q677065" start="24186" end="24204" title="gas chromatography" label="gas chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="24491" end="24498" title="A&amp;amp;E (TV channel)" label="A&amp;amp;E"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="24707" end="24718" title="James Randi" label="James Randi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431488" start="24762" end="24777" title="Fake or Fortune" label="Fake or Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q380708" start="24807" end="24824" title="Dirck van Baburen" label="Dirck van Baburen"/>
<link wikidata="Q63341" start="24838" end="24851" title="The Procuress (Dirck van Baburen)" label="The Procuress"/>
<link wikidata="Q146578" start="25065" end="25073" title="bakelite" label="bakelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="25157" end="25164" title="Harvard" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499784" start="25188" end="25202" title="Jonathan Lopez (writer)" label="Jonathan Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="25757" end="25769" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q735519" start="26941" end="26962" title="Louis Beel" label="Prime Minister&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q57304" start="26985" end="27000" title="Prince Bernhard of Lippe-Biesterfeld" label="Prince Bernhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q154946" start="27017" end="27033" title="Juliana of the Netherlands" label="Princess Juliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q965124" start="28184" end="28201" title="Laughing Cavalier" label="Laughing Cavalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542668" start="28387" end="28403" title="Groninger Museum" label="Groninger Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q92201" start="28537" end="28553" title="Fritz Mannheimer" label="Fritz Mannheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q474198" start="28921" end="28932" title="Malle Babbe" label="Malle Babbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436387" start="30025" end="30043" title="Museum de Fundatie" label="Museum de Fundatie"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="30668" end="30673" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="30682" end="30688" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q9920" start="30697" end="30704" title="Haarlem" label="Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30712" end="30731" title="Kunsthandel de Boer" label="Kunsthandel de Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="30740" end="30746" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="30773" end="30784" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="30793" end="30798" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="30852" end="30864" title="Berkeley, CA" label="Berkeley, CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="30873" end="30879" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="30988" end="30997" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q185372" start="31650" end="31675" title="Girl with a Pearl Earring" label="Girl with a Pearl Earring"/>
<link wikidata="Q20192588" start="31707" end="31719" title="Smiling Girl" label="Smiling Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="31739" end="31762" title="National Gallery of Art" label="National Gallery of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q446858" start="31792" end="31808" title="Andrew W. Mellon" label="Andrew W. Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781518" start="31882" end="31902" title="Theo van Wijngaarden" label="Theo van Wijngaarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="32033" end="32056" title="National Gallery of Art" label="National Gallery of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q446858" start="32086" end="32102" title="Andrew W. Mellon" label="Andrew W. Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65299" start="32292" end="32308" title="Heinrich, Baron Thyssen-Bornemisza de Kászon" label="Heinrich Thyssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120984" start="33830" end="33850" title="Jacques van Meegeren" label="Jacques van Meegeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q223745" start="34149" end="34159" title="Guy Pearce" label="Guy Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621513" start="34179" end="34195" title="The Last Vermeer" label="The Last Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453113" start="34614" end="34634" title="Frederik H. Kreuger" label="Kreuger, Frederik H."/>
<link wikidata="Q6235587" start="35674" end="35710" title="John Godley, 3rd Baron Kilbracken" label="Godley, John Raymond Lord Kilbracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453113" start="37102" end="37122" title="Frederik H. Kreuger" label="Kreuger, Frederik H."/>
<link wikidata="Q55282" start="37434" end="37449" title="Peter Greenaway" label="Peter Greenaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q602236" start="37463" end="37486" title="A Zed &amp;amp; Two Noughts" label="A Zed &amp;amp; Two Noughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242274" start="37514" end="37528" title="Gerard Thoolen" label="Gerard Thoolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q774306" start="37563" end="37570" title="surgeon" label="surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879918" start="37743" end="37755" title="Dan Friedkin" label="Dan Friedkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621513" start="37769" end="37785" title="The Last Vermeer" label="The Last Vermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q223745" start="37839" end="37849" title="Guy Pearce" label="Guy Pearce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983175" start="38009" end="38032" title="Ian Walker (playwright)" label="Ian Walker (playwright)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50479" wikidata="Q3255375" url="?curid=50479" title="List of business schools in Canada">
<text>The following is a list of [[business school]]s in [[Canada]], organized by province.

== Alberta ==

== British Columbia ==
== Manitoba ==
== New Brunswick ==
== Newfoundland and Labrador ==
== Nova Scotia ==
== Ontario ==

== Prince Edward Island ==
== Quebec ==
== Saskatchewan ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3255375" start="19" end="61" title="List of business schools in Canada" label="list of [[business school]]s in [[Canada]]"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50482" wikidata="Q8068" url="?curid=50482" title="Flood">
<text>A flood is an overflow of water (or rarely other fluids) that submerges land that is usually dry. In the sense of &quot;flowing water&quot;, the word may also be applied to the inflow of the tide. Floods are of significant concern in agriculture, civil engineering and public health. Human changes to the environment often increase the intensity and frequency of flooding. Examples for human changes are land use changes such as deforestation and removal of wetlands, changes in waterway course or flood controls such as with levees. Global environmental issues also influence causes of floods, namely climate change which causes an intensification of the water cycle and sea level rise. For example, climate change makes extreme weather events more frequent and stronger. This leads to more intense floods and increased flood risk.

Natural types of floods include river flooding, groundwater flooding coastal flooding and urban flooding sometimes known as flash flooding. Tidal flooding may include elements of both river and coastal flooding processes in estuary areas. There is also the intentional flooding of land that would otherwise remain dry. This may take place for agricultural, military, or river-management purposes. For example, agricultural flooding may occur in preparing paddy fields for the growing of semi-aquatic rice in many countries. 

Flooding may occur as an overflow of water from water bodies, such as a river, lake, sea or ocean. In these cases, the water overtops or breaks levees, resulting in some of that water escaping its usual boundaries. Flooding may also occur due to an accumulation of rainwater on saturated ground. This is called an &quot;areal flood&quot;. The size of a lake or other body of water naturally varies with seasonal changes in precipitation and snow melt. Those changes in size are however not considered a flood unless they flood property or drown domestic animals.

Floods can also occur in rivers when the flow rate exceeds the capacity of the river channel, particularly at bends or meanders in the waterway. Floods often cause damage to homes and businesses if these buildings are in the natural flood plains of rivers. People could avoid riverine flood damage by moving away from rivers. However, people in many countries have traditionally lived and worked by rivers because the land is usually flat and fertile. Also, the rivers provide easy travel and access to commerce and industry. 

Flooding can damage property and also lead to secondary impacts. These include in the short term an increased spread of waterborne diseases and vector-bourne diseases, for example those diseases transmitted by mosquitos. Flooding can also lead to long-term displacement of residents. Floods are an area of study of hydrology and hydraulic engineering. 

A large amount of the world&#x27;s population lives in close proximity to major coastlines, while many major cities and agricultural areas are located near floodplains. There is significant risk for increased coastal and fluvial flooding due to changing climatic conditions. 

==Types==


=== Areal flooding ===

Floods can happen on flat or low-lying areas when water is supplied by rainfall or snowmelt more rapidly than it can either infiltrate or run off. The excess accumulates in place, sometimes to hazardous depths. Surface soil can become saturated, which effectively stops infiltration, where the water table is shallow, such as a floodplain, or from intense rain from one or a series of storms. Infiltration also is slow to negligible through frozen ground, rock, concrete, paving, or roofs. Areal flooding begins in flat areas like floodplains and in local depressions not connected to a stream channel, because the velocity of overland flow depends on the surface slope. Endorheic basins may experience areal flooding during periods when precipitation exceeds evaporation.

===River flooding===
Floods occur in all types of river and stream channels, from the smallest ephemeral streams in humid zones to normally-dry channels in arid climates to the world&#x27;s largest rivers. When overland flow occurs on tilled fields, it can result in a muddy flood where sediments are picked up by run off and carried as suspended matter or bed load. Localized flooding may be caused or exacerbated by drainage obstructions such as landslides, ice, debris, or beaver dams.

Slow-rising floods most commonly occur in large rivers with large catchment areas. The increase in flow may be the result of sustained rainfall, rapid snow melt, monsoons, or tropical cyclones. However, large rivers may have rapid flooding events in areas with dry climates, since they may have large basins but small river channels, and rainfall can be very intense in smaller areas of those basins.

In extremely flat areas, such as the Red River Valley of the North in Minnesota, North Dakota, and Manitoba, a type of hybrid river/areal flooding can occur, known locally as &quot;overland flooding&quot;. This is different from &quot;overland flow&quot; defined as &quot;surface runoff&quot;. The Red River Valley is a former glacial lakebed, created by Lake Agassiz, and over a length of , the river course drops only , for an average slope of about 5 inches per mile (or 8.2 cm per kilometer). In this very large area, spring snowmelt happens at different rates in different places, and if winter snowfall was heavy, a fast snowmelt can push water out of the banks of a tributary river so that it moves overland, to a point further downstream in the river or completely to another streambed. Overland flooding can be devastating because it is unpredictable, it can occur very suddenly with surprising speed, and in such flat land it can run for miles. It is these qualities that set it apart from simple &quot;overland flow&quot;. 

Rapid flooding events, including flash floods, more often occur on smaller rivers, rivers with steep valleys, rivers that flow for much of their length over impermeable terrain, or normally-dry channels. The cause may be localized convective precipitation (intense thunderstorms) or sudden release from an upstream impoundment created behind a dam, landslide, or glacier. In one instance, a flash flood killed eight people enjoying the water on a Sunday afternoon at a popular waterfall in a narrow canyon. Without any observed rainfall, the flow rate increased from about in just one minute. Two larger floods occurred at the same site within a week, but no one was at the waterfall on those days. The deadly flood resulted from a thunderstorm over part of the drainage basin, where steep, bare rock slopes are common and the thin soil was already saturated. 

Flash floods are the most common flood type in normally-dry channels in arid zones, known as arroyos in the southwest United States and many other names elsewhere. In that setting, the first flood water to arrive is depleted as it wets the sandy stream bed. The leading edge of the flood thus advances more slowly than later and higher flows. As a result, the rising limb of the hydrograph becomes ever quicker as the flood moves downstream, until the flow rate is so great that the depletion by wetting soil becomes insignificant.

=== Coastal flooding ===
Coastal areas may be flooded by storm surges combining with high tides and large wave events at sea, resulting in waves over-topping flood defenses or in severe cases by tsunami or tropical cyclones. A storm surge, from either a tropical cyclone or an extratropical cyclone, falls within this category. A storm surge is &quot;an additional rise of water generated by a storm, over and above the predicted astronomical tides&quot;. Due to the effects of climate change (e.g. sea level rise and an increase in extreme weather events) and an increase in the population living in coastal areas, the damage caused by coastal flood events has intensified and more people are being affected.

Flooding in estuaries is commonly caused by a combination of storm surges caused by winds and low barometric pressure and large waves meeting high upstream river flows.

=== Urban flooding ===
=== Intentional floods ===

The intentional flooding of land that would otherwise remain dry may take place for agricultural, military or river-management purposes. This is a form of hydraulic engineering. Agricultural flooding may occur in preparing paddy fields for the growing of semi-aquatic rice in many countries.
Flooding for river management may occur in the form of diverting flood waters in a river at flood stage upstream from areas that are considered more valuable than the areas that are sacrificed in this way. This may be done &quot;ad hoc&quot;, or permanently, as in the so-called &quot;overlaten&quot; (literally &quot;let-overs&quot;), an intentionally lowered segment in Dutch riparian levees, like the &quot;Beerse Overlaat&quot; in the left levee of the Meuse between the villages of Gassel and Linden, North Brabant.

Military inundation creates an obstacle in the field that is intended to impede the movement of the enemy. This may be done both for offensive and defensive purposes. Furthermore, in so far as the methods used are a form of hydraulic engineering, it may be useful to differentiate between controlled inundations and uncontrolled ones. Examples for controlled inundations include those in the Netherlands under the Dutch Republic and its successor states in that area and exemplified in the two Hollandic Water Lines, the Stelling van Amsterdam, the Frisian Water Line, the IJssel Line, the Peel-Raam Line, and the Grebbe line in that country. 

To count as &quot;controlled&quot;, a military inundation has to take the interests of the civilian population into account, by allowing them a timely evacuation, by making the inundation &quot;reversible&quot;, and by making an attempt to minimize the adverse ecological impact of the inundation. That impact may also be adverse in a hydrogeological sense if the inundation lasts a long time.

Examples for uncontrolled inundations are the second Siege of Leiden during the first part of the Eighty Years&#x27; War, the flooding of the Yser plain during the First World War, and the Inundation of Walcheren, and the Inundation of the Wieringermeer during the Second World War).

==Causes==

Floods are caused by many factors or a combination of any of these generally prolonged heavy rainfall (locally concentrated or throughout a catchment area), highly accelerated snowmelt, severe winds over water, unusual high tides, tsunamis, or failure of dams, levees, retention ponds, or other structures that retained the water. Flooding can be exacerbated by increased amounts of impervious surface or by other natural hazards such as wildfires, which reduce the supply of vegetation that can absorb rainfall.

During times of rain, some of the water is retained in ponds or soil, some is absorbed by grass and vegetation, some evaporates, and the rest travels over the land as surface runoff. Floods occur when ponds, lakes, riverbeds, soil, and vegetation cannot absorb all the water.

This has been exacerbated by human activities such as draining wetlands that naturally store large amounts of water and building paved surfaces that do not absorb any water. Water then runs off the land in quantities that cannot be carried within stream channels or retained in natural ponds, lakes, and human-made reservoirs. About 30 percent of all precipitation becomes runoff and that amount might be increased by water from melting snow.

===Upslope factors===

River flooding is often caused by heavy rain, sometimes increased by melting snow. A flood that rises rapidly, with little or no warning, is called a flash flood. Flash floods usually result from intense rainfall over a relatively small area, or if the area was already saturated from previous precipitation.

The amount, location, and timing of water reaching a drainage channel from natural precipitation and controlled or uncontrolled reservoir releases determines the flow at downstream locations. Some precipitation evaporates, some slowly percolates through soil, some may be temporarily sequestered as snow or ice, and some may produce rapid runoff from surfaces including rock, pavement, roofs, and saturated or frozen ground. The fraction of incident precipitation promptly reaching a drainage channel has been observed from nil for light rain on dry, level ground to as high as 170 percent for warm rain on accumulated snow.

Most precipitation records are based on a measured depth of water received within a fixed time interval. &quot;Frequency&quot; of a precipitation threshold of interest may be determined from the number of measurements exceeding that threshold value within the total time period for which observations are available. Individual data points are converted to &quot;intensity&quot; by dividing each measured depth by the period of time between observations. This intensity will be less than the actual peak intensity if the &quot;duration&quot; of the rainfall event was less than the fixed time interval for which measurements are reported. Convective precipitation events (thunderstorms) tend to produce shorter duration storm events than orographic precipitation. Duration, intensity, and frequency of rainfall events are important to flood prediction. Short duration precipitation is more significant to flooding within small drainage basins.

The most important upslope factor in determining flood magnitude is the land area of the watershed upstream of the area of interest. Rainfall intensity is the second most important factor for watersheds of less than approximately . The main channel slope is the second most important factor for larger watersheds. Channel slope and rainfall intensity become the third most important factors for small and large watersheds, respectively.

Time of Concentration is the time required for runoff from the most distant point of the upstream drainage area to reach the point of the drainage channel controlling flooding of the area of interest. The time of concentration defines the critical duration of peak rainfall for the area of interest. The critical duration of intense rainfall might be only a few minutes for roof and parking lot drainage structures, while cumulative rainfall over several days would be critical for river basins.

===Downslope factors===
Water flowing downhill ultimately encounters downstream conditions slowing movement. The final limitation in coastal flooding lands is often the ocean or some coastal flooding bars which form natural lakes. In flooding low lands, elevation changes such as tidal fluctuations are significant determinants of coastal and estuarine flooding. Less predictable events like tsunamis and storm surges may also cause elevation changes in large bodies of water. Elevation of flowing water is controlled by the geometry of the flow channel and, especially, by depth of channel, speed of flow and amount of sediments in it Flow channel restrictions like bridges and canyons tend to control water elevation above the restriction. The actual control point for any given reach of the drainage may change with changing water elevation, so a closer point may control for lower water levels until a more distant point controls at higher water levels.

Effective flood channel geometry may be changed by growth of vegetation, accumulation of ice or debris, or construction of bridges, buildings, or levees within the flood channel.

Periodic floods occur on many rivers, forming a surrounding region known as the flood plain. Even when rainfall is relatively light, the shorelines of lakes and bays can be flooded by severe winds—such as during hurricanes—that blow water into the shore areas.

===Climate change===


===Coincidence===
Extreme flood events often result from coincidence such as unusually intense, warm rainfall melting heavy snow pack, producing channel obstructions from floating ice, and releasing small impoundments like beaver dams. Coincident events may cause extensive flooding to be more frequent than anticipated from simplistic statistical prediction models considering only precipitation runoff flowing within unobstructed drainage channels. Debris modification of channel geometry is common when heavy flows move uprooted woody vegetation and flood-damaged structures and vehicles, including boats and railway equipment. Recent field measurements during the 2010–11 Queensland floods showed that any criterion solely based upon the flow velocity, water depth or specific momentum cannot account for the hazards caused by velocity and water depth fluctuations. These considerations ignore further the risks associated with large debris entrained by the flow motion.

==Negative impacts==

Floods can be a huge destructive power. When water flows, it has the ability to demolish all kinds of buildings and objects, such as bridges, structures, houses, trees, and cars. Economical, social and natural environmental damages are common factors that are impacted by flooding events and the impacts that flooding has on these areas can be catastrophic.

=== Impacts on infrastructure and societies ===
There have been numerous flood incidents around the world which have caused devastating damage to infrastructure, the natural environment and human life. 

Floods can have devastating impacts to human societies. Flooding events worldwide are increasing in frequency and severity, leading to increasing costs to societies. 

Catastrophic riverine flooding can result from major infrastructure failures, often the collapse of a dam. It can also be caused by drainage channel modification from a landslide, earthquake or volcanic eruption. Examples include outburst floods and lahars. Tsunamis can cause catastrophic coastal flooding, most commonly resulting from undersea earthquakes.

=== Economic impacts ===
The primary effects of flooding include loss of life and damage to buildings and other structures, including bridges, sewerage systems, roadways, and canals. The economic impacts caused by flooding can be severe.

Every year flooding causes countries billions of dollars worth of damage that threatens the livelihood of individuals. As a result, there is also significant socio-economic threats to vulnerable populations around the world from flooding. For example, in Bangladesh in 2007, a flood was responsible for the destruction of more than one million houses. And yearly in the United States, floods cause over $7 billion in damage.
Flood waters typically inundate farm land, making the land unworkable and preventing crops from being planted or harvested, which can lead to shortages of food both for humans and farm animals. Entire harvests for a country can be lost in extreme flood circumstances. Some tree species may not survive prolonged flooding of their root systems.

Flooding in areas where people live also has significant economic implications for affected neighborhoods. In the United States, industry experts estimate that wet basements can lower property values by 10–25 percent and are cited among the top reasons for not purchasing a home. According to the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), almost 40 percent of small businesses never reopen their doors following a flooding disaster. In the United States, insurance is available against flood damage to both homes and businesses.

Economic hardship due to a temporary decline in tourism, rebuilding costs, or food shortages leading to price increases is a common after-effect of severe flooding. The impact on those affected may cause psychological damage to those affected, in particular where deaths, serious injuries and loss of property occur.

=== Health impacts ===
Fatalities connected directly to floods are usually caused by drowning; the waters in a flood are very deep and have strong currents. Deaths do not just occur from drowning, deaths are connected with dehydration, heat stroke, heart attack and any other illness that needs medical supplies that cannot be delivered.

Injuries can lead to an excessive amount of morbidity when a flood occurs. Injuries are not isolated to just those who were directly in the flood, rescue teams and even people delivering supplies can sustain an injury. Injuries can occur anytime during the flood process; before, during and after. During floods accidents occur with falling debris or any of the many fast moving objects in the water. After the flood rescue attempts are where large numbers injuries can occur.

Communicable diseases are increased due to many pathogens and bacteria that are being transported by the water.There are many waterborne diseases such as cholera, hepatitis A, hepatitis E and diarrheal diseases, to mention a few. Gastrointestinal disease and diarrheal diseases are very common due to a lack of clean water during a flood. Most of clean water supplies are contaminated when flooding occurs. Hepatitis A and E are common because of the lack of sanitation in the water and in living quarters depending on where the flood is and how prepared the community is for a flood.

When floods hit, people lose nearly all their crops, livestock, and food reserves and face starvation.

Floods also frequently damage power transmission and sometimes power generation, which then has knock-on effects caused by the loss of power. This includes loss of drinking water treatment and water supply, which may result in loss of drinking water or severe water contamination. It may also cause the loss of sewage disposal facilities. Lack of clean water combined with human sewage in the flood waters raises the risk of waterborne diseases, which can include typhoid, giardia, cryptosporidium, cholera and many other diseases depending upon the location of the flood.

Damage to roads and transport infrastructure may make it difficult to mobilize aid to those affected or to provide emergency health treatment.

Flooding can cause chronically wet houses, leading to the growth of indoor mold and resulting in adverse health effects, particularly respiratory symptoms. Respiratory diseases are a common after the disaster has occurred. This depends on the amount of water damage and mold that grows after an incident. Research suggests that there will be an increase of 30–50% in adverse respiratory health outcomes caused by dampness and mold exposure for those living in coastal and wetland areas. Fungal contamination in homes is associated with increased allergic rhinitis and asthma. Vector borne diseases increase as well due to the increase in still water after the floods have settled. The diseases that are vector borne are malaria, dengue, West Nile, and yellow fever. Floods have a huge impact on victims&#x27; psychosocial integrity. People suffer from a wide variety of losses and stress. One of the most treated illness in long-term health problems are depression caused by the flood and all the tragedy that flows with one.

==== Loss of life ====
Below is a list of the deadliest floods worldwide, showing events with death tolls at or above 100,000 individuals.
== Positive impacts (benefits) ==
Floods (in particular more frequent or smaller floods) can also bring many benefits, such as recharging ground water, making soil more fertile and increasing nutrients in some soils. Flood waters provide much needed water resources in arid and semi-arid regions where precipitation can be very unevenly distributed throughout the year and kills pests in the farming land. Freshwater floods particularly play an important role in maintaining ecosystems in river corridors and are a key factor in maintaining floodplain biodiversity. Flooding can spread nutrients to lakes and rivers, which can lead to increased biomass and improved fisheries for a few years.

For some fish species, an inundated floodplain may form a highly suitable location for spawning with few predators and enhanced levels of nutrients or food. Fish, such as the weather fish, make use of floods in order to reach new habitats. Bird populations may also profit from the boost in food production caused by flooding.

Flooding can bring benefits, such as making the soil more fertile and providing it with more nutrients. For this reason, periodic flooding was essential to the well-being of ancient communities along the Tigris-Euphrates Rivers, the Nile River, the Indus River, the Ganges and the Yellow River among others.

The viability of hydropower, a renewable source of energy, is also higher in flood prone regions.

== Protections against floods and associated hazards ==

=== Flood management ===

==== Flood management examples ====
In many countries around the world, waterways prone to floods are often carefully managed. Defenses such as detention basins, levees, bunds, reservoirs, and weirs are used to prevent waterways from overflowing their banks. When these defenses fail, emergency measures such as sandbags or portable inflatable tubes are often used to try to stem flooding. Coastal flooding has been addressed in portions of Europe and the Americas with coastal defenses, such as sea walls, beach nourishment, and barrier islands.

In the riparian zone near rivers and streams, erosion control measures can be taken to try to slow down or reverse the natural forces that cause many waterways to meander over long periods of time. Flood controls, such as dams, can be built and maintained over time to try to reduce the occurrence and severity of floods as well. In the United States, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers maintains a network of such flood control dams.

In areas prone to urban flooding, one solution is the repair and expansion of human-made sewer systems and stormwater infrastructure. Another strategy is to reduce impervious surfaces in streets, parking lots and buildings through natural drainage channels, porous paving, and wetlands (collectively known as green infrastructure or sustainable urban drainage systems (SUDS)). Areas identified as flood-prone can be converted into parks and playgrounds that can tolerate occasional flooding. Ordinances can be adopted to require developers to retain stormwater on site and require buildings to be elevated, protected by floodwalls and levees, or designed to withstand temporary inundation. Property owners can also invest in solutions themselves, such as re-landscaping their property to take the flow of water away from their building and installing rain barrels, sump pumps, and check valves.

=== Flood safety planning ===
In the United States, the National Weather Service gives out the advice &quot;Turn Around, Don&#x27;t Drown&quot; for floods; that is, it recommends that people get out of the area of a flood, rather than trying to cross it. At the most basic level, the best defense against floods is to seek higher ground for high-value uses while balancing the foreseeable risks with the benefits of occupying flood hazard zones. Critical community-safety facilities, such as hospitals, emergency-operations centers, and police, fire, and rescue services, should be built in areas least at risk of flooding. Structures, such as bridges, that must unavoidably be in flood hazard areas should be designed to withstand flooding. Areas most at risk for flooding could be put to valuable uses that could be abandoned temporarily as people retreat to safer areas when a flood is imminent.

Planning for flood safety involves many aspects of analysis and engineering, including:
* observation of previous and present flood heights and inundated areas,
* statistical, hydrologic, and hydraulic model analyses,
* mapping inundated areas and flood heights for future flood scenarios,
* long-term land use planning and regulation,
* engineering design and construction of structures to control or withstand flooding,
* intermediate-term monitoring, forecasting, and emergency-response planning, and
* short-term monitoring, warning, and response operations.

Each topic presents distinct yet related questions with varying scope and scale in time, space, and the people involved. Attempts to understand and manage the mechanisms at work in floodplains have been made for at least six millennia.

In the United States, the Association of State Floodplain Managers works to promote education, policies, and activities that mitigate current and future losses, costs, and human suffering caused by flooding and to protect the natural and beneficial functions of floodplains – all without causing adverse impacts. A portfolio of best practice examples for disaster mitigation in the United States is available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

=== Flood clean-up safety ===
Clean-up activities following floods often pose hazards to workers and volunteers involved in the effort. Potential dangers include electrical hazards, carbon monoxide exposure, musculoskeletal hazards, heat or cold stress, motor vehicle-related dangers, fire, drowning, and exposure to hazardous materials. Because flooded disaster sites are unstable, clean-up workers might encounter sharp jagged debris, biological hazards in the flood water, exposed electrical lines, blood or other body fluids, and animal and human remains. In planning for and reacting to flood disasters, managers provide workers with hard hats, goggles, heavy work gloves, life jackets, and watertight boots with steel toes and insoles.

== Flood predictions ==

=== Mathematical models and computer tools ===
A series of annual maximum flow rates in a stream reach can be analyzed statistically to estimate the 100-year flood and floods of other recurrence intervals there. Similar estimates from many sites in a hydrologically similar region can be related to measurable characteristics of each drainage basin to allow indirect estimation of flood recurrence intervals for stream reaches without sufficient data for direct analysis.

Physical process models of channel reaches are generally well understood and will calculate the depth and area of inundation for given channel conditions and a specified flow rate, such as for use in floodplain mapping and flood insurance. Conversely, given the observed inundation area of a recent flood and the channel conditions, a model can calculate the flow rate. Applied to various potential channel configurations and flow rates, a reach model can contribute to selecting an optimum design for a modified channel. Various reach models are available as of 2015, either 1D models (flood levels measured in the channel) or 2D models (variable flood depths measured across the extent of a floodplain). HEC-RAS, the Hydraulic Engineering Center model, is among the most popular software, if only because it is available free of charge. Other models such as TUFLOW combine 1D and 2D components to derive flood depths across both river channels and the entire floodplain.

Physical process models of complete drainage basins are even more complex. Although many processes are well understood at a point or for a small area, others are poorly understood at all scales, and process interactions under normal or extreme climatic conditions may be unknown. Basin models typically combine land-surface process components (to estimate how much rainfall or snowmelt reaches a channel) with a series of reach models. For example, a basin model can calculate the runoff hydrograph that might result from a 100-year storm, although the recurrence interval of a storm is rarely equal to that of the associated flood. Basin models are commonly used in flood forecasting and warning, as well as in analysis of the effects of land use change and climate change.

In the United States, an integrated approach to real-time hydrologic computer modelling uses observed data from the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), various cooperative observing networks, various automated weather sensors, the NOAA National Operational Hydrologic Remote Sensing Center (NOHRSC), various hydroelectric companies, etc. combined with quantitative precipitation forecasts (QPF) of expected rainfall and/or snow melt to generate daily or as-needed hydrologic forecasts. The NWS also cooperates with Environment Canada on hydrologic forecasts that affect both the US and Canada, like in the area of the Saint Lawrence Seaway.

The Global Flood Monitoring System, &quot;GFMS&quot;, a computer tool which maps flood conditions worldwide, is available online. Users anywhere in the world can use GFMS to determine when floods may occur in their area. GFMS uses precipitation data from NASA&#x27;s Earth observing satellites and the Global Precipitation Measurement satellite, &quot;GPM&quot;. Rainfall data from GPM is combined with a land surface model that incorporates vegetation cover, soil type, and terrain to determine how much water is soaking into the ground, and how much water is flowing into streamflow.

Users can view statistics for rainfall, streamflow, water depth, and flooding every 3 hours, at each 12-kilometer gridpoint on a global map. Forecasts for these parameters are 5 days into the future. Users can zoom in to see inundation maps (areas estimated to be covered with water) in 1-kilometer resolution.

=== Flood forecasts and warnings ===

Anticipating floods before they occur allows for precautions to be taken and people to be warned so that they can be prepared in advance for flooding conditions. For example, farmers can remove animals from low-lying areas and utility services can put in place emergency provisions to re-route services if needed. Emergency services can also make provisions to have enough resources available ahead of time to respond to emergencies as they occur. People can evacuate areas to be flooded.

In order to make the most accurate flood forecasts for waterways, it is best to have a long time-series of historical data that relates stream flows to measured past rainfall events. Coupling this historical information with real-time knowledge about volumetric capacity in catchment areas, such as spare capacity in reservoirs, ground-water levels, and the degree of saturation of area aquifers is also needed in order to make the most accurate flood forecasts.

Radar estimates of rainfall and general weather forecasting techniques are also important components of good flood forecasting. In areas where good quality data is available, the intensity and height of a flood can be predicted with fairly good accuracy and plenty of lead time. The output of a flood forecast is typically a maximum expected water level and the likely time of its arrival at key locations along a waterway, and it also may allow for the computation of the likely statistical return period of a flood. In many developed countries, urban areas at risk of flooding are protected against a 100-year flood – that is a flood that has a probability of around 63% of occurring in any 100-year period of time.

According to the U.S. National Weather Service (NWS) Northeast River Forecast Center (RFC) in Taunton, Massachusetts, a rule of thumb for flood forecasting in urban areas is that it takes at least of rainfall in around an hour&#x27;s time in order to start significant ponding of water on impermeable surfaces. Many NWS RFCs routinely issue Flash Flood Guidance and Headwater Guidance, which indicate the general amount of rainfall that would need to fall in a short period of time in order to cause flash flooding or flooding on larger water basins.

=== Flood risk assessment ===

Flood risks can be defined as the risk that floods pose to individuals, property and the natural landscape based on specific hazards and vulnerability. The extent of flood risks can impact the types of mitigation strategies required and implemented.

A large amount of the world&#x27;s population lives in close proximity to major coastlines, while many major cities and agricultural areas are located near floodplains. There is significant risk for increased coastal and fluvial flooding due to changing climatic conditions.

== Examples by country or region ==
* Worldwide: List of floods
* Africa: List of floods#Africa
* Asia: List of floods#Asia
* Europe: List of floods in Europe
** North Sea: Storm tides of the North Sea
** The Netherlands: Floods in the Netherlands, Flood control in the Netherlands
* Oceania: List of floods#Oceania
** Australia: Floods in Australia
* United States: Lists of floods in the United States

== Society and culture ==
=== Myths and religion ===

== Etymology ==

The word &quot;flood&quot; comes from the Old English , a word common to Germanic languages (compare German , Dutch from the same root as is seen in &quot;flow, float&quot;; also compare with Latin , ), meaning &quot;a flowing of water, tide, an overflowing of land by water, a deluge, Noah&#x27;s Flood; mass of water, river, sea, wave&quot;. The Old English word comes from the Proto-Germanic &quot;floduz&quot; (Old Frisian , Old Norse , Middle Dutch , Dutch , German , and Gothic derives from &quot;floduz&quot;).

== See also ==
*
* 
* 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="2" end="7" title="Flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q111911800" start="33" end="55" title="list of non-water floods" label="or rarely other fluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="191" end="195" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="234" end="245" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="247" end="264" title="civil engineering" label="civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="269" end="282" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144359" start="284" end="316" title="Environmental issues" label="Human changes to the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="404" end="419" title="land use change" label="land use change"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="429" end="442" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990118" start="447" end="466" title="Wetland conservation" label="removal of wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187968" start="498" end="511" title="flood control" label="flood control"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="526" end="531" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="602" end="616" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q107525415" start="633" end="667" title="Effects of climate change on the water cycle" label="intensification of the water cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="672" end="686" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="722" end="744" title="Extreme weather" label="extreme weather events"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="903" end="919" title="coastal flooding" label="coastal flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909735" start="924" end="938" title="urban flooding" label="urban flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187134" start="1204" end="1220" title="River management" label="river-management"/>
<link wikidata="Q842623" start="1289" end="1300" title="paddy field" label="paddy field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="1432" end="1437" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="1439" end="1443" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="1504" end="1509" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="1783" end="1796" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="1887" end="1895" title="property" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q506616" start="1899" end="1904" title="drowning" label="drown"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326504" start="1905" end="1921" title="domestication of animals" label="domestic animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210950" start="2003" end="2016" title="Channel (geography)" label="river channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="2043" end="2050" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="2059" end="2067" title="waterway" label="waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q202080" start="2367" end="2374" title="Fertility (soil)" label="fertile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006636" start="2572" end="2591" title="waterborne diseases" label="waterborne diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="2596" end="2618" title="Vector (epidemiology)" label="vector-bourne diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="2767" end="2776" title="hydrology" label="hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130265" start="2781" end="2802" title="hydraulic engineering" label="hydraulic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="2886" end="2896" title="Coastal flooding" label="coastlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="2962" end="2972" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127330" start="3243" end="3253" title="Infiltration (hydrology)" label="infiltrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="3257" end="3264" title="Surface runoff" label="run off"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="3338" end="3342" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="3413" end="3424" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="3447" end="3457" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141490" start="3494" end="3510" title="storm train" label="series of storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="3581" end="3589" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="3746" end="3759" title="Surface runoff" label="overland flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="3790" end="3805" title="Endorheic basin" label="Endorheic basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="3943" end="3948" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="3953" end="3959" title="stream" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3988" end="4005" title="Stream#Intermittent and ephemeral streams" label="ephemeral streams"/>
<link wikidata="Q373315" start="4024" end="4045" title="Arroyo (watercourse)" label="normally-dry channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="4070" end="4090" title="Amazon River" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151445" start="4162" end="4173" title="muddy flood" label="muddy flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="4180" end="4188" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="4194" end="4214" title="Erosion" label="picked up by run off"/>
<link wikidata="Q889515" start="4250" end="4258" title="bed load" label="bed load"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="4341" end="4350" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q262798" start="4353" end="4356" title="Ice jam" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q637703" start="4358" end="4364" title="debris" label="debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="4369" end="4375" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="4449" end="4464" title="Drainage basin" label="catchment areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="4545" end="4552" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="4558" end="4575" title="tropical cyclones" label="tropical cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q156006" start="4822" end="4851" title="Red River of the North" label="Red River Valley of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="4855" end="4864" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="4866" end="4878" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="4884" end="4892" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q390804" start="5140" end="5152" title="Lake Agassiz" label="Lake Agassiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q860333" start="5854" end="5866" title="flash floods" label="flash floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268251" start="6052" end="6076" title="convective precipitation" label="convective precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="6086" end="6098" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="6165" end="6168" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="6184" end="6191" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q373315" start="6776" end="6783" title="Arroyo (watercourse)" label="arroyos"/>
<link wikidata="Q320062" start="7062" end="7072" title="hydrograph" label="hydrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="7241" end="7269" title="Coastal flooding" label="Coastal areas may be flooded"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="7273" end="7284" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="7411" end="7418" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="7443" end="7454" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="7470" end="7486" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063457" start="7493" end="7514" title="extratropical cyclone" label="extratropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="7683" end="7708" title="effects of climate change" label="effects of climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="7715" end="7729" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="7749" end="7764" title="extreme weather" label="extreme weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="7939" end="7948" title="estuary" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="8011" end="8015" title="wind" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="8025" end="8044" title="barometric pressure" label="barometric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130265" start="8303" end="8324" title="hydraulic engineering" label="hydraulic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q842623" start="8371" end="8382" title="paddy field" label="paddy field"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="8897" end="8902" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2771634" start="8927" end="8933" title="Gassel" label="Gassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816501" start="8938" end="8959" title="Linden, North Brabant" label="Linden, North Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001676" start="9095" end="9104" title="Offensive (military)" label="offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="9109" end="9118" title="Defense (military)" label="defensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="9376" end="9390" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054283" start="9399" end="9415" title="Succession of states" label="successor states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210499" start="9456" end="9476" title="Hollandic Water Line" label="Hollandic Water Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q855003" start="9483" end="9505" title="Stelling van Amsterdam" label="Stelling van Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401790" start="9511" end="9529" title="Frisian Water Line" label="Frisian Water Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981375" start="9535" end="9546" title="IJssel Line" label="IJssel Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18768924" start="9552" end="9566" title="Peel-Raam Line" label="Peel-Raam Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q18775429" start="9576" end="9587" title="Grebbe line" label="Grebbe line"/>
<link wikidata="Q606332" start="9758" end="9768" title="Emergency evacuation" label="evacuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="9868" end="9878" title="Ecology" label="ecological"/>
<link wikidata="Q179509" start="9942" end="9957" title="Hydrogeology" label="hydrogeological"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10048" end="10070" title="Siege of Leiden#Second siege, and relief, of Leiden" label="second Siege of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="10100" end="10122" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War (1566–1609)" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10128" end="10154" title="Battle of the Yser#Battle" label="flooding of the Yser plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10166" end="10181" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219353" start="10191" end="10214" title="Inundation of Walcheren" label="Inundation of Walcheren"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987280" start="10224" end="10255" title="Inundation of the Wieringermeer" label="Inundation of the Wieringermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10267" end="10283" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754697" start="10475" end="10483" title="snowmelt" label="snowmelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="10530" end="10537" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="10560" end="10566" title="levees" label="levees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413117" start="10568" end="10582" title="retention pond" label="retention pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="10980" end="10994" title="surface runoff" label="surface runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210950" start="11337" end="11351" title="stream channel" label="stream channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="11405" end="11414" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q860333" start="11707" end="11718" title="flash flood" label="flash flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983324" start="13875" end="13896" title="Time of Concentration" label="Time of Concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="14541" end="14546" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="14596" end="14600" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q121742" start="14777" end="14788" title="storm surge" label="storm surge"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="15591" end="15602" title="flood plain" label="flood plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="15648" end="15657" title="shoreline" label="shoreline"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="15723" end="15733" title="Tropical cyclone" label="hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="16019" end="16025" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q336797" start="16121" end="16161" title="100-year flood" label="simplistic statistical prediction models"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="16408" end="16415" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q837833" start="16464" end="16489" title="2010–11 Queensland floods" label="2010–11 Queensland floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="17578" end="17592" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033074" start="17613" end="17630" title="dam failure" label="collapse of a dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="17694" end="17703" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="17705" end="17715" title="earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692360" start="17719" end="17736" title="volcanic eruption" label="volcanic eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612702" start="17755" end="17769" title="outburst flood" label="outburst flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q47212" start="17775" end="17780" title="lahar" label="lahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="17783" end="17790" title="Tsunami" label="Tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="17815" end="17831" title="coastal flooding" label="coastal flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="17950" end="17962" title="death" label="loss of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q156849" start="18028" end="18036" title="sewerage" label="sewerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="19008" end="19021" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="19196" end="19231" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="Federal Emergency Management Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972708" start="19356" end="19365" title="National Flood Insurance Program" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q506616" start="19834" end="19842" title="drowning" label="drowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456944" start="19896" end="19904" title="Current (fluid)" label="currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="19906" end="19912" title="Deaths" label="Deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="19972" end="19983" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q337554" start="19985" end="19996" title="heat stroke" label="heat stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="19998" end="20010" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="20025" end="20032" title="illness" label="illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="20044" end="20060" title="medical supplies" label="medical supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341429" start="20235" end="20241" title="rescue" label="rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q637703" start="20429" end="20435" title="debris" label="debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="20566" end="20587" title="Communicable diseases" label="Communicable diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="20614" end="20623" title="pathogens" label="pathogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="20628" end="20636" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="20671" end="20676" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006636" start="20692" end="20711" title="waterborne diseases" label="waterborne diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="20720" end="20727" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q157661" start="20729" end="20740" title="hepatitis A" label="hepatitis A"/>
<link wikidata="Q326643" start="20742" end="20753" title="hepatitis E" label="hepatitis E"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="20758" end="20776" title="diarrheal diseases" label="diarrheal diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300099" start="20796" end="20820" title="Gastrointestinal disease" label="Gastrointestinal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="21025" end="21035" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="21125" end="21134" title="community" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242194" start="21286" end="21304" title="power transmission" label="power transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="21319" end="21335" title="power generation" label="power generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135789" start="21352" end="21367" title="knock-on effect" label="knock-on effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058719" start="21429" end="21444" title="water treatment" label="water treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q918223" start="21629" end="21641" title="human sewage" label="human sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006636" start="21681" end="21700" title="waterborne diseases" label="waterborne diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="21720" end="21727" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469628" start="21729" end="21736" title="giardia" label="giardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133078" start="21738" end="21753" title="cryptosporidium" label="cryptosporidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="21755" end="21762" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895739" start="22042" end="22053" title="indoor mold" label="indoor mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="22130" end="22150" title="Respiratory diseases" label="Respiratory diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q19289049" start="22227" end="22239" title="water damage" label="water damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="22244" end="22248" title="Mold (fungus)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="22550" end="22556" title="Vector (epidemiology)" label="Vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="22694" end="22701" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30953" start="22703" end="22709" title="dengue" label="dengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q158856" start="22711" end="22720" title="West Nile virus" label="West Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="22726" end="22738" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329012" start="22796" end="22805" title="integrity" label="integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500368" start="22855" end="22861" title="Stress (psychological)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="22928" end="22938" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="22971" end="22978" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="23278" end="23290" title="ground water" label="ground water"/>
<link wikidata="Q202080" start="23309" end="23316" title="Fertility (soil)" label="fertile"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="23332" end="23340" title="nutrient" label="nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330709" start="23409" end="23413" title="arid" label="arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="23418" end="23427" title="semi-arid" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="23615" end="23624" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="23692" end="23704" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="23785" end="23792" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="23806" end="23815" title="fisheries" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q131747027" start="23921" end="23929" title="spawning" label="spawning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360260" start="24009" end="24021" title="weather fish" label="weather fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608991" start="24366" end="24382" title="Tigris-Euphrates" label="Tigris-Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="24395" end="24405" title="Nile River" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="24411" end="24422" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="24428" end="24434" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="24443" end="24455" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="24488" end="24498" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500933" start="24797" end="24812" title="detention basin" label="detention basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="24815" end="24820" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997541" start="24823" end="24828" title="bunding" label="bunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="24830" end="24840" title="reservoir (water)" label="reservoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066997" start="24846" end="24850" title="weir" label="weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q91398" start="24965" end="24972" title="sandbag" label="sandbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="25043" end="25059" title="Coastal flooding" label="Coastal flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316027" start="25123" end="25139" title="Coastal management" label="coastal defenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359152" start="25149" end="25157" title="sea wall" label="sea wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749926" start="25160" end="25177" title="beach nourishment" label="beach nourishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="25183" end="25197" title="barrier island" label="barrier island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="25208" end="25221" title="riparian zone" label="riparian zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395394" start="25247" end="25262" title="erosion control" label="erosion control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="25557" end="25585" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638253" start="25893" end="25906" title="porous paving" label="porous paving"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="25912" end="25920" title="wetlands" label="wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427027" start="25944" end="25964" title="green infrastructure" label="green infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897115" start="25968" end="26002" title="sustainable urban drainage systems" label="sustainable urban drainage systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460082" start="26255" end="26264" title="floodwall" label="floodwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="26270" end="26276" title="levees" label="levees"/>
<link wikidata="Q14552508" start="26486" end="26498" title="rain barrels" label="rain barrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638034" start="26500" end="26509" title="sump pump" label="sump pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q519336" start="26516" end="26527" title="check valve" label="check valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="26587" end="26611" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341429" start="27086" end="27092" title="rescue" label="rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="27607" end="27617" title="hydrologic" label="hydrologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738778" start="27733" end="27750" title="land use planning" label="land use planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920267" start="27769" end="27787" title="engineering design" label="engineering design"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409303" start="27885" end="27896" title="Flood forecasting" label="forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460084" start="27960" end="27967" title="Flood warning" label="warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q830382" start="28560" end="28573" title="best practice" label="best practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881760" start="28587" end="28606" title="disaster mitigation" label="disaster mitigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q244404" start="28850" end="28868" title="Electric shock" label="electrical hazards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="28870" end="28885" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q726543" start="28896" end="28911" title="musculoskeletal" label="musculoskeletal"/>
<link wikidata="Q242165" start="28921" end="28925" title="Hyperthermia" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="28929" end="28940" title="Hypothermia" label="cold stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q752870" start="28942" end="28955" title="motor vehicle" label="motor vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="28973" end="28977" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q506616" start="28979" end="28987" title="drowning" label="drowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q757138" start="29005" end="29024" title="hazardous materials" label="hazardous materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058262" start="29327" end="29336" title="hard hats" label="hard hats"/>
<link wikidata="Q72797" start="29338" end="29345" title="goggles" label="goggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262971" start="29366" end="29378" title="life jackets" label="life jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q729429" start="29575" end="29588" title="extreme value analysis" label="statistically"/>
<link wikidata="Q336797" start="29605" end="29619" title="100-year flood" label="100-year flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627230" start="29640" end="29660" title="return period" label="recurrence intervals"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="29814" end="29833" title="regression analysis" label="indirect estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460068" start="30152" end="30167" title="flood insurance" label="flood insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q208920" start="30505" end="30507" title="One-dimensional space" label="1D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210950" start="30545" end="30552" title="stream channel" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q222032" start="30557" end="30559" title="Plane (mathematics)" label="2D"/>
<link wikidata="Q594096" start="30635" end="30642" title="HEC-RAS" label="HEC-RAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="30710" end="30718" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="30903" end="30926" title="computer simulation" label="Physical process models"/>
<link wikidata="Q320062" start="31391" end="31401" title="hydrograph" label="hydrograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="31662" end="31676" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="31795" end="31817" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144045" start="31834" end="31864" title="Weather spotting" label="cooperative observing networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826440" start="31874" end="31899" title="Automated airport weather station" label="automated weather sensors"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="31905" end="31909" title="NOAA" label="NOAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="31982" end="31995" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q18402512" start="32026" end="32061" title="quantitative precipitation forecast" label="quantitative precipitation forecast"/>
<link wikidata="Q348789" start="32189" end="32207" title="Environment Canada" label="Environment Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q753288" start="32292" end="32313" title="Saint Lawrence Seaway" label="Saint Lawrence Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="32571" end="32575" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32618" end="32660" title="Global Precipitation Measurement satellite" label="Global Precipitation Measurement satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q29425295" start="32890" end="32900" title="streamflow" label="streamflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="33798" end="33806" title="waterway" label="waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q29425295" start="33879" end="33890" title="stream flow" label="stream flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300787" start="33968" end="33987" title="Real-time data" label="real-time knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q583075" start="34111" end="34121" title="Phreatic zone" label="saturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="34130" end="34137" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="34207" end="34212" title="Weather radar" label="Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182868" start="34247" end="34266" title="weather forecasting" label="weather forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="34948" end="34972" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q127506" start="35020" end="35042" title="Taunton, Massachusetts" label="Taunton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227734" start="35195" end="35202" title="ponding" label="ponding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434713" start="35215" end="35235" title="Impervious surface" label="impermeable surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="35463" end="35474" title="water basin" label="water basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460077" start="35509" end="35520" title="Flood risk assessment" label="Flood risks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="35840" end="35850" title="Coastal flooding" label="coastlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="35916" end="35926" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620530" start="36085" end="36099" title="List of floods" label="List of floods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36110" end="36131" title="List of floods#Africa" label="List of floods#Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36140" end="36159" title="List of floods#Asia" label="List of floods#Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413510" start="36170" end="36194" title="List of floods in Europe" label="List of floods in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q657568" start="36209" end="36237" title="Storm tides of the North Sea" label="Storm tides of the North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434912" start="36258" end="36283" title="Floods in the Netherlands" label="Floods in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q391115" start="36285" end="36317" title="Flood control in the Netherlands" label="Flood control in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36329" end="36351" title="List of floods#Oceania" label="List of floods#Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864844" start="36366" end="36385" title="Floods in Australia" label="Floods in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149589" start="36403" end="36439" title="Lists of floods in the United States" label="Lists of floods in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="36554" end="36565" title="Old English language" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="36585" end="36602" title="Germanic language" label="Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="36613" end="36619" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="36622" end="36627" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="36704" end="36709" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="36892" end="36906" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35133" start="36927" end="36938" title="Old Frisian" label="Old Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="36941" end="36950" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q178806" start="36953" end="36965" title="Middle Dutch" label="Middle Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="36989" end="36995" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50484" wikidata="Q16529344" url="?curid=50484" title="Goose">
<text>A goose (: geese) is a bird of any of several waterfowl species in the family Anatidae. This group comprises the genera &quot;Anser&quot; (grey geese and white geese) and &quot;Branta&quot; (black geese). Some members of the Tadorninae subfamily (e.g., Egyptian goose, Orinoco goose) are commonly called geese, but are not considered &quot;true geese&quot; taxonomically. More distantly related members of the family Anatidae are swans, most of which are larger than true geese, and ducks, which are smaller.

The term &quot;goose&quot; may refer to such bird of either sex, but when paired with &quot;gander&quot;, &quot;goose&quot; refers specifically to a female one (&quot;gander&quot; referring to a male). Young birds before fledging are called goslings. The collective noun for a group of geese on the ground is a gaggle; when in flight, they are called a skein, a team, or a wedge; when flying close together, they are called a plump.

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;goose&quot; is a direct descendant of Proto-Indo-European &quot;*ǵʰh₂éns&quot;. In Germanic languages, the root gave Old English &quot;gōs&quot; with the plural &quot;gēs&quot; and &quot;gandra&quot; (becoming Modern English goose, geese, gander, respectively), West Frisian &quot;goes&quot;, &quot;gies&quot; and &quot;guoske&quot;, , New High German &quot;Gans&quot;, &quot;Gänse&quot;, and &quot;Ganter&quot;, and Old Norse &quot;gás&quot; and &quot;gæslingr&quot;, whence English &quot;gosling&quot;.

This term also gave , (goose, from Old Irish &quot;géiss&quot;), Hindi: &quot;कलहंस,&quot; , Spanish and , Ancient (&quot;khēn&quot;), (swans), , Avestan &quot;zāō&quot;, , , (&quot;huska&quot; / &quot;husak&quot;), (&quot;gusyna&quot; / &quot;gus&quot;), , and (&quot;ghāz&quot;).

== True geese and their relatives ==


The two living genera of true geese are: &quot;Anser&quot;, grey geese and white geese, such as the greylag goose and snow goose, and &quot;Branta&quot;, black geese, such as the Canada goose.

Two genera of geese are only tentatively placed in the Anserinae; they may belong to the shelducks or form a subfamily on their own: &quot;Cereopsis&quot;, the Cape Barren goose, and &quot;Cnemiornis&quot;, the prehistoric New Zealand goose. Either these or, more probably, the goose-like coscoroba swan is the closest living relative of the true geese.

Fossils of true geese are hard to assign to genus; all that can be said is that their fossil record, particularly in North America, is dense and comprehensively documents many different species of true geese that have been around since about 10 million years ago in the Miocene. The aptly named &quot;Anser atavus&quot; (meaning &quot;progenitor goose&quot;) from some 12 million years ago had even more plesiomorphies in common with swans. In addition, some goose-like birds are known from subfossil remains found on the Hawaiian Islands.

Geese are monogamous, living in permanent pairs throughout the year; however, unlike most other permanently monogamous animals, they are territorial only during the short nesting season. Paired geese are more dominant and feed more, two factors that result in more young.

== Fossil record ==
Goose fossils have been found ranging from 10 to 12 million years ago (Middle Miocene). &quot;Garganornis ballmanni&quot; from Late Miocene (~ 6–9 Ma) of Gargano region of central Italy, stood one and a half meters tall and weighed about 22 kilograms. The evidence suggests the bird was flightless, unlike modern geese.

== Migratory patterns ==
Most goose species are migratory, though populations of Canada geese living near human developments may remain in a locality year-round. These &#x27;resident&#x27; geese, found primarily in the eastern United States, may migrate only short distances, or not at all, if they have adequate food supply and access to open water.

=== Navigation ===
Migratory geese may use several environmental cues in timing the beginning of their migration, including temperature, predation threat, and food availability. Like all migratory birds, geese exhibit an ability to navigate using an internal compass, using a combination of innate and learned behaviors. The preferred direction of migration is heritable, and birds appear to orient themselves using Earth&#x27;s magnetic field. Migrations occur over the course of several weeks, and up to 85% of migration time is spent at perennial stopover sites, where individuals rest and build up fat stores for further travel.

=== Formation ===
Geese, like other birds, fly in a V formation. This formation helps to conserve energy in flight, and aids in communication and monitoring of flock mates. Using great white pelicans as a model species, researchers showed that flying in a V formation increased the aerodynamics of trailing birds, thus requiring fewer wing flaps to stay aloft and lowering individuals&#x27; heartrates. Leading geese switch positions on longer flights to allow for multiple individuals to gain benefits from the less energy-intensive trailing positions; in family groups, parental birds almost always lead.

== Other birds called &quot;geese&quot; ==
Some mainly Southern Hemisphere birds are called &quot;geese&quot;, most of which belong to the shelduck subfamily Tadorninae. These are:
* The Orinoco goose (&quot;Neochen jubata&quot;)
* The Egyptian goose (&quot;Alopochen aegyptiaca&quot;)
* The South American sheldgeese in the genus &quot;Chloephaga&quot;
* The prehistoric Malagasy sheldgoose (&quot;Centrornis majori&quot;)

Others:
* The spur-winged goose (&quot;Plectropterus gambensis&quot;) is most closely related to the shelducks, but distinct enough to warrant its own subfamily, the Plectropterinae.
* The blue-winged goose (&quot;Cyanochen cyanopterus&quot;) and the Cape Barren goose (&quot;Cereopsis novaehollandiae&quot;) have disputed affinities. They belong to separate ancient lineages that may ally either to the Tadorninae, the Anserinae, or closer to the dabbling ducks (Anatinae).
* The three species of small waterfowl in the genus &quot;Nettapus&quot; named &quot;pygmy geese&quot;; they seem to represent another ancient lineage, with possible affinities to the Cape Barren goose or the spur-winged goose.
* The maned goose, also known as the maned duck or Australian wood duck (&quot;Chenonetta jubata&quot;)
* A genus of prehistorically extinct seaducks, &quot;Chendytes&quot;, is sometimes called the &quot;diving-geese&quot; due to their large size.
* The magpie goose (&quot;Anseranas semipalmata&quot;) is the only living species in the family Anseranatidae.
* The northern gannet (&quot;Morus bassanus&quot;), a seabird, is also known as the &quot;solan goose&quot;, although it is unrelated to the true geese, or any other Anseriformes for that matter.

== In popular culture ==

=== Sayings and phrases that reference geese ===
* To &quot;have a gander&quot; is to look at something.
* &quot;What&#x27;s good sauce for the goose is good sauce for the gander&quot; or &quot;What&#x27;s good for the goose is good for the gander&quot; means that what is an appropriate treatment for one person is equally appropriate for someone else. This statement supporting equality is frequently used in the context of sex and gender, because a goose is female and a gander is male.
* Saying that someone&#x27;s &quot;goose is cooked&quot; means that they are about to be punished.
* The common phrase &quot;silly goose&quot; is used when referring to someone who is acting particularly silly.
* &quot;Killing the goose that lays the golden eggs&quot;, derived from Aesop&#x27;s Fables, is a saying referring to a greed-motivated action that destroys or otherwise renders useless a favourable situation that would have provided benefits over time.
* &quot;A wild goose chase&quot; is a useless, futile waste of time and effort. It is derived from a 16th-century horse racing event.
* A raised, rounded area of swelling (typically a hematoma) caused by an impact injury is sometimes metaphorically called a &quot;goose egg&quot;, especially if it occurs on the head.

=== Geese as characters in cultural works ===
* Mother Goose is a fictitious children&#x27;s storybook author associated with several collections of fairy tales and nursery rhymes translated into English during the 18th century.
* &quot;Gänsewein&quot; (German, ) is a playful term for plain drinking water, first documented the &quot;Podagrammisch Trostbüchlein&quot; by Johann Fischart (1577).
* Popular indie game Untitled Goose Game released in 2019 chronicles the activities of an ornery goose in an English village.
* In the late 18th century poem, The Goose and the Common, geese serve to illustrate the social and economic issues cased by the enclosure of common land.
===&quot;Gray Goose Laws&quot; in Iceland===

The oldest collection of Medieval Icelandic laws is known as &quot;Grágás&quot;; i.e., the &quot;Gray Goose Laws&quot;. Various etymologies were offered for that name:
* The fact that the laws were written with a goose quill;
* The fact that the laws were bound in goose skin;
* Because of the age of the laws — it was then believed that geese lived longer than other birds.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==

* Angel wing, a disease common in geese
* Domestic goose, which includes cooking and folklore
* Flying geese paradigm
* List of Anseriformes by population
* List of goose breeds
* Roast goose
* Waterfowl
* Wildfowl
* &quot;Untitled Goose Game&quot;, a 2019 video game centering around a goose that takes place in a middle-class village in England.

== References ==
==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==

* Anatidae media on the Internet Bird Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="2" end="7" title="Goose" label="goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="11" end="16" title="Goose" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="23" end="27" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651" start="46" end="55" title="waterfowl" label="waterfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="56" end="63" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="71" end="77" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556" start="78" end="86" title="Anatidae" label="Anatidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="113" end="119" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q183361" start="126" end="131" title="Anser (bird)" label="Anser"/>
<link wikidata="Q210416" start="177" end="183" title="Branta" label="Branta"/>
<link wikidata="Q21153" start="225" end="235" title="Tadorninae" label="Tadorninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q274179" start="253" end="267" title="Egyptian goose" label="Egyptian goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q905268" start="269" end="282" title="Orinoco goose" label="Orinoco goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="430" end="434" title="swan" label="swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="483" end="487" title="duck" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="602" end="608" title="Goose" label="gander"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="751" end="759" title="Goose" label="goslings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834161" start="765" end="780" title="List of collective nouns" label="collective noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="821" end="827" title="Goose" label="gaggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="863" end="868" title="Goose" label="skein"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="872" end="876" title="Goose" label="team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="883" end="888" title="Goose" label="wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="936" end="941" title="Goose" label="plump"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1013" end="1032" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="1058" end="1075" title="Germanic language" label="Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1092" end="1103" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q27175" start="1237" end="1249" title="West Frisian language" label="West Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q454476" start="1311" end="1326" title="New High German" label="New High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1392" end="1401" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="1516" end="1525" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1574" end="1581" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1588" end="1595" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="1617" end="1621" title="swan" label="swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572" start="1627" end="1634" title="Avestan" label="Avestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1818" end="1824" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q183361" start="1850" end="1855" title="Anser (genus)" label="Anser"/>
<link wikidata="Q25882" start="1903" end="1916" title="greylag goose" label="greylag goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074540" start="1921" end="1931" title="snow goose" label="snow goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q210416" start="1943" end="1949" title="Branta" label="Branta"/>
<link wikidata="Q26733" start="1982" end="1994" title="Canada goose" label="Canada goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q46316" start="2086" end="2094" title="shelduck" label="shelduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q257006" start="2136" end="2145" title="Cereopsis" label="Cereopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443727" start="2186" end="2196" title="Cnemiornis" label="Cnemiornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443727" start="2220" end="2237" title="New Zealand goose" label="New Zealand goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q144218" start="2286" end="2300" title="coscoroba swan" label="coscoroba swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2352" end="2358" title="Fossil" label="Fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2469" end="2482" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="2597" end="2614" title="million years ago" label="million years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="2622" end="2629" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q932223" start="2756" end="2767" title="plesiomorph" label="plesiomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2843" end="2852" title="subfossil" label="subfossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="2874" end="2890" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="2903" end="2913" title="Monogamous pairing in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q28233971" start="3280" end="3301" title="Garganornis ballmanni" label="Garganornis ballmanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495247" start="3313" end="3325" title="Late Miocene" label="Late Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q763332" start="3340" end="3347" title="Gargano" label="Gargano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578074" start="4545" end="4556" title="V formation" label="V formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q199427" start="4672" end="4691" title="great white pelican" label="great white pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="5156" end="5175" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q46316" start="5240" end="5248" title="shelduck" label="shelduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q21153" start="5259" end="5269" title="Tadorninae" label="Tadorninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q905268" start="5288" end="5301" title="Orinoco goose" label="Orinoco goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q274179" start="5337" end="5351" title="Egyptian goose" label="Egyptian goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q367753" start="5408" end="5418" title="Sheldgoose" label="sheldgeese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511309" start="5461" end="5472" title="Late Quaternary prehistoric birds" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q15707882" start="5473" end="5492" title="Malagasy sheldgoose" label="Malagasy sheldgoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q247412" start="5540" end="5557" title="spur-winged goose" label="spur-winged goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q247412" start="5692" end="5707" title="Plectropterinae" label="Plectropterinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q658658" start="5715" end="5732" title="blue-winged goose" label="blue-winged goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q257006" start="5777" end="5794" title="Cape Barren goose" label="Cape Barren goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q21153" start="5930" end="5940" title="Tadorninae" label="Tadorninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q620938" start="5946" end="5955" title="Anserinae" label="Anserinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q244107" start="6059" end="6067" title="Nettapus" label="Nettapus"/>
<link wikidata="Q837402" start="6235" end="6246" title="maned goose" label="maned goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="6362" end="6369" title="extinct" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q33176341" start="6370" end="6377" title="seaduck" label="seaduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667117" start="6386" end="6395" title="Chendytes" label="Chendytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212937" start="6483" end="6495" title="magpie goose" label="magpie goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835559" start="6573" end="6586" title="Anseranatidae" label="Anseranatidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q26675" start="6594" end="6609" title="northern gannet" label="northern gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651" start="6754" end="6766" title="Anseriformes" label="Anseriformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718028" start="7520" end="7563" title="The Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs" label="Killing the goose that lays the golden eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q865902" start="7584" end="7603" title="Aesop&amp;#x27;s Fables" label="Aesop&amp;#x27;s Fables"/>
<link wikidata="Q468787" start="7950" end="7958" title="hematoma" label="hematoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q142305" start="8133" end="8145" title="Mother Goose" label="Mother Goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q69303" start="8457" end="8472" title="Johann Fischart" label="Johann Fischart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762504" start="8491" end="8501" title="indie game" label="indie game"/>
<link wikidata="Q59618073" start="8502" end="8521" title="Untitled Goose Game" label="Untitled Goose Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q125398685" start="8640" end="8664" title="The Goose and the Common" label="The Goose and the Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="8736" end="8745" title="enclosure" label="enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9828451" start="8749" end="8755" title="Commons" label="common"/>
<link wikidata="Q62389" start="8833" end="8851" title="Icelandic Commonwealth" label="Medieval Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551261" start="8905" end="8920" title="Gray Goose Laws" label="Gray Goose Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762346" start="9216" end="9226" title="Angel wing" label="Angel wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q255503" start="9256" end="9270" title="Domestic goose" label="Domestic goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430704" start="9310" end="9331" title="Flying geese paradigm" label="Flying geese paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561770" start="9334" end="9368" title="List of Anseriformes by population" label="List of Anseriformes by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501489" start="9371" end="9391" title="List of goose breeds" label="List of goose breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q36415" start="9394" end="9405" title="Roast goose" label="Roast goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651" start="9408" end="9417" title="Waterfowl" label="Waterfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556" start="9420" end="9428" title="Wildfowl" label="Wildfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59618073" start="9437" end="9456" title="Untitled Goose Game" label="Untitled Goose Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="9471" end="9481" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="9553" end="9560" title="England" label="England"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50485" wikidata="Q193231" url="?curid=50485" title="Debugger">
<text>A debugger is a computer program used to test and debug other programs (the &quot;target&quot; programs). Common features of debuggers include the ability to run or halt the target program using breakpoints, step through code line by line, and display or modify the contents of memory, CPU registers, and stack frames.

The code to be examined might alternatively be running on an &quot;instruction set simulator&quot; (ISS), a technique that allows great power in its ability to halt when specific conditions are encountered, but which will typically be somewhat slower than executing the code directly on the appropriate (or the same) processor. Some debuggers offer two modes of operation, full or partial simulation, to limit this impact.

An exception occurs when the program cannot normally continue because of a programming bug or invalid data. For example, the program might have tried to use an instruction not available on the current version of the CPU or attempted to access unavailable or protected memory. When the program &quot;traps&quot; or reaches a preset condition, the debugger typically shows the location in the original code if it is a source-level debugger or symbolic debugger, commonly now seen in integrated development environments. If it is a low-level debugger or a machine-language debugger it shows the line in the disassembly (unless it also has online access to the original source code and can display the appropriate section of code from the assembly or compilation).

==Features==
Typically, debuggers offer a query processor, a symbol resolver, an expression interpreter, and a debug support interface at its top level. Debuggers also offer more sophisticated functions such as running a program step by step (single-stepping or program animation), stopping (breaking) (pausing the program to examine the current state) at some event or specified instruction by means of a breakpoint, and tracking the values of variables. Some debuggers have the ability to modify the program state while it is running. It may also be possible to continue execution at a different location in the program to bypass a crash or logical error.

The same functionality which makes a debugger useful for correcting bugs allows it to be used as a software cracking tool to evade copy protection, digital rights management, and other software protection features. It often also makes it useful as a general verification tool, fault coverage, and performance analyzer, especially if instruction path lengths are shown. Early microcomputers with disk-based storage often benefitted from the ability to diagnose and recover corrupted directory or registry data records, to &quot;undelete&quot; files marked as deleted, or to crack file password protection.

Most mainstream debugging engines, such as gdb and dbx, provide console-based command line interfaces. Debugger front-ends are popular extensions to debugger engines that provide IDE integration, program animation, and visualization features.

=== Record and replay debugging ===
Record and replay debugging, also known as &quot;software flight recording&quot; or &quot;program execution recording&quot;, captures application state changes and stores them to disk as each instruction in a program executes. The recording can then be replayed over and over, and interactively debugged to diagnose and resolve defects. Record and replay debugging is very useful for remote debugging and for resolving intermittent, non-deterministic, and other hard-to-reproduce defects.

===Reverse debugging===

Some debuggers include a feature called &quot;reverse debugging&quot;, also known as &quot;historical debugging&quot; or &quot;backwards debugging&quot;. These debuggers make it possible to step a program&#x27;s execution backwards in time. Various debuggers include this feature. Microsoft Visual Studio (2010 Ultimate edition, 2012 Ultimate, 2013 Ultimate, and 2015 Enterprise edition) offers IntelliTrace reverse debugging for C#, Visual Basic .NET, and some other languages, but not C++. Reverse debuggers also exist for C, C++, Java, Python, Perl, and other languages. Some are open source; some are proprietary commercial software. Some reverse debuggers slow down the target by orders of magnitude, but the best reverse debuggers cause a slowdown of 2× or less. Reverse debugging is very useful for certain types of problems, but is still not commonly used yet.

===Time travel debugging===

In addition to the features of reverse debuggers, time travel debugging also allow users to interact with the program, changing the history if desired, and watch how the program responds.

==Language dependency==
Some debuggers operate on a single specific language while others can handle multiple languages transparently. For example, if the main target program is written in COBOL but calls assembly language subroutines and PL/1 subroutines, the debugger may have to dynamically switch modes to accommodate the changes in language as they occur.

==Memory protection==
Some debuggers also incorporate memory protection to avoid storage violations such as buffer overflow. This may be extremely important in transaction processing environments where memory is dynamically allocated from memory &#x27;pools&#x27; on a task by task basis.

==Hardware support for debugging==
Most modern microprocessors have at least one of these features in their CPU design to make debugging easier:
*Hardware support for single-stepping a program, such as the trap flag.
*An instruction set that meets the Popek and Goldberg virtualization requirements makes it easier to write debugger software that runs on the same CPU as the software being debugged; such a CPU can execute the inner loops of the program under test at full speed, and still remain under debugger control.
*In-system programming allows an external hardware debugger to reprogram a system under test (for example, adding or removing instruction breakpoints). Many systems with such ISP support also have other hardware debug support.
*Hardware support for code and data breakpoints, such as address comparators and data value comparators or, with considerably more work involved, page fault hardware.
*JTAG access to hardware debug interfaces such as those on ARM architecture processors or using the Nexus command set. Processors used in embedded systems typically have extensive JTAG debug support.
*Micro controllers with as few as six pins need to use low pin-count substitutes for JTAG, such as BDM, Spy-Bi-Wire, or debugWIRE on the Atmel AVR. DebugWIRE, for example, uses bidirectional signaling on the RESET pin.

==Debugger front-ends==
Some of the most capable and popular debuggers implement only a simple command line interface (CLI)—often to maximize portability and minimize resource consumption. Developers typically consider debugging via a graphical user interface (GUI) easier and more productive. This is the reason for visual front-ends, that allow users to monitor and control subservient CLI-only debuggers via graphical user interface. Some GUI debugger front-ends are designed to be compatible with a variety of CLI-only debuggers, while others are targeted at one specific debugger.

== Ethical or legal debugging ==
Debugging is often used to illegally crack or pirate software, which is usually illegal even when done non-maliciously. Crackme&#x27;s are programs specifically designed to be cracked or debugged. These programs allow those with debuggers to practice their debugging ability without getting into legal trouble.

==List of debuggers==

Some widely used debuggers are:
*Arm DTT, formerly known as Allinea DDT
*Eclipse debugger API used in a range of IDEs: Eclipse IDE (Java), Nodeclipse (JavaScript)
*Firefox JavaScript debugger
*GDB - the GNU debugger
*LLDB
*Microsoft Visual Studio Debugger
*Radare2
*Valgrind
*WinDbg
*x64dbg/x32dbg
*Cheat Engine

Earlier minicomputer debuggers include:
*Dynamic debugging technique (DDT)
*On-line Debugging Tool (ODT)

Mainframe debuggers include:
*CA/EZTEST

==See also==



== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
==External links==

*Debugging Tools for Windows
*OpenRCE: Various Debugger Resources and Plug-ins
*IntelliTrace MSDN, Visual Studio 2015</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="2" end="10" title="Debugger" label="debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="16" end="32" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q188522" start="41" end="45" title="software testing" label="test"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="50" end="55" title="debugging" label="debug"/>
<link wikidata="Q634179" start="195" end="205" title="breakpoint" label="breakpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978554" start="387" end="412" title="instruction set simulator" label="instruction set simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="819" end="834" title="software bug" label="programming bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="960" end="963" title="central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q163585" start="1002" end="1011" title="memory protection" label="protected"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="1012" end="1018" title="computer memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="1160" end="1181" title="Debugger" label="source-level debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="1185" end="1202" title="Debugger" label="symbolic debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="1225" end="1259" title="integrated development environment" label="integrated development environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="1273" end="1291" title="Debugger" label="low-level debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="1297" end="1322" title="Debugger" label="machine-language debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q279650" start="1348" end="1359" title="disassembly" label="disassembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248406" start="1735" end="1747" title="stepping (debugging)" label="step by step"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248406" start="1768" end="1785" title="program animation" label="program animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q634179" start="1912" end="1922" title="breakpoint" label="breakpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138423" start="2264" end="2281" title="software cracking" label="software cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q15738686" start="2296" end="2311" title="copy protection" label="copy protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q192532" start="2313" end="2338" title="digital rights management" label="digital rights management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438152" start="2442" end="2456" title="fault coverage" label="fault coverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138496" start="2462" end="2482" title="Profiling (computer programming)" label="performance analyzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041761" start="2498" end="2521" title="instruction path length" label="instruction path length"/>
<link wikidata="Q464113" start="2814" end="2817" title="gdb" label="gdb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940512" start="2822" end="2825" title="dbx (debugger)" label="dbx"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="2849" end="2871" title="command line interface" label="command line interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="2874" end="2892" title="Debugger front-end" label="Debugger front-end"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="2950" end="2953" title="Integrated Developer Environment" label="IDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248406" start="2967" end="2984" title="program animation" label="program animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796283" start="3051" end="3078" title="Record and replay debugging" label="Record and replay debugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q134067" start="3847" end="3870" title="Microsoft Visual Studio" label="Microsoft Visual Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080269" start="4515" end="4536" title="time travel debugging" label="time travel debugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="4843" end="4848" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="4859" end="4876" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q223433" start="4893" end="4897" title="PL/1" label="PL/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619931" start="5097" end="5114" title="storage violation" label="storage violation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19423" start="5124" end="5139" title="buffer overflow" label="buffer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q844565" start="5176" end="5198" title="transaction processing" label="transaction processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303814" start="5414" end="5424" title="CPU design" label="CPU design"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835542" start="5512" end="5521" title="trap flag" label="trap flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017100" start="5558" end="5604" title="Popek and Goldberg virtualization requirements" label="Popek and Goldberg virtualization requirements"/>
<link wikidata="Q373805" start="5828" end="5849" title="In-system programming" label="In-system programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q634179" start="6090" end="6100" title="breakpoint" label="breakpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928607" start="6200" end="6210" title="page fault" label="page fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q545306" start="6222" end="6226" title="JTAG" label="JTAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="6280" end="6296" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021281" start="6321" end="6326" title="Nexus (standard)" label="Nexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839640" start="6520" end="6523" title="Background debug mode interface" label="BDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581645" start="6525" end="6536" title="Spy-Bi-Wire" label="Spy-Bi-Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037119" start="6541" end="6550" title="debugWIRE" label="debugWIRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q216651" start="6558" end="6567" title="Atmel AVR" label="Atmel AVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="6783" end="6794" title="porting" label="portability"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="6876" end="6900" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="7052" end="7076" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138405" start="7381" end="7395" title="Crackme" label="Crackme&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732682" start="7629" end="7636" title="Allinea DDT" label="Arm DTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q82268" start="7669" end="7676" title="Eclipse (software)" label="Eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q698" start="7760" end="7767" title="Firefox" label="Firefox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="7768" end="7778" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q464113" start="7789" end="7792" title="GNU Debugger" label="GDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206079" start="7813" end="7817" title="LLDB (debugger)" label="LLDB"/>
<link wikidata="Q134067" start="7819" end="7851" title="Microsoft Visual Studio Debugger" label="Microsoft Visual Studio Debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155039" start="7853" end="7860" title="Radare2" label="Radare2"/>
<link wikidata="Q924041" start="7862" end="7870" title="Valgrind" label="Valgrind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055099" start="7872" end="7878" title="WinDbg" label="WinDbg"/>
<link wikidata="Q129567481" start="7880" end="7893" title="x64dbg" label="x64dbg/x32dbg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625606" start="7895" end="7907" title="Cheat Engine" label="Cheat Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q185131" start="7917" end="7929" title="minicomputer" label="minicomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318964" start="7950" end="7977" title="Dynamic debugging technique" label="Dynamic debugging technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090838" start="7985" end="8007" title="On-line Debugging Tool" label="On-line Debugging Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="8015" end="8024" title="Mainframe" label="Mainframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008463" start="8045" end="8054" title="CA/EZTEST" label="CA/EZTEST"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50486" wikidata="Q1455280" url="?curid=50486" title="French Kiss (1995 film)">
<text>French Kiss is a 1995 romantic comedy film directed by Lawrence Kasdan and starring Meg Ryan and Kevin Kline. Written by Adam Brooks, the film is about a woman who flies to France to confront her straying fiancé and gets into trouble when the charming crook seated next to her uses her to smuggle a stolen diamond necklace. &quot;French Kiss&quot; was filmed on location in Paris, the Provence-Alpes-Côte d&#x27;Azur région of southeastern France, and Cannes. The film was released in the United States on May 5, 1995, and received mixed reviews. The film was a success and went on to earn a total worldwide gross of $101,982,854.

A Hindi remake of the film named &quot;Pyaar To Hona Hi Tha&quot; was released on July 24, 1998. The 2004 Malayalam comedy film &quot;Vettam&quot; was also based on &quot;French Kiss&quot;.

It was the last movie to be shot by cinematographer Owen Roizman before his death in 2023.

==Plot==
American history teacher Kate lives in Canada with her fiancé Charlie, a doctor. When Charlie urges her to accompany him to Paris for an upcoming conference, she declines, partly due to her fear of flying, her intolerance for cheese and the stereotypical idea she has about the French.

Days later, Charlie calls Kate, saying he has fallen in love with French woman Juliette and will not be returning. Determined to win him back, Kate boards a flight to Paris and is seated next to Frenchman Luc Teyssier, whom she instantly dislikes.

Unknown to Kate, Luc is smuggling a vine cutting and a stolen diamond necklace into France, hoping to use both to start his own vineyard. To tolerate him long enough to arrive in Paris, she gets drunk. Before deboarding, Luc sneaks the vine and necklace into Kate&#x27;s bag, knowing she will not be searched at customs.

At the terminal, Luc is spotted by Inspector Jean-Paul Cardon, who searches his bag. Jean-Paul knows of Luc&#x27;s vocation, but feels &quot;protective&quot; of him as Luc once saved his life. Meanwhile, Kate arrives at Charlie&#x27;s hotel.

While waiting in the lobby with thief Bob, Kate sees Charlie and Juliette kissing and faints. Bob steals her bag and suitcase and leaves as Luc arrives. After reviving Kate, Luc realizes who has the necklace, goes with her to Bob&#x27;s apartment, and recovers the bag minus her money and passport.

Upset, Kate heads off on her own, and learns that Charlie is traveling to Cannes to meet Juliette&#x27;s parents. Luc, meanwhile, realizes the necklace must still be in Kate&#x27;s bag. He tracks her down to the train station, offers to help her &quot;win back Charlie&quot;, and together they board a train to Cannes. That evening, Luc sees Charlie&#x27;s picture from Kate&#x27;s locket. After Kate falls asleep, he tries to check the bag during which she, thinking he is Charlie, kisses him.

The next morning during breakfast, she describes it as a &#x27;delicious dream&#x27; with which she woke up &#x27;transformed,&#x27; only to sample some of the 452 official government cheeses of France, despite being lactose intolerant. She eventually gets an upset stomach and is ill. 

They get off the train at Luc&#x27;s hometown of La Ravelle in Paulhaguet and stay at his family home and vineyard. Kate learns about Luc&#x27;s past and how he gambled away his vineyard birthright to his brother in a hand of poker; she also learns that while Luc may be a schemer, he knows about wine, and dreams of someday buying land for his own winery. As they board the train to Cannes, Kate shows him that she, in fact, has the necklace.

At Cannes, they check into a hotel room using his brother&#x27;s stolen credit card. Following Luc&#x27;s advice, Kate confronts Charlie in front of Juliette on the beach, pretending to be indifferent to him. To make him jealous, Luc pretends to be Kate&#x27;s lover, and it works. Later that afternoon, Jean-Paul approaches Kate, urging her to convince Luc to return the necklace anonymously to avoid jail. Luc was planning to sell the necklace at Cartier, but agrees to Kate&#x27;s &quot;new plan&quot; to have her sell the necklace, as that would be safer.

At dinner, Charlie apologizes to Kate and accompanies her to her room, where he tries to seduce her. Rejecting his advances, Kate realizes she no longer wants him, as she has fallen in love with Luc. Meanwhile, in an effort to &quot;ensure victory&quot; for her, Luc takes an all-too-willing Juliette to bed, seducing her, but his plan fails when he calls her &quot;Kate&quot;.

The following morning, Kate tells Luc that Charlie wants her back, but quickly leaves the room, saying, &quot;Cartier is waiting&quot;. She returns the necklace to Jean-Paul and purchases a Cartier cheque for $45,782 with her own savings to create the illusion that she sold it. 

After giving the cheque to Luc, she leaves for the airport pretending to meet Charlie. Jean-Paul then approaches him and reveals the charade and all that Kate has done for him. Luc rushes to the airport, boards the plane, and confesses his love for her, wanting her to stay with him. Kate and he later kiss and embrace in their new vineyard.

==Cast==

* Meg Ryan as Kate
* Kevin Kline as Luc Teyssier
* Timothy Hutton as Charlie Lytton
* Jean Reno as Inspector Jean-Paul Cardon
* François Cluzet as Bob
* Susan Anbeh as Juliette
* Marie-Christine Adam as Juliette&#x27;s mother
* Jean-Paul Jaupart as Juliette&#x27;s father
* Renee Humphrey as Lilly
* Michael Riley as M. Campbell
* as Concierge
* as Octave
* as Claire
* Julie Leibowitch as Olivia
* Miquel Brown as Sgt. Patton
* Claudio Todeschini as Antoine Teyssier
* Jerry Harte as Herb
* Thomasine Heiner as mom
* Barbara Schulz as a pouting girl
* Clément Sibony as a pouting boy
* Adam Brooks as Perfect Passenger
* Patrice Juiff as French Customs Official
* Jean Corso as Hotel George V Desk&#x27;s clerk
* François-Xavier Tilmant as hotel waiter
* Williams Diols as beach waiter
* Mike Johns as Lucien
* Ghislaine Juillot as Jean-Paul Cardon&#x27;s wife
* Alain Frérot as Old Man
==Production==
===Pre-production===
The lead role of Luc was originally written for Gérard Depardieu, but Kevin Kline accepted the role when Depardieu was not available for the film.

===Filming===
Principal photography took place from September 17 to December 22, 1994. &quot;French Kiss&quot; was filmed primarily in Paris, the Alpes-Maritimes department in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d&#x27;Azur region of southeastern France, and Cannes.

In Paris, scenes were shot at the Hotel George V, where Kate has her encounters with the supercilious concierge. The hotel lobby was used for the scene where the petty thief Bob steals Kate&#x27;s bag after she faints. Several scenes show the Eiffel Tower in the background—the one site Kate longs to see most but keeps on missing. A phonebooth on Champs-Élysées near the Arc de Triomphe was used for the scene where Kate calls Charlie&#x27;s mother. Scenes were also filmed at the American Embassy at 2 Avenue Gabriel, and the Canadian Embassy at 35 Avenue Montaigne. The scene where Luc throws money on the sidewalk was filmed at the corner of rue Paul-Albert and rue Feutrier in Montmartre.

Driving scenes in Paris were filmed in front of the Louvre near the Louvre Pyramid, along the Rive Droite, and on Rue des Rosiers, where Luc drives down a narrow, winding cobblestoned street. Additional Paris scenes were filmed at the Sacré-Cœur in Montmartre, the Grande Pharmacie de la Place Blanche at 5 Place Blanche, the Palais de Chaillot, and Place des Abbesses, where Kate and Luc discuss his &quot;little problem&quot;. The final scene filmed in Paris was at the Gare Saint-Lazare train station, where Luc is chased by Inspector Jean-Paul Cardon while trying to board a train south to Cannes.

In the Provence-Alpes-Côte d&#x27;Azur region, the small village of Valbonne, about fifteen minutes north of Cannes, was used for several scenes, including the scene where Luc fights with his brother in the main village square in front of the Hotel les Armoiries, an old seventeenth century building. Other scenes were filmed at the train station and nearby vineyards around La Ravelle, 84240 La Tour-d&#x27;Aigues, The train station near Meyrargues, Bouches-du-Rhône, was also used in one scene.

In Cannes, several exterior shots of the Carlton Hotel were used to represent where the four main characters stay. There are interior scenes of the lobby and the brasserie used for morning breakfasts. Other scenes filmed here include the beach in front of the hotel along with the adjacent waterfront—in particular the Cartier boutique on the next corner. The grape harvest scenes were filmed at Château Val Joanis in Pertuis, Vaucluse. Studio scenes were shot at Paris Studios Cinéma.

===Title===
The film was originally titled &quot;Paris Match&quot;, a play on the name of the famous French newsmagazine. However, the title had to be changed after Billy Crystal challenged it with the MPAA as being too close to that of his own Paris-set romantic comedy &quot;Forget Paris&quot;, released just two weeks later.

===Soundtrack===
The &quot;French Kiss Original Soundtrack&quot; album was released by Mercury Records on CD on May 9, 1995. It peaked at 170 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200.

==Release==
===Critical response===
&quot;French Kiss&quot; was released in United States on May 5, 1995, and received mixed reviews. In his review in the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot;, Mick LaSalle wrote that director Lawrence Kasdan &quot;takes what could have been a fluffy comedy with lots of plot complications and picturesque scenery and instead puts his focus on the important things: on the characters played by Ryan and Kline and how they happen to be feeling.&quot; LaSalle also applauded Kasdan&#x27;s sense of subtle comedy:
LaSalle found Kline&#x27;s performance &quot;extraordinary&quot; and that he not only perfected the accent but the &quot;speech rhythms and the manner as well.&quot; LaSalle also praised Ryan&#x27;s comic timing, which &quot;continues to delight.&quot;

In her review in &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, Rita Kempley, giving it a mixed review, wrote that the film &quot;isn&#x27;t as passionate as the title suggests—in fact, it&#x27;s facile—but Ryan and Kevin Kline, as her attractive opposite, are irresistible together.&quot; Kempley applauded the acting performances:

In his review in the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot;, a disappointed Roger Ebert wrote, &quot;The characters in this movie may look like adults, but they think like teenagers.&quot; Although he acknowledged that the film was not without its charms—Paris and Cannes being &quot;two of the most photogenic cities on earth&quot;—Ebert concluded, &quot;Kline&#x27;s Frenchman is somehow not worldly enough, and Ryan&#x27;s heroine never convinces us she ever loved her fiancé in the first place.&quot;

In her review in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Janet Maslin called the film a &quot;romantic comedy with barely a laugh or a spark, and with a pace that makes it feel longer than Mr. Kasdan&#x27;s previous work, &quot;Wyatt Earp&quot;.&quot;

Review aggregation website &quot;Rotten Tomatoes&quot; gave the film a score of 48% based on reviews from 27 critics with a weighted average of 5.6/10. The consensus summarizes: &quot;&quot;French Kiss&quot; is effervescent like good champagne but its spirit fizzles in a film that isn&#x27;t as intoxicating as its stars.&quot; On Metacritic, another aggregator, the film holds a weighted average score of 50 out of 100 based on 14 critics, indicating &quot;mixed or average&quot; reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of &quot;B+&quot; on an A+ to F scale.

===Box office===
The film earned $38,896,854 in the United States and an additional $63,086,000 in international markets for a total worldwide gross of $101,982,854.

===Accolades===

==Home media==
&quot;French Kiss&quot; was released in United States on video on February 6, 1996. It was released in DVD format by 20th Century Fox on January 18, 2000, and in Blu-ray format by 20th Century Fox on January 8, 2013.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="22" end="37" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q240872" start="55" end="70" title="Lawrence Kasdan" label="Lawrence Kasdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="84" end="92" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105817" start="97" end="108" title="Kevin Kline" label="Kevin Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q348885" start="121" end="132" title="Adam Brooks (filmmaker)" label="Adam Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104" start="385" end="416" title="Provence-Alpes-Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Provence-Alpes-Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q39984" start="452" end="458" title="Cannes" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="634" end="639" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250759" start="671" end="691" title="Pyaar To Hona Hi Tha" label="Pyaar To Hona Hi Tha"/>
<link wikidata="Q36236" start="738" end="747" title="Malayalam" label="Malayalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923800" start="766" end="772" title="Vettam" label="Vettam"/>
<link wikidata="Q767938" start="875" end="887" title="Owen Roizman" label="Owen Roizman"/>
<link wikidata="Q285484" start="2985" end="3022" title="List of French cheeses" label="official government cheeses of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q270768" start="3172" end="3182" title="Paulhaguet" label="Paulhaguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q538587" start="4003" end="4010" title="Cartier S.A." label="Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q167498" start="5130" end="5138" title="Meg Ryan" label="Meg Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105817" start="5149" end="5160" title="Kevin Kline" label="Kevin Kline"/>
<link wikidata="Q310324" start="5179" end="5193" title="Timothy Hutton" label="Timothy Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43697" start="5214" end="5223" title="Jean Reno" label="Jean Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q600051" start="5256" end="5271" title="François Cluzet" label="François Cluzet"/>
<link wikidata="Q89103" start="5281" end="5292" title="Susan Anbeh" label="Susan Anbeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724026" start="5307" end="5327" title="Marie-Christine Adam" label="Marie-Christine Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932949" start="5402" end="5416" title="Renee Humphrey" label="Renee Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616959" start="5428" end="5441" title="Michael Riley" label="Michael Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q435487" start="5527" end="5539" title="Miquel Brown" label="Miquel Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884036" start="5646" end="5660" title="Barbara Schulz" label="Barbara Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980691" start="5681" end="5695" title="Clément Sibony" label="Clément Sibony"/>
<link wikidata="Q348885" start="5715" end="5726" title="Adam Brooks (filmmaker)" label="Adam Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q106508" start="6100" end="6116" title="Gérard Depardieu" label="Gérard Depardieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139" start="6346" end="6361" title="Alpes-Maritimes" label="Alpes-Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="6362" end="6372" title="Departments of France" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104" start="6380" end="6411" title="Provence-Alpes-Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur" label="Provence-Alpes-Côte d&amp;#x27;Azur"/>
<link wikidata="Q36784" start="6412" end="6418" title="Regions of France" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q39984" start="6447" end="6453" title="Cannes" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217708" start="6490" end="6504" title="Hotel George V" label="Hotel George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="6699" end="6711" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q550" start="6804" end="6818" title="Champs-Élysées" label="Champs-Élysées"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="6828" end="6843" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q894836" start="6938" end="6954" title="Embassy of the United States, Paris" label="American Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q137798" start="6984" end="7000" title="Embassy of Canada, Paris" label="Canadian Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q735620" start="7007" end="7023" title="Avenue Montaigne" label="Avenue Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q186115" start="7138" end="7148" title="Montmartre" label="Montmartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="7203" end="7209" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13397" start="7219" end="7233" title="Louvre Pyramid" label="Louvre Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q603022" start="7245" end="7256" title="Rive Droite" label="Rive Droite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176233" start="7265" end="7280" title="Rue des Rosiers" label="Rue des Rosiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28785" start="7386" end="7396" title="Sacré-Cœur, Paris" label="Sacré-Cœur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919893" start="7458" end="7471" title="Place Blanche" label="Place Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q28052877" start="7477" end="7495" title="Trocadéro, Paris" label="Palais de Chaillot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7501" end="7519" title="Abbesses (Paris Métro)#Location" label="Place des Abbesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q747506" start="7623" end="7640" title="Gare Saint-Lazare" label="Gare Saint-Lazare"/>
<link wikidata="Q383436" start="7822" end="7830" title="Valbonne" label="Valbonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240" start="8205" end="8221" title="Bouches-du-Rhône" label="Bouches-du-Rhône"/>
<link wikidata="Q538587" start="8571" end="8578" title="Cartier (jeweler)" label="Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q15210388" start="8648" end="8666" title="Château Val Joanis" label="Château Val Joanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q386778" start="8670" end="8677" title="Pertuis" label="Pertuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12792" start="8679" end="8687" title="Vaucluse" label="Vaucluse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501083" start="8716" end="8736" title="Billancourt Studios" label="Paris Studios Cinéma"/>
<link wikidata="Q678095" start="8840" end="8859" title="Paris Match" label="French newsmagazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="8904" end="8917" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q676222" start="8941" end="8945" title="MPAA" label="MPAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760597" start="9016" end="9028" title="Forget Paris" label="Forget Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q165745" start="9155" end="9170" title="Mercury Records" label="Mercury Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="9217" end="9242" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355172" start="11079" end="11089" title="Wyatt Earp (film)" label="Wyatt Earp"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="11137" end="11152" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="11436" end="11446" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972775" start="11615" end="11626" title="CinemaScore" label="CinemaScore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50487" wikidata="Q1455872" url="?curid=50487" title="JFS (file system)">
<text>Journaled File System (JFS) is a 64-bit journaling file system created by IBM. There are versions for AIX, OS/2, eComStation, ArcaOS and Linux operating systems. The latter is available as free software under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL). HP-UX has another, different filesystem named JFS that is actually an OEM version of Veritas Software&#x27;s VxFS.

In the AIX operating system, two generations of JFS exist, which are called &quot;JFS&quot; (&quot;JFS1&quot;) and &quot;JFS2&quot; respectively.

IBM&#x27;s JFS was originally designed for 32-bit systems. JFS2 was designed for 64-bit systems. 

In other operating systems, such as OS/2 and Linux, only the second generation exists and is called simply &quot;JFS&quot;. This should not be confused with JFS in AIX that actually refers to JFS1.

== History ==
IBM introduced JFS with the initial release of AIX version 3.1 in February 1990. This file system, now called &quot;JFS1 on AIX&quot;, was the premier file system for AIX over the following decade and was installed in thousands or millions of customers&#x27; AIX systems. Historically, the JFS1 file system is very closely tied to the memory manager of AIX, which is a typical design for a file system supporting only one operating system. JFS was one of the first file systems to support Journaling.

In 1995, work began to enhance the file system to be more scalable and to support machines that had more than one processor. Another goal was to have a more portable file system, capable of running on multiple operating systems. After several years of designing, coding, and testing, the new JFS was first shipped in OS/2 Warp Server for eBusiness in April 1999, and then in OS/2 Warp Client in October 2000. In December 1999, a snapshot of the original OS/2 JFS source was granted to the open source community and work was begun to port JFS to Linux. The first stable release of &quot;JFS for Linux&quot; appeared in June 2001. The &quot;JFS for Linux&quot; project is maintained by a small group of contributors known as the &quot;JFS Core Team&quot;. This release of sources also worked to form the basis of a re-port back to OS/2 of the open-source JFS.

In parallel with this effort, some of the JFS development team returned to the AIX Operating System Development Group in 1997 and started to move this new JFS source base to the AIX operating system. In May 2001, a second journaled file system, &quot;Enhanced Journaled File System (JFS2)&quot;, was made available for AIX 5L.

Early in 2008 there was speculation that IBM is no longer interested in maintaining JFS and thus it should not be used in production environments. However, Dave Kleikamp, a member of the IBM Linux Technology Center and JFS Core Team, explained that they still follow changes in the Linux kernel and try to fix potential software bugs. He went on to add that certain distributions expect a larger resource commitment from them and opt not to support the filesystem.

In 2012, TRIM command support for solid-state drives was added to JFS.

== Features ==
JFS supports the following features.

=== Journal ===
JFS is a journaling file system. Rather than adding journaling as an add-on feature like in the ext3 file system, it was implemented from the start. The journal can be up to 128 MB. JFS journals metadata only, which means that metadata will remain consistent but user files may be corrupted after a crash or power loss. JFS&#x27;s journaling is similar to XFS in that it only journals parts of the inode.

=== B+ tree ===
JFS uses a B+ tree to accelerate lookups in directories. JFS can store 8 entries of a directory in the directory&#x27;s inode before moving the entries to a B+ tree. JFS also indexes extents in a B+ tree.

=== Dynamic inode allocation ===
JFS dynamically allocates space for disk inodes as necessary. Each inode is 512 bytes. 32 inodes are allocated on a 16 kB Extent.

=== Extents ===
JFS allocates files as an extent. An extent is a variable-length sequence of Aggregate blocks. An extent may be located in several allocation groups. To solve this the extents are indexed in a B+ tree for better performance when locating the extent locations.

=== Compression ===
Compression is supported only in JFS1 on AIX and uses a variation of the LZ algorithm. Because of high CPU usage and increased free space fragmentation, compression is not recommended for use other than on a single user workstation or off-line backup areas.

=== Concurrent input / output (CIO) ===
JFS normally applies read-shared, write-exclusive locking to files, which avoids data inconsistencies but imposes write serialization at the file level. The CIO option disables this locking. Applications such as relational databases which maintain data consistency themselves can use this option to largely eliminate filesystem overheads.

=== Allocation groups ===
JFS uses allocation groups. Allocation groups divide the aggregate space into chunks. This allows JFS to use resource allocation policies to achieve great I/O performance. The first policy is to try to cluster disk blocks and disk inodes for related data in the same AG in order to achieve good locality for the disk. The second policy is to distribute unrelated data throughout the file system in an attempt to minimize free-space fragmentation. When there is an open file JFS will lock the AG the file resides in and only allow the open file to grow. This reduces fragmentation as only the open file can write to the AG.

=== Superblocks ===
The superblock maintains information about the entire file system and includes the following fields:
* Size of the file system
* Number of data blocks in the file system
* A flag indicating the state of the file system
* Allocation group sizes
* File system block size

==On Linux==
In the Linux operating system, JFS is supported with the kernel module (since the kernel version &quot;2.4.18pre9-ac4&quot;) and the complementary userspace utilities packaged under the name &quot;JFSutils&quot;. Most Linux distributions support JFS unless it is specifically removed due to space restrictions, such as on live CDs.

According to benchmarks of the available filesystems for Linux, JFS is fast and reliable, with consistently good performance under different kinds of load.

Actual usage of JFS in Linux is uncommon, however, JFS does have a niche role in Linux: it offers a case-insensitive mount option, unlike most other Linux file systems.

There are also potential problems with JFS, such as its implementation of journal writes. They can be postponed until there is another trigger—potentially indefinitely, which can cause data loss over a theoretically infinite timeframe.

== See also ==

* Journaling file system
* List of file systems
* Comparison of file systems
* fsck – File System Check utility

==References==
==External links==
* JFS for Linux project website
* JFS1 File System Layout, IBM
* JFS2 File System Layout, IBM
* JFSRec, a console program that performs a read only extraction of files and directories from a damaged JFS filesystem</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1455872" start="0" end="21" title="JFS (file system)" label="Journaled File System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455872" start="23" end="26" title="JFS (file system)" label="JFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="33" end="39" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q579047" start="40" end="62" title="journaling file system" label="journaling file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="74" end="77" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="102" end="105" title="IBM AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="107" end="111" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q307032" start="113" end="124" title="eComStation" label="eComStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29342781" start="126" end="132" title="ArcaOS" label="ArcaOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="137" end="142" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="143" end="159" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="226" end="252" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q847593" start="260" end="265" title="HP-UX" label="HP-UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q498397" start="345" end="361" title="Veritas Software" label="Veritas Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064372" start="369" end="373" title="VxFS" label="VxFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455872" start="534" end="537" title="JFS (file system)" label="JFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="566" end="572" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455872" start="582" end="586" title="JFS (file system)" label="JFS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="604" end="610" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="786" end="789" title="AIX operating system" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q579047" start="1324" end="1334" title="Journaling file system" label="Journaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="1826" end="1837" title="Open-source model" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="1882" end="1887" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555083" start="2711" end="2738" title="IBM Linux Technology Center" label="IBM Linux Technology Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="2806" end="2818" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="2844" end="2857" title="software bugs" label="software bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q957004" start="2999" end="3003" title="Trim (computing)" label="TRIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="3024" end="3041" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q579047" start="3140" end="3162" title="journaling file system" label="journaling file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q283390" start="3227" end="3231" title="ext3" label="ext3"/>
<link wikidata="Q394011" start="3487" end="3490" title="XFS" label="XFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q306170" start="3529" end="3534" title="inode" label="inode"/>
<link wikidata="Q285861" start="3564" end="3571" title="B+ tree" label="B+ tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q306170" start="3673" end="3678" title="inode" label="inode"/>
<link wikidata="Q306170" start="3833" end="3838" title="inode" label="inode"/>
<link wikidata="Q389408" start="3965" end="3971" title="Extent (file systems)" label="extent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732999" start="4070" end="4086" title="allocation group" label="allocation group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="4220" end="4231" title="Data compression" label="Compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670963" start="4293" end="4305" title="LZ77 and LZ78" label="LZ algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146920" start="4323" end="4332" title="CPU usage" label="CPU usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089244" start="4358" end="4371" title="file system fragmentation" label="fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192525" start="4440" end="4451" title="workstation" label="workstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194274" start="4464" end="4470" title="backup" label="backup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5533" end="5543" title="superblock (computing)" label="superblock"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="5869" end="5875" title="Linux kernel" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142183" start="5959" end="5968" title="userspace" label="userspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="6030" end="6048" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q215552" start="6134" end="6141" title="live CD" label="live CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q579047" start="6727" end="6749" title="Journaling file system" label="Journaling file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q633005" start="6752" end="6772" title="List of file systems" label="List of file systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370201" start="6775" end="6801" title="Comparison of file systems" label="Comparison of file systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q283865" start="6804" end="6808" title="fsck" label="fsck"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50489" wikidata="Q253090" url="?curid=50489" title="Robert Urich">
<text>Robert Michael Urich (December 19, 1946 – April 16, 2002) was an American film, television, and stage actor and television producer. Over the course of his 30-year career, he starred in a record 15 television series.

Urich began his career in television in the early 1970s. After guest stints and roles in short-lived television series, he won a co-starring role in the action/crime drama series &quot;S.W.A.T.&quot; in 1975. In 1978, he landed the lead role of Dan Tanna in the crime drama series &quot;Vega$&quot;, which aired on ABC from 1978 to June 1981 and earned him two Golden Globe Award nominations. In addition to his work in television, Urich also co starred in several feature films, including &quot;Magnum Force&quot; (1973), &quot;The Ice Pirates&quot; (1984) and &quot;Turk 182&quot; (1985). From 1985 to 1988, he portrayed the title role in the detective television series &quot;&quot;, based on Robert B. Parker&#x27;s series of mystery novels. In 1988, he began hosting the documentary series &quot;National Geographic Explorer&quot;. He won a CableACE Award for his work on the series. He was also awarded a Golden Boot Award for his work in Western television series and films. 

In 1993, he won an Emmy for narrating a nature documentary. He revealed on &quot;The Late Show with David Letterman&quot; that he never knew about his nomination and win. It was sent by FedEx to his home.

In 1996, Urich starred in &quot;The Lazarus Man&quot;. It was canceled shortly after he announced that he had been diagnosed with synovial sarcoma, a rare cancer, in July that year. He sought treatment for his illness while continuing his career and also worked to raise money for cancer research. He was declared cancer free in 1998 and returned to television in the UPN series &quot;Love Boat: The Next Wave&quot;. In 2000, he made his Broadway debut as Billy Flynn in the musical &quot;Chicago&quot;. His last role was in the NBC sitcom &quot;Emeril&quot; in 2001, but in the autumn of that year his cancer returned and he died in April 2002 at age 55. 

==Early life==
Urich was born and raised in Toronto, Ohio, the son of John Paul and Cecilia Monica (née Halpate) Urich. He was of Rusyn (Ukrainian) and Slovak extraction and raised Byzantine Catholic. An excellent high school athlete, Urich attended Florida State University on a football scholarship. He played backup center during the 1965–66 football season, receiving only minimal playing time, and was a member of the Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity. In 1968, he earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree in Radio and Television Communications. He went on to Michigan State University and earned a master&#x27;s degree in Broadcast Research and Management. Urich then worked as a salesman in Chicago at WGN-TV. He later worked as a weatherman.

==Career==
After appearing in a Chicago production of &quot;The Rainmaker&quot; with Burt Reynolds, Urich decided to pursue acting full-time after Reynolds encouraged him to move to Los Angeles, and do more acting.

===1970s–1980s===
Urich made his television debut in a guest starring role in &quot;The F.B.I.&quot;, in 1972. The following year, he won a lead role in &quot;Bob &amp; Carol &amp; Ted &amp; Alice&quot;. It was a television adaptation of the 1969 film of the same title. It struggled in the ratings and was canceled after six episodes. He made his film debut later that same year opposite Clint Eastwood in the Dirty Harry film &quot;Magnum Force&quot; playing a vigilante motorcycle-patrol police officer. In 1975, Urich was cast in the action/crime drama series &quot;S.W.A.T.&quot;. According to the executive producer Aaron Spelling, Burt Reynolds convinced Spelling to allow Urich to read for the part. Spelling was impressed with his reading and cast him in the role of &quot;Officer Jim Street&quot;. A mid-season replacement, it earned high enough ratings to warrant a second season. However, it was canceled in 1976 due to its violent content.

Urich&#x27;s next role was on the sitcom &quot;Soap&quot; as Peter the Tennis Player in 1977. That same year he was cast as Paul Thurston, a handsome, ego-driven talk show host in the &quot;Bewitched&quot; spin-off series &quot;Tabitha&quot;, starring Lisa Hartman. Its ratings were initially strong, but schedule changes caused ratings to drop, and the show was canceled in 1978 after 13 episodes. Shortly after, he was cast in another Aaron Spelling produced series, called &quot;Vega$&quot;. Urich portrayed the series&#x27; lead character, Dan Tanna, a private detective who solves various crimes in Las Vegas. &quot;Vega$&quot; was a hit for ABC and he received two Golden Globe Award nominations for his work on it. By the third season, ratings had started to decline, and with little network support, &quot;Vega$&quot; was canceled at the end of the third season in June, 1981. Shortly after, Urich signed with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) and focused on film roles. His first film for MGM was &quot;Endangered Species&quot; (1982), a science fiction film directed by Alan Rudolph.

After filming &quot;Endangered Species&quot;, Urich returned to television and starred in &quot;Gavilan&quot;. He played the title character who was a former CIA agent turned oceanographer. The series, however, was canceled after seven episodes. In 1984, he starred in two more films &quot;The Ice Pirates&quot;, and Wes Craven&#x27;s &quot;Invitation to Hell&quot;. In 1985, Urich co-starred in the film &quot;Turk 182&quot;, although it was not a commercial success. In 1985, Urich returned to episodic television as the title character in &quot;&quot;. It was a hit and aired for three seasons. He also reprised the role in several television films after it was canceled: &quot;Spenser: Ceremony&quot; (1993), &quot;Spenser: Pale Kings and Princes&quot; (1994), &quot;Spenser: The Judas Goat&quot; (1994), and &quot;Spenser: A Savage Place&quot; (1995). In 1988, he hosted the documentary series &quot;National Geographic Explorer&quot;. He won a CableACE Award for his work on the series. In 1989, he portrayed Jake Spoon in the acclaimed television miniseries &quot;Lonesome Dove&quot;, a role for which he received many positive reviews.

===1990s–2000s===
In the 1990s, Urich mainly appeared in television films and several short-lived television series. From 1990 to 1991, he starred in the sitcom &quot;American Dreamer&quot; and the TV movie &quot;83 Hours &#x27;Til Dawn&quot;. The following year, he starred in &quot;Crossroads&quot;, a drama series that aired on ABC for ten episodes. In 1993, he and Faye Dunaway starred in the sitcom &quot;It Had to Be You&quot;. It was critically panned and canceled after four episodes. In 1995, he narrated an extremely rare one-night showing of a Disney television documentary called &quot;Alien Encounters: From New Tomorrowland&quot;. It has never been shown again. In 1996, he starred in the TNT western series &quot;The Lazarus Man&quot;. It earned strong enough ratings to be picked up for a second season but shortly after it was renewed, he announced he had been diagnosed with synovial sarcoma. Its production company, Castle Rock Entertainment, opted to cancel it due to that. In 1999, he commented on their choice to do so, &quot;There&#x27;s really a law against what they did. They found out I had cancer, and they just canceled the show. They didn&#x27;t ask the doctors if I could work. They didn&#x27;t ask if I could go back to work.&quot; In 2000, he sued them for breach of contract. The lawsuit was later settled with both parties agreeing not to publicly disclose the terms. While undergoing cancer treatments, Urich hosted the medical documentary series &quot;Vital Signs&quot; in 1997 and the PBS series &quot;Boatworks&quot;. After a year of treatment, he was declared cancer-free and returned to television in 1998 as Captain Jim Kennedy III in &quot;Love Boat: The Next Wave&quot;. It aired on UPN for two seasons. In 2000, he made his Broadway debut as Billy Flynn in the musical &quot;Chicago&quot; and also starred in the North American tour of the musical, in 1999 and in 2000. The next year, he costarred in &quot;Emeril&quot;, a sitcom starring celebrity chef Emeril Lagasse. While it was critically panned, he received good notices for his work on it. It would be his last role in a television series. Urich&#x27;s final television film, &quot;Night of the Wolf&quot;, aired on Animal Planet the night before his death.

==Personal life==
===Marriages and children===
Urich&#x27;s first marriage was to actress Barbara Rucker in 1968. They divorced in 1974. He married actress Heather Menzies (1949–2017) in 1975. They adopted three children. They remained married until his death in 2002.

== Illness and death ==
In July 1996, Urich announced his diagnosis with synovial sarcoma, a rare cancer affecting soft tissue. Despite his illness, he continued working, underwent treatment, and advocated for cancer cure research. He received an award from the John Wayne Cancer Institute and the Gilda Radner Courage Award for his cancer awareness efforts. He and his wife established the Urich Fund at the University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center to support cancer research. Additionally, Urich donated $125,000, his winnings from an episode of &quot;Who Wants to Be a Millionaire&quot;. He was declared cancer-free in 1998 and became the national spokesperson for the American Cancer Society that year.

In November 2001, Urich shared in an interview that doctors had found lumps in his body, but a new medication had successfully treated them. A week before his death, he was hospitalized at Los Robles Hospital &amp; Medical Center in Thousand Oaks with respiratory problems. He died there on April 16, 2002. His funeral Mass was held on April 19 at St. Charles Borromeo Church in North Hollywood. A statement was released by his publicist Cindy Guagenti, and said Urich&#x27;s wife and three children were with him when he died. 

Urich&#x27;s body was cremated, and his ashes interred at the family&#x27;s vacation home in Prince Edward County, Ontario, Canada. A memorial stands in the West Lake Church of Christ Cemetery, near their vacation home.

==Legacy==
Urich and his wife helped to raise money for the Eccles Performing Arts Centers at the Park City High School in Park City, Utah. After his death, the school established the Robert Urich Scholarship fund in his honor. In addition, they established the Robert and Heather Urich Fund for Sarcoma Research at the University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center. She also had cancer and was an ovarian cancer survivor. Heather continued to work for the center, until she died from brain cancer on December 24, 2017, surrounded by their three children.

Urich&#x27;s hometown of Toronto, Ohio, named the Robert Urich Interchange in his honor. It connects the town to Ohio State Route 7. For his contribution to the television industry, Urich has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame located at 7083 Hollywood Blvd. Until Usher was added, he was the only person with a name starting with the letter U on the walk.

==Filmography==

== See also ==

==References==
==External links==
* Robert Urich, (1946-2002) - The Carpathian Connection
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q253090" start="0" end="20" title="Robert Urich" label="Robert Michael Urich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218802" start="403" end="411" title="S.W.A.T. (1975 TV series)" label="S.W.A.T."/>
<link wikidata="Q932929" start="505" end="510" title="Vegas (1978 TV series)" label="Vega$"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="533" end="536" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="579" end="597" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q458852" start="714" end="726" title="Magnum Force" label="Magnum Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753863" start="747" end="762" title="The Ice Pirates" label="The Ice Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438444" start="786" end="794" title="Turk 182" label="Turk 182"/>
<link wikidata="Q550819" start="914" end="930" title="Robert B. Parker" label="Robert B. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972888" start="1019" end="1047" title="National Geographic Explorer" label="National Geographic Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024866" start="1064" end="1078" title="CableACE Award" label="CableACE Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110027" start="1129" end="1146" title="Golden Boot Awards" label="Golden Boot Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="1163" end="1170" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="1221" end="1225" title="Emmy" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="1283" end="1317" title="The Late Show with David Letterman" label="The Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q459477" start="1388" end="1393" title="FedEx" label="FedEx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828209" start="1440" end="1455" title="The Lazarus Man" label="The Lazarus Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619315" start="1538" end="1554" title="synovial sarcoma" label="synovial sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="1776" end="1779" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1793" end="1817" title="Love Boat: The Next Wave" label="Love Boat: The Next Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q656285" start="1897" end="1904" title="Chicago (musical)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="1937" end="1940" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908124" start="1954" end="1960" title="Emeril (TV series)" label="Emeril"/>
<link wikidata="Q736775" start="2110" end="2123" title="Toronto, Ohio" label="Toronto, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q140420" start="2196" end="2213" title="Rusyns" label="Rusyn (Ukrainian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="2218" end="2224" title="Slovaks" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q657390" start="2247" end="2265" title="Ruthenian Greek Catholic Church" label="Byzantine Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q861548" start="2316" end="2340" title="Florida State University" label="Florida State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="2346" end="2354" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481107" start="2489" end="2505" title="Lambda Chi Alpha" label="Lambda Chi Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="2616" end="2641" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="2655" end="2675" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="2749" end="2756" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="2760" end="2766" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379900" start="2862" end="2875" title="The Rainmaker (play)" label="The Rainmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q202148" start="2887" end="2900" title="Burt Reynolds" label="Burt Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234407" start="3102" end="3112" title="The F.B.I. (TV series)" label="The F.B.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q4931610" start="3177" end="3214" title="Bob &amp;amp; Carol &amp;amp; Ted &amp;amp; Alice (TV series)" label="Bob &amp;amp; Carol &amp;amp; Ted &amp;amp; Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731768" start="3260" end="3287" title="Bob &amp;amp; Carol &amp;amp; Ted &amp;amp; Alice" label="1969 film of the same title"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="3407" end="3421" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q458852" start="3452" end="3464" title="Magnum Force" label="Magnum Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218802" start="3588" end="3596" title="S.W.A.T. (1975 TV series)" label="S.W.A.T."/>
<link wikidata="Q295080" start="3640" end="3654" title="Aaron Spelling" label="Aaron Spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q202148" start="3656" end="3669" title="Burt Reynolds" label="Burt Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857085" start="3828" end="3850" title="mid-season replacement" label="mid-season replacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247292" start="4019" end="4023" title="Soap (TV series)" label="Soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044635" start="4162" end="4171" title="Bewitched" label="Bewitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512733" start="4200" end="4207" title="Tabitha (TV series)" label="Tabitha"/>
<link wikidata="Q272878" start="4224" end="4236" title="Lisa Hartman Black" label="Lisa Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q932929" start="4454" end="4459" title="Vegas (1978 TV series)" label="Vega$"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="4576" end="4585" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="4619" end="4622" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="4643" end="4661" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="4890" end="4909" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757911" start="4976" end="4994" title="Endangered Species (1982 film)" label="Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337411" start="5044" end="5056" title="Alan Rudolph" label="Alan Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758981" start="5155" end="5162" title="Gavilan (TV series)" label="Gavilan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="5217" end="5220" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="5234" end="5247" title="Oceanography" label="oceanographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753863" start="5349" end="5364" title="The Ice Pirates" label="The Ice Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q223992" start="5376" end="5386" title="Wes Craven" label="Wes Craven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284562" start="5400" end="5418" title="Invitation to Hell (1984 film)" label="Invitation to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438444" start="5470" end="5478" title="Turk 182" label="Turk 182"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972888" start="5964" end="5992" title="National Geographic Explorer" label="National Geographic Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024866" start="6009" end="6023" title="CableACE Award" label="CableACE Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547946" start="6130" end="6143" title="Lonesome Dove (miniseries)" label="Lonesome Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743633" start="6371" end="6387" title="American Dreamer (TV series)" label="American Dreamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188798" start="6488" end="6498" title="Crossroads (1992 TV series)" label="Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q168721" start="6573" end="6585" title="Faye Dunaway" label="Faye Dunaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997375" start="6614" end="6630" title="It Had to Be You (TV series)" label="It Had to Be You"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="6907" end="6910" title="TNT (U.S. TV network)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828209" start="6932" end="6947" title="The Lazarus Man" label="The Lazarus Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619315" start="7097" end="7113" title="synovial sarcoma" label="synovial sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q622848" start="7139" end="7164" title="Castle Rock Entertainment" label="Castle Rock Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="7494" end="7512" title="breach of contract" label="breach of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="7727" end="7730" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7887" end="7911" title="Love Boat: The Next Wave" label="Love Boat: The Next Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q206272" start="7931" end="7934" title="UPN" label="UPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q656285" start="8024" end="8031" title="Chicago (musical)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q339838" start="8203" end="8217" title="Emeril Lagasse" label="Emeril Lagasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43429" start="8422" end="8435" title="Animal Planet" label="Animal Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q462368" start="8621" end="8636" title="Heather Menzies" label="Heather Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619315" start="8808" end="8824" title="synovial sarcoma" label="synovial sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458306" start="8850" end="8861" title="soft tissue" label="soft tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q40531" start="8997" end="9007" title="John Wayne" label="John Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q266808" start="9033" end="9045" title="Gilda Radner" label="Gilda Radner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795474" start="9299" end="9328" title="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire (U.S. game show)" label="Who Wants to Be a Millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q463665" start="9417" end="9440" title="American Cancer Society" label="American Cancer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="9523" end="9528" title="tumor" label="lumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683243" start="9642" end="9682" title="Los Robles Hospital &amp;amp; Medical Center" label="Los Robles Hospital &amp;amp; Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="9686" end="9699" title="Thousand Oaks, California" label="Thousand Oaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587497" start="9801" end="9828" title="St. Charles Borromeo Church (North Hollywood)" label="St. Charles Borromeo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319697" start="9832" end="9847" title="North Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="North Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q385085" start="10076" end="10105" title="Prince Edward County, Ontario" label="Prince Edward County, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137694" start="10302" end="10323" title="Park City High School" label="Park City High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q482993" start="10327" end="10342" title="Park City, Utah" label="Park City, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q172341" start="10607" end="10621" title="ovarian cancer" label="ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q736775" start="10791" end="10804" title="Toronto, Ohio" label="Toronto, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162778" start="10879" end="10897" title="Ohio State Route 7" label="Ohio State Route 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="10972" end="10994" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q165911" start="11033" end="11038" title="Usher (musician)" label="Usher"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50490" wikidata="Q105405" url="?curid=50490" title="Cherokee">
<text>The Cherokee (; , or ) people are one of the Indigenous peoples of the Southeastern Woodlands of the United States. Prior to the 18th century, they were concentrated in their homelands, in towns along river valleys of what is now southwestern North Carolina, southeastern Tennessee, southwestern Virginia, edges of western South Carolina, northern Georgia and northeastern Alabama consisting of around 40,000 square miles.

The Cherokee language is part of the Iroquoian language group. In the 19th century, James Mooney, an early American ethnographer, recorded one oral tradition that told of the tribe having migrated south in ancient times from the Great Lakes region, where other Iroquoian peoples have been based. However, anthropologist Thomas R. Whyte, writing in 2007, dated the split among the peoples as occurring earlier. He believes that the origin of the proto-Iroquoian language was likely the Appalachian region, and the split between Northern and Southern Iroquoian languages began 4,000 years ago.

By the 19th century, White American settlers had classified the Cherokee of the Southeast as one of the &quot;Five Civilized Tribes&quot; in the region. They were agrarian, lived in permanent villages and had begun to adopt some cultural and technological practices of the white settlers. They also developed their own writing system.

Today, three Cherokee tribes are federally recognized: the United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians (UKB) in Oklahoma, the Cherokee Nation (CN) in Oklahoma, and the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians (EBCI) in North Carolina.

The Cherokee Nation has more than 300,000 tribal citizens, making it the largest of the 574 federally recognized tribes in the United States. In addition, numerous groups claim Cherokee lineage, and some of these are state-recognized. A total of more than 819,000 people are estimated to have identified as having Cherokee ancestry on the U.S. census; most are not enrolled citizens of any tribe.

Of the three federally recognized Cherokee tribes, the Cherokee Nation and the UKB have headquarters in Tahlequah, Oklahoma, and most of their citizens live in the state. The UKB are mostly descendants of &quot;Old Settlers&quot;, also called Western Cherokee: those who migrated from the Southeast to Arkansas and Oklahoma in about 1817, prior to Indian removal. They are related to the Cherokee who were later forcibly relocated there in the 1830s under the Indian Removal Act. The Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians is located on land known as the Qualla Boundary in western North Carolina. They are mostly descendants of ancestors who had resisted or avoided relocation, remaining in the area. Because they gave up tribal citizenship at the time, they became state and US citizens. In the late 19th century, they reorganized as a federally recognized tribe.

==Etymology==
A Cherokee-language name for Cherokee people is (, translating as ). Another endonym is (, translating as ). () is the Cherokee name for the Cherokee language.

Many theories, though all unproven, abound about the origin of the name &quot;Cherokee&quot;. It may have originally been derived from one of the competitive tribes in the area.

The earliest Spanish transliteration of the name, from 1755, is recorded as , but it dates to accounts related to the Hernando de Soto expedition in the mid-16th century. Another theory is that &quot;Cherokee&quot; derives from the Lower Creek word (&quot;chuh-log-gee&quot;), as the Creek were also in this mountainous region.

The Iroquois Five Nations, historically based in New York and Pennsylvania, called the Cherokee (). It is possible the word &quot;Cherokee&quot; comes from a Muscogee Creek word meaning , because the two peoples spoke different languages. Jack Kilpatrick disputes this idea, noting that he believes the name come from the Cherokee word meaning .

==Origins==

Anthropologists and historians have two main theories of Cherokee origins. One is that the Cherokee, an Iroquoian-speaking people, migrated to Southern Appalachia from northern areas around the Great Lakes in The area became territory of the &quot;Iroquois&quot; (also known as the &quot;Haudenosaunee&quot;) nations and other Iroquoian-speaking peoples of the Southeast such as the Tuscarora people of the Carolinas, and the Meherrin and Nottaway of Virginia. The other theory is that the Cherokee had been in the Southeast for thousands of years and that proto-Iroquoian developed there instead of in the north. 

Supporting the first theory are recorded conversations of Cherokee elders made by ethnographer James Mooney in the late 19th century, who recounted an oral tradition of their people migrating south from the Great Lakes region in ancient times. They occupied territories where earthwork platform mounds were built by peoples during the earlier Woodland period.

The people of the Middle Woodland period are believed to be ancestors of the historic Cherokee and occupied what is now Western North Carolina, circa 200 to 600 CE. They are believed to have built what is called the Biltmore Mound, found in 1984 south of the Swannanoa River on the Biltmore Estate, which has numerous Native American sites.

Other ancestors of the Cherokee are considered to be part of the later Pisgah phase of South Appalachian Mississippian culture, a regional variation of the Mississippian culture that arose circa 1000 and lasted to 1500 CE. There is a consensus among most specialists in Southeast archeology and anthropology about these dates. But Finger says that ancestors of the Cherokee people lived in western North Carolina and eastern Tennessee for a far longer period of time. Additional mounds were built by peoples during this cultural phase. Typically in this region, towns had a single platform mound and served as a political center for smaller villages.

==The homelands==
The Cherokee occupied numerous towns throughout the river valleys and mountain ridges of their homelands. What were called the Lower towns were found in what is present-day western Oconee County, South Carolina, along the Keowee River (called the Savannah River in its lower portion). The principal town of the Lower Towns was Keowee. Other Cherokee towns on the Keowee River included Estatoe and Sugartown (&quot;Kulsetsiyi&quot;), a name repeated in other areas.

In western North Carolina, what were known as the Valley, Middle, and Outer Towns were located along the major rivers of the Tuckasegee, the upper Little Tennessee, Hiwasee, French Broad and other systems. The Overhill Cherokee occupied towns along the lower Little Tennessee River and upper Tennessee River on the western side of the Appalachian Mountains, in present-day southeastern Tennessee.

===Agriculture===
During the late Archaic and Woodland Period, Native Americans in the region began to cultivate plants such as marsh elder, lambsquarters, pigweed, sunflowers, and some native squash. People created new art forms such as shell gorgets, adopted new technologies, and developed an elaborate cycle of religious ceremonies.

During the Mississippian culture-period (1000 to 1500 CE in the regional variation known as the South Appalachian Mississippian culture), local women developed a new variety of maize (corn) called eastern flint corn. It closely resembled modern corn and produced larger crops. The successful cultivation of corn surpluses allowed the rise of larger, more complex chiefdoms consisting of several villages and concentrated populations during this period. Corn became celebrated among numerous peoples in religious ceremonies, especially the Green Corn Ceremony.

==Early culture==
Much of what is known about pre-18th century Native American cultures has come from records of Spanish expeditions. The earliest ones of the mid-16th century encountered peoples of the Mississippian culture era, who were ancestral to tribes that emerged in the Southeast, such as the Cherokee, Muscogee, Cheraw, and Catawba. Specifically in 1540–41, a Spanish expedition led by Hernando de Soto passed through present-day South Carolina, proceeding into western North Carolina and what is considered Cherokee country. The Spanish recorded a &quot;Chalaque&quot; people as living around the Keowee River, where western North Carolina, South Carolina, and northeastern Georgia meet. The Cherokee consider this area to be part of their homelands, which also extended into southeastern Tennessee.

Further west, De Soto&#x27;s expedition visited villages in present-day northwestern Georgia, recording them as ruled at the time by the Coosa chiefdom. This is believed to be a chiefdom ancestral to the Muscogee Creek people, who developed as a Muskogean-speaking people with a distinct culture.

In 1566, the Juan Pardo expedition traveled from the present-day South Carolina coast into its interior, and into western North Carolina and southeastern Tennessee. He recorded meeting Cherokee-speaking people who visited him while he stayed at the Joara chiefdom (north of present-day Morganton, North Carolina). The historic Catawba later lived in this area of the upper Catawba River. Pardo and his forces wintered over at Joara, building Fort San Juan there in 1567.

His expedition proceeded into the interior, noting villages near modern Asheville and other places that are part of the Cherokee homelands. According to anthropologist Charles M. Hudson, the Pardo expedition also recorded encounters with Muskogean-speaking peoples at Chiaha in southeastern modern Tennessee.

==Linguistic studies==
Linguistic studies have been another way for researchers to study the development of people and their cultures. Unlike most other Native American tribes in the American Southeast at the start of the historic era, the Cherokee and Tuscarora people spoke Iroquoian languages. Since the Great Lakes region was the territory of most Iroquoian-language speakers, scholars have theorized that both the Cherokee and Tuscarora migrated south from that region. The Cherokee oral history tradition supports their migration from the Great Lakes.

Linguistic analysis shows a relatively large difference between Cherokee and the northern Iroquoian languages, suggesting they had migrated long ago. Scholars posit a split between the groups in the distant past, perhaps 3,500–3,800 years ago. Glottochronology studies suggest the split occurred between about 1500 and 1800 BCE. The Cherokee say that the ancient settlement of &quot;Kituwa&quot; on the Tuckasegee River is their original settlement in the Southeast. It was formerly adjacent to and is now part of Qualla Boundary (the base of the federally recognized Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians) in North Carolina.

According to Thomas Whyte, who posits that proto-Iroquoian developed in Appalachia, the Cherokee and Tuscarora broke off in the Southeast from the major group of Iroquoian speakers who migrated north to the Great Lakes area. There a succession of Iroquoian-speaking tribes were encountered by Europeans in historic times.

===Other sources of early Cherokee history===
In the 1830s, the American writer John Howard Payne visited Cherokee then based in Georgia. He recounted what they shared about pre-19th-century Cherokee culture and society. For instance, the Payne papers describe the account by Cherokee elders of a traditional two-part societal structure. A &quot;white&quot; organization of elders represented the seven clans. As Payne recounted, this group, which was hereditary and priestly, was responsible for religious activities, such as healing, purification, and prayer. A second group of younger men, the &quot;red&quot; organization, was responsible for warfare. The Cherokee considered warfare a polluting activity.

Researchers have debated the reasons for the change. Some historians believe the decline in priestly power originated with a revolt by the Cherokee against the abuses of the priestly class known as the &quot;Ani-kutani&quot;. Ethnographer James Mooney, who studied and talked with the Cherokee in the late 1880s, was the first to trace the decline of the former hierarchy to this revolt. By the time that Mooney was studying the people in the late 1880s, the structure of Cherokee religious practitioners was more informal, based more on individual knowledge and ability than upon heredity.

Another major source of early cultural history comes from materials written in the 19th century by the &quot;didanvwisgi&quot; (), Cherokee medicine men, after Sequoyah&#x27;s creation of the Cherokee syllabary in the 1820s. Initially only the &quot;didanvwisgi&quot; learned to write and read such materials, which were considered extremely powerful in a spiritual sense. Later, the syllabary and writings were widely adopted by the Cherokee people.

==History==
===17th century: English contact===
In 1657, there was a disturbance in Virginia Colony as the &quot;Rechahecrians&quot; or &quot;Rickahockans&quot;, as well as the Siouan &quot;Manahoac&quot; and &quot;Nahyssan&quot;, broke through the frontier and settled near the Falls of the James River, near present-day Richmond, Virginia. The following year, a combined force of English colonists and Pamunkey drove the newcomers away. The identity of the &quot;Rechahecrians&quot; has been much debated. Historians noted the name closely resembled that recorded for the &quot;Eriechronon&quot; or &quot;Erielhonan&quot;, commonly known as the Erie tribe, another Iroquoian-speaking people based south of the Great Lakes in present-day northern Pennsylvania. This Iroquoian people had been driven away from the southern shore of Lake Erie in 1654 by the powerful Iroquois Five Nations, also known as &quot;Haudenosaunee&quot;, who were seeking more hunting grounds to support their dominance in the beaver fur trade. The anthropologist Martin Smith theorized some remnants of the tribe migrated to Virginia after the wars (1986:131–32), later becoming known as the Westo to English colonists in the Province of Carolina. A few historians suggest this tribe was Cherokee.

Virginian traders developed a small-scale trading system with the Cherokee in the Piedmont before the end of the 17th century. The earliest recorded Virginia trader to live among the Cherokee was Cornelius Dougherty or Dority, in 1690.

===18th century===


The Cherokee gave sanctuary to a band of Shawnee in the 1660s. But from 1710 to 1715, the Cherokee and Chickasaw allied with the British, and fought the Shawnee, who were allied with French colonists, forcing the Shawnee to move northward.

The Cherokee fought with the Yamasee, Catawba, and British in late 1712 and early 1713 against the Tuscarora in the Second Tuscarora War. The Tuscarora War marked the beginning of a British-Cherokee relationship that, despite breaking down on occasion, remained strong for much of the 18th century. With the growth of the deerskin trade, the Cherokee were considered valuable trading partners, since deer skins from the cooler country of their mountain hunting-grounds were of better quality than those supplied by the lowland coastal tribes, who were neighbors of the English colonists.

In January 1716, Cherokee murdered a delegation of Muscogee Creek leaders at the town of Tugaloo, marking their entry into the Yamasee War. It ended in 1717 with peace treaties between the colony of South Carolina and the Creek. Hostility and sporadic raids between the Cherokee and Creek continued for decades. These raids came to a head at the Battle of Taliwa in 1755, at present-day Ball Ground, Georgia, with the defeat of the Muscogee.

In 1721, the Cherokee ceded lands in South Carolina. In 1730, at Nikwasi, a Cherokee town and Mississippian culture site, a Scots adventurer, Sir Alexander Cuming, crowned Moytoy of Tellico as &quot;Emperor&quot; of the Cherokee. Moytoy agreed to recognize King George II of Great Britain as the Cherokee protector. Cuming arranged to take seven prominent Cherokee, including &quot;Attakullakulla&quot;, to London, England. There the Cherokee delegation signed the Treaty of Whitehall with the British. Moytoy&#x27;s son, Amo-sgasite (Dreadful Water), attempted to succeed him as &quot;Emperor&quot; in 1741, but the Cherokee elected their own leader, Conocotocko (Old Hop) of Chota.

Political power among the Cherokee remained decentralized, and towns acted autonomously. In 1735, the Cherokee were said to have sixty-four towns and villages, with an estimated fighting force of 6,000 men. In 1738 and 1739, smallpox epidemics broke out among the Cherokee, who had no natural immunity to the new infectious disease. Nearly half their population died within a year. Hundreds of other Cherokee committed suicide due to their losses and disfigurement from the disease.
British colonial officer Henry Timberlake, born in Virginia, described the Cherokee people as he saw them in 1761:

From 1753 to 1755, battles broke out between the Cherokee and Muscogee over disputed hunting grounds in North Georgia. The Cherokee were victorious in the Battle of Taliwa. British soldiers built forts in Cherokee country to defend against the French in the Seven Years&#x27; War, which was fought across Europe and was called the French and Indian War on the North American front. These included Fort Loudoun near Chota on the Tennessee River in eastern Tennessee. Serious misunderstandings arose quickly between the two allies, resulting in the 1760 Anglo-Cherokee War.

King George III&#x27;s Royal Proclamation of 1763 forbade British settlements west of the Appalachian crest, as his government tried to afford some protection from colonial encroachment to the Cherokee and other tribes they depended on as allies. The Crown found the ruling difficult to enforce with colonists.

From 1771 to 1772, North Carolinian settlers squatted on Cherokee lands in Tennessee, forming the Watauga Association. Daniel Boone and his party tried to settle in Kentucky, but the Shawnee, Delaware, Mingo, and some Cherokee attacked a scouting and forage party that included Boone&#x27;s son, James Boone, and William Russell&#x27;s son, Henry, who were killed in the skirmish.

In 1776, allied with the Shawnee led by Cornstalk, Cherokee attacked settlers in South Carolina, Georgia, Virginia, and North Carolina in the Second Cherokee War. Overhill Cherokee Nancy Ward, Dragging Canoe&#x27;s cousin, warned settlers of impending attacks. Provincial militias retaliated, destroying more than 50 Cherokee towns. North Carolina militia in 1776 and 1780 invaded and destroyed the Overhill towns in what is now Tennessee. In 1777, surviving Cherokee town leaders signed treaties with the new states.

Dragging Canoe and his band settled along Chickamauga Creek near present-day Chattanooga, Tennessee, where they established 11 new towns. Chickamauga Town was his headquarters and the colonists tended to call his entire band the Chickamauga to distinguish them from other Cherokee. From here he fought a guerrilla war against settlers, which lasted from 1776 to 1794. These are known informally as the Cherokee–American wars, but this is not a historian&#x27;s term.

The first Treaty of Tellico Blockhouse, signed November 7, 1794, finally brought peace between the Cherokee and Americans, who had achieved independence from the British Crown. In 1805, the Cherokee ceded their lands between the Cumberland and Duck rivers (i.e. the Cumberland Plateau) to Tennessee.

====Scots (and other Europeans) among the Cherokee in the 18th century====
The traders and British government agents dealing with the southern tribes in general, and the Cherokee in particular, were nearly all of Scottish ancestry, with many documented as being from the Highlands. A few were Scotch-Irish, English, French, and German (see Scottish Indian trade). Many of these men married women from their host peoples and remained after the fighting had ended. Some of their mixed-race children, who were raised in Native American cultures, later became significant leaders among the Five Civilized Tribes of the Southeast.
Notable traders, agents, and refugee Tories among the Cherokee included John Stuart, Henry Stuart, Alexander Cameron, John McDonald, John Joseph Vann (father of James Vann), Daniel Ross (father of John Ross), John Walker Sr., Mark Winthrop Battle, John McLemore (father of Bob), William Buchanan, John Watts (father of John Watts Jr.), John D. Chisholm, John Benge (father of Bob Benge), Thomas Brown, John Rogers (Welsh), John Gunter (German, founder of Gunter&#x27;s Landing), James Adair (Irish), William Thorpe (English), and Peter Hildebrand (German), among many others. Some attained the honorary status of minor chiefs and/or members of significant delegations.

By contrast, a large portion of the settlers encroaching on the Native American territories were Scotch-Irish, Irish from Ulster who were of Scottish descent and had been part of the plantation of Ulster. They also tended to support the Revolution. But in the back country, there were also Scotch-Irish who were Loyalists, such as Simon Girty.

===19th century===
====Acculturation====
The Cherokee lands between the Tennessee and Chattahoochee rivers were remote enough from white settlers to remain independent after the Cherokee–American wars. The deerskin trade was no longer feasible on their greatly reduced lands, and over the next several decades, the people of the fledgling Cherokee Nation began to build a new society modeled on the white Southern United States.
George Washington sought to &#x27;civilize&#x27; Southeastern American Indians, through programs overseen by the Indian Agent Benjamin Hawkins. He encouraged the Cherokee to abandon their communal land-tenure and settle on individual farmsteads, which was facilitated by the destruction of many American Indian towns during the American Revolutionary War. The deerskin trade brought white-tailed deer to the brink of extinction, and as pigs and cattle were introduced, they became the principal sources of meat. The government supplied the tribes with spinning wheels and cotton-seed, and men were taught to fence and plow the land, in contrast to their traditional division in which crop cultivation was woman&#x27;s labor. Americans instructed the women in weaving. Eventually, Hawkins helped them set up smithies, gristmills and cotton plantations.

The Cherokee organized a national government under Principal Chiefs Little Turkey (1788–1801), Black Fox (1801–1811), and Pathkiller (1811–1827), all former warriors of Dragging Canoe. The &#x27;Cherokee triumvirate&#x27; of James Vann and his protégés The Ridge and Charles R. Hicks advocated acculturation, formal education, and modern methods of farming. In 1801 they invited Moravian missionaries from North Carolina to teach Christianity and the &#x27;arts of civilized life.&#x27; The Moravians and later Congregationalist missionaries ran boarding schools, and a select few students were educated at the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions school in Connecticut.

In 1806 a Federal Road from Savannah, Georgia, to Knoxville, Tennessee, was built through Cherokee land. Chief James Vann opened a tavern, inn and ferry across the Chattahoochee and built a cotton-plantation on a spur of the road from Athens, Georgia, to Nashville. His son &#x27;Rich Joe&#x27; Vann developed the plantation to , cultivated by 150 slaves. He exported cotton to England, and owned a steamboat on the Tennessee River.

The Cherokee allied with the U.S. against the nativist and pro-British Red Stick faction of the Upper Creek in the Creek War during the War of 1812. Cherokee warriors led by Major Ridge played a major role in General Andrew Jackson&#x27;s victory at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. Major Ridge moved his family to Rome, Georgia, where he built a substantial house, developed a large plantation and ran a ferry on the Oostanaula River. Although he never learned English, he sent his son and nephews to New England to be educated in mission schools. His interpreter and protégé Chief John Ross, the descendant of several generations of Cherokee women and Scots fur-traders, built a plantation and operated a trading firm and a ferry at Ross&#x27; Landing (Chattanooga, Tennessee). During this period, divisions arose between the acculturated elite and the great majority of Cherokee, who clung to traditional ways of life.

Around 1809 Sequoyah began developing a written form of the Cherokee language. He spoke no English, but his experiences as a silversmith dealing regularly with white settlers, and as a warrior at Horseshoe Bend, convinced him the Cherokee needed to develop writing. In 1821, he introduced Cherokee syllabary, the first written syllabic form of an American Indian language outside of Central America. Initially, his innovation was opposed by both Cherokee traditionalists and white missionaries, who sought to encourage the use of English. When Sequoyah taught children to read and write with the syllabary, he reached the adults. By the 1820s, the Cherokee had a higher rate of literacy than the whites around them in Georgia.

In 1819, the Cherokee began holding council meetings at New Town, at the headwaters of the Oostanaula (near present-day Calhoun, Georgia). In November 1825, New Town became the capital of the Cherokee Nation, and was renamed New Echota, after the Overhill Cherokee principal town of Chota. Sequoyah&#x27;s syllabary was adopted. They had developed a police force, a judicial system, and a National Committee.

In 1827, the Cherokee Nation drafted a Constitution modeled on the United States, with executive, legislative and judicial branches and a system of checks and balances. The two-tiered legislature was led by Major Ridge and his son John Ridge. Convinced the tribe&#x27;s survival required English-speaking leaders who could negotiate with the U.S., the legislature appointed John Ross as Principal Chief. A printing press was established at New Echota by the Vermont missionary Samuel Worcester and Major Ridge&#x27;s nephew Elias Boudinot, who had taken the name of his white benefactor, a leader of the Continental Congress and New Jersey Congressman. They translated the Bible into Cherokee syllabary. Boudinot published the first edition of the bilingual &#x27;Cherokee Phoenix,&#x27; the first American Indian newspaper, in February 1828.

====Removal era====
Before the final removal to present-day Oklahoma, many Cherokees relocated to present-day Arkansas, Missouri and Texas. Between 1775 and 1786 the Cherokee, along with people of other nations such as the Choctaw and Chickasaw, began voluntarily settling along the Arkansas and Red Rivers.

In 1802, the federal government promised to extinguish Indian titles to lands claimed by Georgia in return for Georgia&#x27;s cession of the western lands that became Alabama and Mississippi. To convince the Cherokee to move voluntarily in 1815, the US government established a Cherokee Reservation in Arkansas. The reservation boundaries extended from north of the Arkansas River to the southern bank of the White River. Di&#x27;wali (The Bowl), Sequoyah, Spring Frog and Tatsi (Dutch) and their bands settled there. These Cherokees became known as &quot;Old Settlers.&quot;

The Cherokee eventually migrated as far north as the Missouri Bootheel by 1816. They lived interspersed among the Delawares and Shawnees of that area. The Cherokee in Missouri Territory increased rapidly in population, from 1,000 to 6,000 over the next year (1816–1817), according to reports by Governor William Clark. Increased conflicts with the Osage Nation led to the Battle of Claremore Mound and the eventual establishment of Fort Smith between Cherokee and Osage communities. In the Treaty of St. Louis (1825), the Osage were made to &quot;cede and relinquish to the United States, all their right, title, interest, and claim, to lands lying within the State of Missouri and Territory of Arkansas...&quot; to make room for the Cherokee and the &quot;Mashcoux&quot;, Muscogee Creeks. As late as the winter of 1838, Cherokee and Creek living in the Missouri and Arkansas areas petitioned the War Department to remove the Osage from the area.

A group of Cherokee traditionalists led by &quot;Di&#x27;wali&quot; moved to Spanish Texas in 1819. Settling near Nacogdoches, they were welcomed by Mexican authorities as potential allies against Anglo-American colonists. The Texas Cherokees were mostly neutral during the Texas War of Independence. In 1836, they signed a treaty with Texas President Sam Houston, an adopted member of the Cherokee tribe. His successor Mirabeau Lamar sent militia to evict them in 1839.

=====Trail of Tears=====

Following the War of 1812, and the concurrent Red Stick War, the U.S. government persuaded several groups of Cherokee to a voluntary removal to the Arkansas Territory. These were the &quot;Old Settlers&quot;, the first of the Cherokee to make their way to what would eventually become Indian Territory (modern day Oklahoma). This effort was headed by Indian Agent Return J. Meigs, and was finalized with the signing of the Jackson and McMinn Treaty, giving the Old Settlers undisputed title to the lands designated for their use.

During this time, Georgia focused on removing the Cherokee&#x27;s neighbors, the Lower Creek. Georgia Governor George Troup and his cousin William McIntosh, chief of the Lower Creek, signed the Treaty of Indian Springs in 1825, ceding the last Muscogee (Creek) lands claimed by Georgia. The state&#x27;s northwestern border reached the Chattahoochee, the border of the Cherokee Nation. In 1829, gold was discovered at Dahlonega, on Cherokee land claimed by Georgia. The Georgia Gold Rush was the first in U.S. history, and state officials demanded that the federal government expel the Cherokee. When Andrew Jackson was inaugurated as president in 1829, Georgia gained a strong ally in Washington. In 1830 Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, authorizing the forcible relocation of American Indians east of the Mississippi to a new Indian Territory.

Jackson claimed the removal policy was an effort to prevent the Cherokee from facing extinction as a people, which he considered the fate that &quot;...the Mohegan, the Narragansett, and the Delaware&quot; had suffered. There is, however, ample evidence that the Cherokee were adapting to modern farming techniques. A modern analysis shows that the area was in general in a state of economic surplus and could have accommodated both the Cherokee and new settlers.

The Cherokee brought their grievances to a US judicial review that set a precedent in Indian country. John Ross traveled to Washington, D.C., and won support from National Republican Party leaders Henry Clay and Daniel Webster. Samuel Worcester campaigned on behalf of the Cherokee in New England, where their cause was taken up by Ralph Waldo Emerson (see Emerson&#x27;s 1838 letter to Martin Van Buren). In June 1830, a delegation led by Chief Ross defended Cherokee rights before the U.S. Supreme Court in &quot;Cherokee Nation v. Georgia&quot;.

In 1831, Georgia militia arrested Samuel Worcester for residing on Indian lands without a state permit, imprisoning him in Milledgeville. In &quot;Worcester v. Georgia&quot; (1832), the US Supreme Court Chief Justice John Marshall ruled that American Indian nations were &quot;distinct, independent political communities retaining their original natural rights,&quot; and entitled to federal protection from the actions of state governments that infringed on their sovereignty. &quot;Worcester v. Georgia&quot; is considered one of the most important dicta in law dealing with Native Americans.

Jackson ignored the Supreme Court&#x27;s ruling, as he needed to conciliate Southern sectionalism during the era of the Nullification Crisis. His landslide reelection in 1832 emboldened calls for Cherokee removal. Georgia sold Cherokee lands to its citizens in a Land Lottery, and the state militia occupied New Echota. The Cherokee National Council, led by John Ross, fled to Red Clay, a remote valley north of Georgia&#x27;s land claim. Ross had the support of Cherokee traditionalists, who could not imagine removal from their ancestral lands.

A small group known as the &quot;Ridge Party&quot; or the &quot;Treaty Party&quot; saw relocation as inevitable and believed the Cherokee Nation needed to make the best deal to preserve their rights in Indian Territory. Led by Major Ridge, John Ridge and Elias Boudinot, they represented the Cherokee elite, whose homes, plantations and businesses were confiscated, or under threat of being taken by white squatters with Georgia land-titles. With capital to acquire new lands, they were more inclined to accept relocation. On December 29, 1835, the &quot;Ridge Party&quot; signed the Treaty of New Echota, stipulating terms and conditions for the removal of the Cherokee Nation. In return for their lands, the Cherokee were promised a large tract in the Indian Territory, $5 million, and $300,000 for improvements on their new lands.

John Ross gathered over 15,000 signatures for a petition to the U.S. Senate, insisting that the treaty was invalid because it did not have the support of the majority of the Cherokee people. The Senate passed the Treaty of New Echota by a one-vote margin. It was enacted into law in May 1836.

Two years later, President Martin Van Buren ordered 7,000 federal troops and state militia under General Winfield Scott into Cherokee lands to evict the tribe. Over 16,000 Cherokee were forcibly relocated westward to Indian Territory in 1838–1839, a migration known as the Trail of Tears or in Cherokee or (&quot;The Trail Where They Cried&quot;), although it is described by another word (&quot;The Removal&quot;). Marched over across Tennessee, Kentucky, Illinois, Missouri and Arkansas, the people suffered from disease, exposure and starvation, and as many as 4,000 died, nearly a fifth of the population. As some Cherokees were slaveholders, they took enslaved African Americans with them west of the Mississippi. Intermarried European Americans and missionaries also walked the Trail of Tears. Ross preserved a vestige of independence by negotiating permission for the Cherokee to conduct their own removal under U.S. supervision.

In keeping with the tribe&#x27;s &quot;blood law&quot; that prescribed the death penalty for Cherokee who sold lands, Ross&#x27;s son arranged the murder of the leaders of the &quot;Treaty Party&quot;. On June 22, 1839, a party of twenty-five Ross supporters assassinated Major Ridge, John Ridge and Elias Boudinot. The party included Daniel Colston, John Vann, Archibald, James and Joseph Spear. Boudinot&#x27;s brother Stand Watie fought and survived that day, escaping to Arkansas.

In 1827, Sequoyah had led a delegation of Old Settlers to Washington, D.C., to negotiate for the exchange of Arkansas land for land in Indian Territory. After the Trail of Tears, he helped mediate divisions between the Old Settlers and the rival factions of the more recent arrivals. In 1839, as President of the Western Cherokee, Sequoyah signed an Act of Union with John Ross that reunited the two groups of the Cherokee Nation.

=====Eastern Band=====
The Cherokee living along the Oconaluftee River in the Great Smoky Mountains were the most conservative and isolated from European–American settlements. They rejected the reforms of the Cherokee Nation. When the Cherokee government ceded all territory east of the Little Tennessee River to North Carolina in 1819, they withdrew from the Nation. William Holland Thomas, a white store owner and state legislator from Jackson County, North Carolina, helped over 600 Cherokee from Qualla Town obtain North Carolina citizenship, which exempted them from forced removal. Over 400 Cherokee either hid from Federal troops in the remote Snowbird Mountains, under the leadership of Tsali (), or belonged to the former Valley Towns area around the Cheoah River who negotiated with the state government to stay in North Carolina. An additional 400 Cherokee stayed on reserves in Southeast Tennessee, North Georgia, and Northeast Alabama, as citizens of their respective states. They were mostly mixed-race and Cherokee women married to white men. Together, these groups were the ancestors of the federally recognized Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, and some of the state-recognized tribes in surrounding states.

====Civil War====

The American Civil War was devastating for both East and Western Cherokee. The Eastern Band, aided by William Thomas, became the Thomas Legion of Cherokee Indians and Highlanders, fighting for the Confederacy in the American Civil War. Cherokee in Indian Territory divided into Union and Confederate factions.

Stand Watie, the leader of the Ridge Party, raised a regiment for Confederate service in 1861. John Ross, who had reluctantly agreed to ally with the Confederacy, was captured by Federal troops in 1862. He lived in a self-imposed exile in Philadelphia, supporting the Union. In the Indian Territory, the national council of those who supported the Union voted to abolish slavery in the Cherokee Nation in 1863, but they were not the majority slaveholders and the vote had little effect on those supporting the Confederacy.

Watie was elected Principal Chief of the pro-Confederacy majority. A master of hit-and-run cavalry tactics, Watie fought those Cherokee loyal to John Ross and Federal troops in Indian Territory and Arkansas, capturing Union supply trains and steamboats, and saving a Confederate army by covering their retreat after the Battle of Pea Ridge in March 1862. He became a Brigadier General of the Confederate States; the only other American Indian to hold the rank in the American Civil War was Ely S. Parker with the Union Army. On June 25, 1865, two months after Robert E. Lee surrendered at Appomattox, Stand Watie became the last Confederate General to stand down.

====Reconstruction and late 19th century====

After the Civil War, the U.S. government required the Cherokee Nation to sign a new treaty, because of its alliance with the Confederacy. The U.S. required the 1866 Treaty to provide for the emancipation of all Cherokee slaves, and full citizenship to all Cherokee Freedmen and all African Americans who chose to continue to reside within tribal lands, so that they &quot;shall have all the rights of native Cherokees.&quot; Both before and after the Civil War, some Cherokee intermarried or had relationships with African Americans, just as they had with whites. Many Cherokee Freedmen have been active politically within the tribe.

The US government also acquired easement rights to the western part of the territory, which became the Oklahoma Territory, for the construction of railroads. Development and settlers followed the railroads. By the late 19th century, the government believed that Native Americans would be better off if each family owned its own land. The Dawes Act of 1887 provided for the breakup of commonly held tribal land into individual household allotments. Native Americans were registered on the Dawes Rolls and allotted land from the common reserve. The U.S. government counted the remainder of tribal land as &quot;surplus&quot; and sold it to non-Cherokee individuals.

The Curtis Act of 1898 dismantled tribal governments, courts, schools, and other civic institutions. For Indian Territory, this meant the abolition of the Cherokee courts and governmental systems. This was seen as necessary before the Oklahoma and Indian territories could be admitted as a combined state. In 1905, the Five Civilized Tribes of the Indian Territory proposed the creation of the State of Sequoyah as one to be exclusively Native American but failed to gain support in Washington, D.C.. In 1907, the Oklahoma and Indian Territories entered the union as the state of Oklahoma.
By the late 19th century, the Eastern Band of Cherokee were laboring under the constraints of a segregated society. In the aftermath of Reconstruction, conservative white Democrats regained power in North Carolina and other southern states. They proceeded to effectively disenfranchise all blacks and many poor whites by new constitutions and laws related to voter registration and elections. They passed Jim Crow laws that divided society into &quot;white&quot; and &quot;colored&quot;, mostly to control freedmen. Cherokee and other Native Americans were classified on the colored side and suffered the same racial segregation and disenfranchisement as former slaves. They also often lost their historical documentation for identification as Indians, when the Southern states classified them as colored. Black Americans and Native Americans would not have their constitutional rights as U.S. citizens enforced until after the Civil Rights Movement secured passage of civil rights legislation in the mid-1960s, and the federal government began to monitor voter registration and elections, as well as other programs.

====Tribal land jurisdiction status====
On July 9, 2020, the United States Supreme Court decided in the McGirt v Oklahoma decision in a criminal jurisdiction case that roughly half the land of the state of Oklahoma made up of tribal nations like the Cherokee are officially Native American tribal land jurisdictions. Oklahoma Governor Kevin Stitt, himself a Cherokee Nation citizen, sought to reverse the Supreme Court decision. The following year, the state of Oklahoma couldn&#x27;t block federal action to grant the Cherokee Nation—along with the Chickasaw, Choctaw, Muscogee (Creek), and Seminole Nations—reservation status.

== Population history ==
John R. Swanton enumerates 201 Cherokee villages and towns. The Cherokee had 6,000 warriors (and therefore around 30,000 people) in years 1730–35 according to J. Adair. In 1738 they also had 6,000 warriors, but down to 5,000 in 1740 (according to Ga. Hist. Coll., II). Colonel James Oglethorpe confirms that they had 5,000 warriors in 1739 (Ga. Coll. Rec., V). Also according to Ga. Coll. Rec., V an epidemic reduced them &quot;by almost one-half&quot; in 1738, but this source doesn&#x27;t specify how numerous they were before the epidemic. Perhaps this source exaggerates the casualties caused by that epidemic, and in fact it killed just around 1,000 warriors. Arthur Dobbs estimated the Cherokee warrior strength in 1755 at 2,590 (but W. Douglas at about the same time reported 6,000 warriors). In 1761 soon after the end of the Anglo-Cherokee War there were 2,300 warriors according to J. Adair. By year 1768 their number recovered back to 3,000 warriors, and B. R. Carroll in &quot;Historical Collections of South Carolina&quot; also reported that they had 3,000 warriors. By 1819 there were 4,000 warriors (and therefore around 20,000 people - including about 5,000 to the west of the Mississippi). George Catlin estimated 22,000 Cherokees in 1832, before their removal. But according to a report by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs dated November 25, 1841, the number of Cherokees who had already been removed west of the Mississippi (to Oklahoma, Indian Territory) was 25,911. Henry Schoolcraft reported 21,707 Cherokees in 1857. Indian Affairs 1861 reported 22,000. Enumeration published in 1886 counted 23,000 Cherokee in Oklahoma (Indian Territory) as of year 1884. Indian Affairs reported in 1890 around 25,000 among the Western Cherokee (in Oklahoma) and in years 1884 and 1889 around 3,000 among the Eastern Cherokee. The Cherokee national census of 1890 in Oklahoma gave the total number of the nation under Cherokee law to be 25,978. In 1900 there were 35,000 in Oklahoma. According to James Mooney (quoted by Frederick Webb Hodge) the majority of the earlier estimates of the Cherokee population are probably too low as the Cherokee occupied so extensive a territory that only a part of them came into contact with the Whites. Indian Affairs 1910 reported that in 1910 the Cherokee in Oklahoma contained 41,701 people, including 36,301 by blood, 286 by intermarriage and 4,917 Freedmen. While the census of 1910 counted 31,489 Cherokees.

In the 2020 census a total of 1,130,730 people claimed Cherokee ancestry. However the percentage of full-blood individuals is probably very low considering that the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians reported having only 395 full-blood members. Perhaps there is a larger number of full-blood individuals among the United Keetoowah Band and among the Cherokee Nation.

==Culture==

===Spirituality===
The Cherokee believe that the world is divided into two major spiritual forces: &quot;red&quot; (war, success, youth) and &quot;white&quot; (peace, instrospection, old age).

===Cultural institutions===
The Qualla Arts and Crafts Mutual, Inc., of Cherokee, North Carolina, is the oldest continuing Native American art co-operative. They were founded in 1946 to provide a venue for traditional Eastern Band Cherokee artists. The Museum of the Cherokee Indian, also in Cherokee, displays permanent and changing exhibits, houses archives and collections important to Cherokee history, and sponsors cultural groups, such as the Warriors of the AniKituhwa dance group.

In 2007, the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians entered into a partnership with Southwestern Community College and Western Carolina University to create the Oconaluftee Institute for Cultural Arts (OICA), to emphasize native art and culture in traditional fine arts education. This is intended both to preserve traditional art forms and encourage exploration of contemporary ideas. Located in Cherokee, OICA offered an associate degree program. In August 2010, OICA acquired a letterpress and had the Cherokee syllabary recast to begin printing one-of-a-kind fine art books and prints in the Cherokee language. In 2012, the Fine Art degree program at OICA was incorporated into Southwestern Community College and moved to the SCC Swain Center, where it continues to operate.

The Cherokee Heritage Center, of Park Hill, Oklahoma, is the site of a reproduction of an ancient Cherokee village, Adams Rural Village (including 19th-century buildings), Nofire Farms, and the Cherokee Family Research Center for genealogy. The Cherokee Heritage Center also houses the Cherokee National Archives. Both the Cherokee Nation (of Oklahoma) and the United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee, as well as other tribes, contribute funding to the CHC.

===Marriage===
Before the 19th century, polygamy was common among the Cherokee, especially by elite men. The matrilineal culture meant that women controlled property, such as their dwellings, and their children were considered born into their mother&#x27;s clan, where they gained hereditary status. Advancement to leadership positions was generally subject to approval by the women elders. In addition, the society was matrifocal; customarily, a married couple lived with or near the woman&#x27;s family, so she could be aided by her female relatives. Her eldest brother was a more important mentor to her sons than was their father, who belonged to another clan. Traditionally, couples, particularly women, can divorce freely.

It was unusual for a Cherokee man to marry a European-American woman. The children of such a union were disadvantaged, as they would not belong to the nation. They would be born outside the clans and traditionally were not considered Cherokee citizens. This is because of the matrilineal aspect of Cherokee culture. As the Cherokee began to adopt some elements of European-American culture in the early 19th century, they sent elite young men, such as John Ridge and Elias Boudinot to American schools for education. After Ridge had married a European-American woman from Connecticut and Boudinot was engaged to another, the Cherokee Council in 1825 passed a law making children of such unions full citizens of the tribe, as if their mothers were Cherokee. This was a way to protect the families of men expected to be leaders of the tribe.

In the late nineteenth century, the U.S. government put new restrictions on marriage between a Cherokee and non-Cherokee, although it was still relatively common. A European-American man could legally marry a Cherokee woman by petitioning the federal court, after gaining the approval of ten of her blood relatives. Once married, the man had status as an &quot;Intermarried White,&quot; a member of the Cherokee tribe with restricted rights; for instance, he could not hold any tribal office. He remained a citizen of and under the laws of the United States. Common law marriages were more popular. Such &quot;Intermarried Whites&quot; were listed in a separate category on the registers of the Dawes Rolls, prepared for allotment of plots of land to individual households of members of the tribe, in the early twentieth-century federal policy for assimilation of the Native Americans.

===Ethnobotany definition ===

Ethnobotany is the study of interrelations between humans and plants; however, current use of the term implies the study of indigenous or traditional knowledge of plants. It involves the indigenous knowledge of plant classification, cultivation, and use as food, medicine and shelter.

=== Gender roles ===
Men and women have historically played important yet, at times, different roles in Cherokee society. Historically, women have primarily been the heads of households, owning the home and the land, farmers of the family&#x27;s land, and &quot;mothers&quot; of the clans. As in many Native American cultures, Cherokee women are honored as life-givers. As givers and nurturers of life via childbirth and the growing of plants, and community leaders as clan mothers, women are traditionally community leaders in Cherokee communities. Some have served as warriors, both historically and in contemporary culture in military service. Cherokee women are regarded as tradition-keepers and responsible for cultural preservation.

The redefining of gender roles in Cherokee society first occurred in the time period between 1776 and 1835. This period is demarcated by the De Soto exploration and subsequent invasion, was followed by the American Revolution in 1776, and culminated with the signing of Treaty of New Echota in 1835. The purpose of this redefinition was to push European social standards and norms on the Cherokee people. The long-lasting effect of these practices reorganized Cherokee forms of government towards a male-dominated society which has affected the nation for generations. Miles argues white agents were mainly responsible for the shifting of Cherokee attitudes toward women&#x27;s role in politics and domestic spaces. These &quot;white agents&quot; could be identified as white missionaries and white settlers seeking out &quot;manifest destiny&quot;. By the time of removal in the mid-1830s, Cherokee men and women had begun to fulfill different roles and expectations as defined by the &quot;civilization&quot; program promoted by US presidents Washington and Jefferson.
While there is a record of a non-Native traveler in 1825 noticing what he considered to be &quot;men who assumed the dress and performed the duties of women&quot;, this observer was unfamiliar with how the Natives in that region dressed. There is no evidence of what would now be considered &quot;two-spirit&quot; individuals in Cherokee society; this is generally the case in matriarchal and matrilineal cultures, as third gender roles are usually found in patriarchal societies and cultures with more rigid gender roles.

=== Slavery ===
Slavery was a component of Cherokee society prior to European colonization, as they frequently enslaved enemy captives taken during times of conflict with other indigenous tribes. By their oral tradition, the Cherokee viewed slavery as the result of an individual&#x27;s failure in warfare and as a temporary status, pending release or the slave&#x27;s adoption into the tribe. During the colonial era, Carolinian settlers purchased or impressed Cherokees as slaves during the late 17th and early 18th century. The Cherokee were also among the Native American peoples who sold Indian slaves to traders for use as laborers in Virginia and further north. They took them as captives in raids on enemy tribes.

As the Cherokee began to adopt some European-American customs, they began to purchase enslaved African Americans to serve as workers on their farms or plantations, which some of the elite families had in the antebellum years. When the Cherokee were forcibly removed on the Trail of Tears, they took slaves with them, and acquired others in Indian Territory.

===Funeral rites===
==Language and writing system==

The Cherokee speak a Southern Iroquoian language, which is polysynthetic and is written in a syllabary invented by Sequoyah () in the 1810s. For years, many people wrote and transliterated Cherokee or used poor intercompatible fonts to type out the syllabary. However, since the fairly recent addition of the Cherokee syllables to Unicode, the Cherokee language is experiencing a renaissance in its use on the Internet.

Because of the polysynthetic nature of the Cherokee language, new and descriptive words in Cherokee are easily constructed to reflect or express modern concepts. Examples include &quot;ditiyohihi&quot; (), which means &quot;he argues repeatedly and on purpose with a purpose,&quot; meaning &quot;attorney.&quot; Another example is &quot;didaniyisgi&quot; () which means &quot;he catches them finally and conclusively,&quot; meaning &quot;policeman.&quot;

Many words, however, have been borrowed from the English language, such as &quot;gasoline&quot;, which in Cherokee is (). Many other words were borrowed from the languages of tribes who settled in Oklahoma in the early 20th century. One example relates to a town in Oklahoma named &quot;Nowata&quot;. The word is a Delaware Indian word for &quot;welcome&quot; (more precisely the Delaware word is which can mean &quot;welcome&quot; or &quot;friend&quot; in the Delaware Language). The white settlers of the area used the name &quot;nowata&quot; for the township, and local Cherokees, being unaware the word had its origins in the Delaware Language, called the town &quot;Amadikanigvnagvna&quot; () which means &quot;the water is all gone from here&quot;, i.e. &quot;no water&quot;.

Other examples of borrowed words are () for &quot;coffee&quot; and () for &quot;watch&quot; (which led to () or &quot;big watch&quot; for &quot;clock&quot;).

The following table is an example of Cherokee text and its translation:

==Treaties and government==

===Treaties===
The Cherokee have participated in at least thirty-six treaties in the past three hundred years.

===Government===

After being ravaged by smallpox, and feeling pressure from European settlers, the Cherokee adopted a European-American Representative democracy form of government in an effort to retain their lands. They established a governmental system modeled on that of the United States, with an elected principal chief, senate, and house of representatives. On April 10, 1810 the seven Cherokee clans met and began the abolition of blood vengeance by giving the sacred duty to the new Cherokee National government. Clans formally relinquished judicial responsibilities by the 1820s when the Cherokee Supreme Court was established. In 1825, the National Council extended citizenship to the children of Cherokee men married to white women. These ideas were largely incorporated into the 1827 Cherokee constitution. The constitution stated that &quot;No person who is of negro or mulatto parentage, either by the father or mother side, shall be eligible to hold any office of profit, honor or trust under this Government,&quot; with an exception for, &quot;negroes and descendants of white and Indian men by negro women who may have been set free.&quot; This definition to limit rights of multiracial descendants may have been more widely held among the elite than the general population.

==Modern Cherokee tribes==

===Cherokee Nation===


During 1898–1906 the federal government dissolved the former Cherokee Nation, to make way for the incorporation of Indian Territory into the new state of Oklahoma. From 1906 to 1975, the structure and function of the tribal government were defunct, except for the purposes of DOI management. In 1975 the tribe drafted a constitution, which they ratified on June 26, 1976, and the tribe received federal recognition.

In 1999, the CN changed or added several provisions to its constitution, among them the designation of the tribe to be &quot;Cherokee Nation,&quot; dropping &quot;of Oklahoma.&quot; According to a 2009 statement by BIA head Larry Echo Hawk, the Cherokee Nation is not legally considered the &quot;historical Cherokee tribe&quot; but instead a &quot;successor in interest.&quot; The attorney of the Cherokee Nation has stated that they intend to appeal this decision.

The modern Cherokee Nation, in recent times, has expanded economically, providing equality and prosperity for its citizens. Under the leadership of Principal Chief Bill John Baker, the Nation has significant business, corporate, real estate, and agricultural interests. The CN controls Cherokee Nation Entertainment, Cherokee Nation Industries, and Cherokee Nation Businesses. CNI is a very large defense contractor that creates thousands of jobs in eastern Oklahoma for Cherokee citizens.

The CN has constructed health clinics throughout Oklahoma, contributed to community development programs, built roads and bridges, constructed learning facilities and universities for its citizens, instilled the practice of Gadugi and self-reliance, revitalized language immersion programs for its children and youth, and is a powerful and positive economic and political force in Eastern Oklahoma.

The CN hosts the Cherokee National Holiday on Labor Day weekend each year, and 80,000 to 90,000 Cherokee citizens travel to Tahlequah, Oklahoma, for the festivities. It publishes the &quot;Cherokee Phoenix,&quot; the tribal newspaper, in both English and Cherokee, using the Sequoyah syllabary. The Cherokee Nation council appropriates money for historic foundations concerned with the preservation of Cherokee culture.

The Cherokee Nation supports the Cherokee Nation Film festivals in Tahlequah, Oklahoma and participates in the Sundance Film Festival in Park City, Utah.

===Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians===

The Eastern Band of the Cherokee Indians in North Carolina, led by Chief Richard Sneed,
hosts over a million visitors a year to cultural attractions of the sovereign nation. The reservation, the &quot;Qualla Boundary&quot;, has a population of over 8,000 Cherokee, primarily direct descendants of Indians who managed to avoid &quot;The Trail of Tears&quot;.

Attractions include the Oconaluftee Indian Village, Museum of the Cherokee Indian, and the Qualla Arts and Crafts Mutual. Founded in 1946, the Qualla Arts and Crafts Mutual is the country&#x27;s oldest and foremost Native American crafts cooperative. The outdoor drama &quot;Unto These Hills&quot;, which debuted in 1950, recently broke record attendance sales. Together with Harrah&#x27;s Cherokee Casino and Hotel, Cherokee Indian Hospital and Cherokee Boys Club, the tribe generated $78 million in the local economy in 2005.

===United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians===
The United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians formed their government under the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 and gained federal recognition in 1946. Enrollment in the tribe is limited to people with a quarter or more of Cherokee blood. Many members of the UKB are descended from Old Settlers – Cherokees who moved to Arkansas and Indian Territory before the Trail of Tears. Of the 12,000 people enrolled in the tribe, 11,000 live in Oklahoma. Their chief is Joe Bunch.

The UKB operate a tribal casino, bingo hall, smokeshop, fuel outlets, truck stop, and gallery that showcases art and crafts made by tribal members. The tribe issues their own tribal vehicle tags.

===Relations among the three federally recognized Cherokee tribes===
The Cherokee Nation participates in numerous joint programs with the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians. It also participates in cultural exchange programs and joint Tribal Council meetings involving councilors from both Cherokee Tribes. These are held to address issues affecting all of the Cherokee people.

174 years after the Trail of Tears, on July 12, 2012, the leaders of the three separate Cherokee tribes met in North Carolina.

==Contemporary settlement==
Cherokee people are most concentrated in Oklahoma and North Carolina, but some reside in the US West Coast, due to economic migrations caused by the Dust Bowl during the Great Depression, job availability during the Second World War, and the Federal Indian Relocation program during the 1950s–1960s. Destinations for Cherokee diaspora included multi-ethnic/racial urban centers of California (i.e. the Greater Los Angeles and San Francisco Bay Areas). They frequently live in farming communities, or by military bases and other Indian reservations.

==Membership controversies==

===Tribal recognition and citizenship===

The three Cherokee tribes have differing requirements for enrollment. The Cherokee Nation determines enrollment by lineal descent from Cherokees listed on the Dawes Rolls and has no minimum blood quantum requirement. Currently, descendants of the Dawes Cherokee Freedman rolls are citizens of the tribe, pending court decisions. The Cherokee Nation includes numerous citizens who have mixed ancestry, including African-American, Latino American, Asian American, European-American, and others. The Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians requires a minimum of one-sixteenth Cherokee blood quantum (genealogical descent, equivalent to one great-great-grandparent) and an ancestor on the Baker Roll. The United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians requires a minimum of one-quarter Keetoowah Cherokee blood quantum (equivalent to one grandparent). The UKB does not allow citizens who have relinquished their citizenship to re-enroll in the UKB.

The 2000 United States census reported 729,533 Americans self-identified as Cherokee. The 2010 census reported an increased number of 819,105 with almost 70% being mixed-race Cherokees. In 2015, the Cherokee Nation, the United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians, and the Eastern Band of Cherokees had a combined enrolled population of roughly 344,700.

Over 200 groups claim to be Cherokee nations, tribes, or bands. Cherokee Nation spokesman Mike Miller has suggested that some groups, which he calls Cherokee Heritage Groups, are encouraged. Others, however, are controversial for their attempts to gain economically through their claims to be Cherokee. The three federally recognized groups note that they are the only groups having the legal right to present themselves as Cherokee Indian Tribes and only their enrolled citizens are legally Cherokee.

One exception to this may be the Texas Cherokee. Before 1975, they were considered part of the Cherokee Nation, as reflected in briefs filed before the Indian Claims Commission. At one time W.W. Keeler served as Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation and, at the same time, held the position as Chairman of the Texas Cherokee and Associated Bands (TCAB) Executive Committee.
Following the adoption of the Cherokee constitution in 1976, TCAB descendants whose ancestors had remained a part of the physical Mount Tabor Community in Rusk County, Texas, were excluded from CN citizenship. Because they had already migrated from Indian Territory at the time of the Dawes Commission, their ancestors were not recorded on the Final Rolls of the Five Civilized Tribes, which serve as the basis for tracing descent for many individuals. But, most if not all TCAB descendants did have an ancestor listed on either the Guion-Miller or Old settler rolls.

While most Mount Tabor residents returned to the Cherokee Nation after the Civil War and following the death of John Ross in 1866, in the 21st century, there is a sizable group that is well documented but outside that body. It is not actively seeking a status clarification. They have treaty rights going back to the Treaty of Bird&#x27;s Fort. From the end of the Civil War until 1975, they were associated with the Cherokee Nation.

Other remnant populations continue to exist throughout the Southeast United States and individually in the states surrounding Oklahoma. Many of these people trace descent from persons enumerated on official rolls such as the Guion-Miller, Drennan, Mullay, and Henderson Rolls, among others. Other descendants trace their heritage through the treaties of 1817 and 1819 with the federal government that gave individual land allotments to Cherokee households. State-recognized tribes may have different membership requirements and genealogical documentation than to the federally recognized ones.

Current enrollment guidelines of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma have been approved by the US Bureau of Indian Affairs. The CN noted such facts during the Constitutional Convention held to ratify a new governing document. The document was eventually ratified by a small portion of the electorate. Any changes to the tribe&#x27;s enrollment procedures must be approved by the Department of Interior. Under 25 CFR 83, the Office of Federal Acknowledgment is required to first apply its own anthropological, genealogical, and historical research methods to any request for change by the tribe. It forwards its recommendations to the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs for consideration.

===Cherokee Freedmen===

The Cherokee Freedmen, descendants of African American slaves owned by citizens of the Cherokee Nation during the Antebellum Period, were first guaranteed Cherokee citizenship under a treaty with the United States in 1866. This was in the wake of the American Civil War, when the U.S. emancipated slaves and passed US constitutional amendments granting freedmen citizenship in the United States.

In 1988, the federal court in the Freedmen case of &quot;Nero v. Cherokee Nation&quot; held that Cherokees could decide citizenship requirements and exclude Freedmen. On March 7, 2006, the Cherokee Nation Judicial Appeal Tribunal ruled that the Cherokee Freedmen were eligible for Cherokee citizenship. This ruling proved controversial; while the Cherokee Freedman had historically been recorded as &quot;citizens&quot; of the Cherokee Nation at least since 1866 and the later Dawes Commission Land Rolls, the ruling &quot;did not limit membership to people possessing Cherokee blood&quot;. This ruling was consistent with the 1975 Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma, in its acceptance of the Cherokee Freedmen on the basis of historical citizenship, rather than documented blood relation.

On March 3, 2007, a constitutional amendment was passed by a Cherokee vote limiting citizenship to Cherokees on the Dawes Rolls for those listed as Cherokee by blood on the Dawes roll, which did not include partial Cherokee descendants of slaves, Shawnee and Delaware. The Cherokee Freedmen had 90 days to appeal this amendment vote which disenfranchised them from Cherokee citizenship and file appeal within the Cherokee Nation Tribal Council, which is currently pending in &quot;Nash, et al. v. Cherokee Nation Registrar&quot;. On May 14, 2007, the Cherokee Freedmen were reinstated as citizens of the Cherokee Nation by the Cherokee Nation Tribal Courts through a temporary order and temporary injunction until the court reached its final decision. On January 14, 2011, the tribal district court ruled that the 2007 constitutional amendment was invalid because it conflicted with the 1866 treaty guaranteeing the Freedmen&#x27;s rights.

==See also==

* Black drink
* Black Indians in the United States
* Booger Dance
* Kanuchi
* Moon-eyed people
* One-drop rule

==Notes==
==References==
* Doublass, Robert Sydney. &quot;History of Southeast Missouri&quot;, 1992, pp. 32–45
* Evans, E. Raymond. &quot;Notable Persons in Cherokee History: Dragging Canoe&quot;. &quot;Journal of Cherokee Studies, Vol. 2, No. 2&quot;, pp. 176–189. (Cherokee: Museum of the Cherokee Indian, 1977).
* Finger, John R. &quot;Cherokee Americans: The Eastern Band of Cherokees in the 20th century&quot;. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1991. .
* Glenn, Eddie. &quot;A league of nations?&quot; &quot;Tahlequah Daily Press&quot;. January 6, 2006 (Accessed May 24, 2007)
* Halliburton, R., jr.: &quot;Red over Black – Black Slavery among the Cherokee Indians&quot;, Greenwood Press, Westport, Connecticut 1977.
* Kelton, Paul. &quot;Cherokee Medicine, Colonial Germs: An Indigenous Nation&#x27;s Fight Against Smallpox.&quot; Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 2015.
* McLoughlin, William G. &quot;Cherokee Renascence in the New Republic&quot;. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992).
*Kilpatrick, Jack Frederick. &quot;An Etymological Note on the Tribal Name
of the Cherokees and Certain Place and
Proper Names Derived from Cherokee&quot; Journal of the Graduate Research Center 30:37-41, 1962, Southern Methodist University.
* Mooney, James. &quot;Myths of the Cherokees.&quot; Bureau of American Ethnology, Nineteenth Annual Report, 1900, Part I. pp. 1–576. Washington: Smithsonian Institution.
* Perdue, Theda. &quot;Cherokee women: gender and culture change, 1700–1835.&quot; Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1999.
* Pierpoint, Mary. &quot;Unrecognized Cherokee claims cause problems for nation.&quot; &quot;Indian Country Today&quot;. August 16, 2000 (Accessed May 16, 2007).
* Reed, Julie L. &quot;Serving the Nation: Cherokee Sovereignty and Social Welfare, 1800-1907.&quot; Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press, 2016.
* Rollings, Willard H. &quot;The Osage: An Ethnohistorical Study of Hegemony on the Prairie-Plains.&quot; (University of Missouri Press, 1992)
* Royce, Charles C. &quot;The Cherokee Nation.&quot; Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2007.
* Sturtevant, William C., general editor and Raymond D. Fogelson, volume editor. &quot;Handbook of North American Indians: Southeast.&quot; Volume 14. Washington DC: Smithsonian Institution, 2004. .
* Tortora, Daniel J. &quot;Carolina in Crisis: Cherokees, Colonists, and Slaves in the American Southeast, 1756–1763.&quot; Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 2015.

==External links==

* Cherokee Nation, official site
* Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians, official site
* United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians, official site
* , Cherokee, NC
* Cherokee Heritage Center, Park Hill, OK
* Smithsonian Institution – Cherokee photos and documents
* Cherokee Heritage Documentation Center – Genealogy and Culture
* &quot;Cherokee&quot;, Oklahoma Historical Society &quot;Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="4" end="12" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q905014" start="45" end="93" title="Indigenous peoples of the Southeastern Woodlands" label="Indigenous peoples of the Southeastern Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="243" end="257" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="272" end="281" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="323" end="337" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="348" end="355" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="373" end="380" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="428" end="445" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33623" start="461" end="479" title="Iroquoian languages" label="Iroquoian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370358" start="508" end="520" title="James Mooney" label="James Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="540" end="552" title="Ethnography" label="ethnographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12885585" start="599" end="604" title="Tribe (Native American)" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="653" end="664" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q110654499" start="685" end="694" title="Iroquoian Peoples" label="Iroquoian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251852" start="869" end="893" title="proto-Iroquoian language" label="proto-Iroquoian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="909" end="927" title="Appalachian region" label="Appalachian region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="1053" end="1061" title="American pioneer" label="settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q319421" start="1127" end="1148" title="Five Civilized Tribes" label="Five Civilized Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="1180" end="1188" title="Agrarianism" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="1290" end="1295" title="White American" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="1386" end="1406" title="List of federally recognized tribes" label="federally recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651031" start="1412" end="1453" title="United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians" label="United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="1477" end="1492" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330004" start="1519" end="1551" title="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians" label="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092232" start="1743" end="1772" title="Cherokee heritage groups" label="groups claim Cherokee lineage"/>
<link wikidata="Q736809" start="2081" end="2100" title="Tahlequah, Oklahoma" label="Tahlequah, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="2279" end="2287" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="2325" end="2339" title="Indian removal" label="Indian removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q86661955" start="2389" end="2407" title="Cherokee removal" label="forcibly relocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q786008" start="2437" end="2455" title="Indian Removal Act" label="Indian Removal Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330573" start="2526" end="2541" title="Qualla Boundary" label="Qualla Boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="2993" end="3010" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="3066" end="3084" title="etymology" label="origin of the name"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="3310" end="3326" title="Hernando de Soto" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="3424" end="3435" title="Muscogee Creek" label="Lower Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="3525" end="3533" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q523014" start="3679" end="3687" title="Muscogee language" label="Muscogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="4033" end="4043" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="4129" end="4137" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="4264" end="4280" title="Tuscarora people" label="Tuscarora people"/>
<link wikidata="Q844328" start="4307" end="4315" title="Meherrin" label="Meherrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512034" start="4320" end="4328" title="Nottaway" label="Nottaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370358" start="4592" end="4604" title="James Mooney" label="James Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="4704" end="4715" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202294" start="4783" end="4798" title="platform mounds" label="platform mounds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4876" end="4898" title="Woodland_period#Middle_Woodland_period_(200_BCE_–_500_CE)" label="Middle Woodland period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988113" start="4978" end="5000" title="Western North Carolina" label="Western North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q125747270" start="5074" end="5088" title="Biltmore Mound" label="Biltmore Mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653621" start="5117" end="5132" title="Swannanoa River" label="Swannanoa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198285" start="5271" end="5283" title="Pisgah phase" label="Pisgah phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="5287" end="5326" title="South Appalachian Mississippian culture" label="South Appalachian Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="5356" end="5377" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202294" start="5781" end="5795" title="platform mound" label="platform mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q513833" start="6051" end="6080" title="Oconee County, South Carolina" label="Oconee County, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393077" start="6092" end="6104" title="Keowee River" label="Keowee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393073" start="6197" end="6203" title="Keowee" label="Keowee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851033" start="6461" end="6471" title="Tuckasegee River" label="Tuckasegee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137567" start="6483" end="6499" title="Little Tennessee River" label="Little Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138706" start="6501" end="6508" title="Hiwassee River" label="Hiwasee"/>
<link wikidata="Q478303" start="6510" end="6522" title="French Broad River" label="French Broad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860515" start="6546" end="6563" title="Overhill Cherokee" label="Overhill Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q632376" start="6768" end="6775" title="Archaic period in the Americas" label="Archaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299963" start="6780" end="6795" title="Woodland Period" label="Woodland Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q6095678" start="6862" end="6873" title="Iva annua" label="marsh elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q820986" start="6875" end="6888" title="Chenopodium berlandieri" label="lambsquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349335" start="6890" end="6897" title="Amaranthus palmeri" label="pigweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="6899" end="6909" title="Helianthus annuus" label="sunflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="6927" end="6933" title="Squash (plant)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493711" start="6972" end="6984" title="shell gorget" label="shell gorget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="7168" end="7207" title="South Appalachian Mississippian culture" label="South Appalachian Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303407" start="7277" end="7287" title="flint corn" label="flint corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642488" start="7435" end="7443" title="chiefdom" label="chiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602431" start="7611" end="7630" title="Green Corn Ceremony" label="Green Corn Ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="7836" end="7857" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="7945" end="7953" title="Muscogee" label="Muscogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q846124" start="7955" end="7961" title="Cheraw" label="Cheraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q55290" start="7967" end="7974" title="Catawba (tribe)" label="Catawba"/>
<link wikidata="Q60040" start="8029" end="8045" title="Hernando de Soto" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393077" start="8241" end="8253" title="Keowee River" label="Keowee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168075" start="8582" end="8596" title="Coosa chiefdom" label="Coosa chiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="8649" end="8670" title="Muscogee Creek people" label="Muscogee Creek people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639778" start="8756" end="8766" title="Juan Pardo (explorer)" label="Juan Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808596" start="8992" end="8997" title="Joara" label="Joara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021031" start="9029" end="9054" title="Morganton, North Carolina" label="Morganton, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q648501" start="9287" end="9296" title="Asheville, North Carolina" label="Asheville"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485873" start="9383" end="9400" title="Charles M. Hudson" label="Charles M. Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q902978" start="9453" end="9462" title="Muskogean languages" label="Muskogean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095147" start="9483" end="9489" title="Chiaha" label="Chiaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="9778" end="9794" title="Tuscarora people" label="Tuscarora people"/>
<link wikidata="Q33623" start="9801" end="9820" title="Iroquoian languages" label="Iroquoian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="9832" end="9843" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="10013" end="10035" title="oral tradition" label="oral history tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q942552" start="10328" end="10344" title="Glottochronology" label="Glottochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194647" start="10467" end="10473" title="Kituwa" label="Kituwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851033" start="10487" end="10503" title="Tuckasegee River" label="Tuckasegee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330573" start="10598" end="10613" title="Qualla Boundary" label="Qualla Boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330004" start="10652" end="10684" title="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians" label="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="10807" end="10816" title="Tuscarora people" label="Tuscarora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4401542" start="11109" end="11126" title="John Howard Payne" label="John Howard Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="11432" end="11436" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200303" start="11481" end="11491" title="Inheritance" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319957" start="11948" end="11958" title="Ani-kutani" label="Ani-kutani"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="11966" end="11978" title="Ethnography" label="Ethnographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370358" start="11979" end="11991" title="James Mooney" label="James Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q266750" start="12472" end="12484" title="Medicine man" label="medicine men"/>
<link wikidata="Q313595" start="12492" end="12500" title="Sequoyah" label="Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q26549" start="12524" end="12542" title="Cherokee syllabary" label="Cherokee syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="12868" end="12883" title="Virginia Colony" label="Virginia Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513639" start="12974" end="12982" title="Manahoac" label="Manahoac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757507" start="12999" end="13007" title="Nahyssan" label="Nahyssan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="13106" end="13124" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q918556" start="13188" end="13196" title="Pamunkey" label="Pamunkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q258571" start="13431" end="13441" title="Erie tribe" label="Erie tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="13616" end="13625" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="13650" end="13658" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="13693" end="13706" title="Haudenosaunee" label="Haudenosaunee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="13808" end="13822" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13910" end="13921" title="#refSmith1987" label="1986:131–32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542754" start="13952" end="13957" title="Westo" label="Westo"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="14358" end="14365" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="14420" end="14429" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165898" start="14587" end="14594" title="Yamasee" label="Yamasee"/>
<link wikidata="Q55290" start="14596" end="14603" title="Catawba (tribe)" label="Catawba"/>
<link wikidata="Q504912" start="14657" end="14666" title="Tuscarora people" label="Tuscarora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038126" start="14681" end="14694" title="Tuscarora War" label="Tuscarora War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250985" start="14880" end="14894" title="deerskin trade" label="deerskin trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="15198" end="15212" title="Muscogee Creek" label="Muscogee Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q261091" start="15236" end="15243" title="Tugaloo (Cherokee town)" label="Tugaloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520241" start="15274" end="15285" title="Yamasee War" label="Yamasee War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="15346" end="15360" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872493" start="15493" end="15509" title="Battle of Taliwa" label="Battle of Taliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895677" start="15534" end="15554" title="Ball Ground, Georgia" label="Ball Ground, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7036744" start="15655" end="15662" title="Nikwasi" label="Nikwasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546093" start="15736" end="15752" title="Alexander Cuming" label="Alexander Cuming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927773" start="15762" end="15779" title="Moytoy of Tellico" label="Moytoy of Tellico"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="15852" end="15878" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49310" start="15972" end="15986" title="Attakullakulla" label="Attakullakulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="15997" end="16003" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092241" start="16055" end="16074" title="Cherokee treaties" label="Treaty of Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748007" start="16112" end="16123" title="Amouskositte" label="Amo-sgasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200199" start="16242" end="16253" title="Conocotocko I" label="Conocotocko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105371" start="16267" end="16272" title="Chota (Cherokee town)" label="Chota"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="16500" end="16508" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="16694" end="16701" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729199" start="16783" end="16799" title="Henry Timberlake" label="Henry Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055479" start="16978" end="16991" title="North Georgia" label="North Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872493" start="17029" end="17045" title="Battle of Taliwa" label="Battle of Taliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="17132" end="17153" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="17205" end="17226" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471547" start="17271" end="17283" title="Fort Loudoun (Tennessee)" label="Fort Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817778" start="17426" end="17444" title="Anglo-Cherokee War" label="Anglo-Cherokee War"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="17470" end="17496" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973025" start="17857" end="17876" title="Watauga Association" label="Watauga Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q316661" start="17878" end="17890" title="Daniel Boone" label="Daniel Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="17951" end="17959" title="Lenape" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q128531" start="17961" end="17966" title="Mingo" label="Mingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017849" start="18072" end="18087" title="William Russell (Virginia politician)" label="William Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q248519" start="18181" end="18190" title="Cornstalk (Shawnee leader)" label="Cornstalk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18283" end="18302" title="Cherokee–American wars#The Second Cherokee War" label="Second Cherokee War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860515" start="18304" end="18321" title="Overhill Cherokee" label="Overhill Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q292814" start="18322" end="18332" title="Nancy Ward" label="Nancy Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304956" start="18334" end="18348" title="Dragging Canoe" label="Dragging Canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860515" start="18540" end="18554" title="Overhill Cherokee" label="Overhill towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304956" start="18660" end="18674" title="Dragging Canoe" label="Dragging Canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096183" start="18702" end="18719" title="Chickamauga Creek" label="Chickamauga Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="18737" end="18759" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18798" end="18814" title="Chickamauga Town" label="Chickamauga Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q472747" start="18889" end="18900" title="Chickamauga Cherokee" label="Chickamauga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122685" start="18964" end="18977" title="Cherokee–American wars" label="guerrilla war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697600" start="19148" end="19166" title="Tellico Blockhouse" label="Tellico Blockhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143718" start="19357" end="19367" title="Cumberland River" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q652618" start="19372" end="19383" title="Duck River (Tennessee)" label="Duck rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="19394" end="19412" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="19417" end="19426" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="19700" end="19709" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437787" start="19769" end="19790" title="Scottish Indian trade" label="Scottish Indian trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="19906" end="19916" title="mixed-race" label="mixed-race"/>
<link wikidata="Q319421" start="20015" end="20036" title="Five Civilized Tribes" label="Five Civilized Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="20044" end="20053" title="Southeastern United States" label="Southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259520" start="20127" end="20138" title="John Stuart (loyalist)" label="John Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211836" start="20216" end="20226" title="James Vann" label="James Vann"/>
<link wikidata="Q984347" start="20252" end="20261" title="John Ross (Cherokee chief)" label="John Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263256" start="20374" end="20388" title="John Watts (Cherokee chief)" label="John Watts Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5102096" start="20391" end="20407" title="Chisholm Tavern (Knoxville)" label="John D. Chisholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931792" start="20431" end="20440" title="Bob Benge" label="Bob Benge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255407" start="20457" end="20468" title="John Rogers (Cherokee chief)" label="John Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679919" start="20534" end="20545" title="James Adair (historian)" label="James Adair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435494" start="20822" end="20834" title="Scotch-Irish Americans" label="Scotch-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="20847" end="20853" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262722" start="20908" end="20928" title="Plantations of Ireland" label="plantation of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287510" start="21056" end="21067" title="Simon Girty" label="Simon Girty"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="21142" end="21151" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068297" start="21156" end="21169" title="Chattahoochee River" label="Chattahoochee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122685" start="21248" end="21270" title="Cherokee–American wars" label="Cherokee–American wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250985" start="21276" end="21290" title="deerskin trade" label="deerskin trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092177" start="21409" end="21424" title="Cherokee Nation (19th century)" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="21499" end="21516" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q131613569" start="21612" end="21624" title="Indian Agent" label="Indian Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896102" start="21625" end="21641" title="Benjamin Hawkins" label="Benjamin Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="21827" end="21853" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250985" start="21859" end="21873" title="deerskin trade" label="deerskin trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="21882" end="21899" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58966" start="22051" end="22065" title="spinning wheel" label="spinning wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652364" start="22420" end="22433" title="Little Turkey" label="Little Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q51751" start="22447" end="22456" title="Black Fox (Cherokee chief)" label="Black Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144795" start="22474" end="22484" title="Pathkiller" label="Pathkiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304956" start="22521" end="22535" title="Dragging Canoe" label="Dragging Canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211836" start="22577" end="22587" title="James Vann" label="James Vann"/>
<link wikidata="Q938906" start="22605" end="22614" title="Major Ridge" label="The Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081850" start="22619" end="22635" title="Charles R. Hicks" label="Charles R. Hicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="22731" end="22739" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="22758" end="22772" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="22782" end="22794" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="22863" end="22880" title="Congregationalist" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q463587" start="22963" end="23015" title="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions" label="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="23026" end="23037" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440415" start="23050" end="23062" title="Federal Road (Cherokee lands)" label="Federal Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="23068" end="23085" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="23090" end="23110" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211836" start="23151" end="23161" title="James Vann" label="James Vann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068297" start="23204" end="23217" title="Chattahoochee River" label="Chattahoochee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096950" start="23230" end="23247" title="Chief Vann House Historic Site" label="cotton-plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q203263" start="23275" end="23290" title="Athens, Georgia" label="Athens, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="23295" end="23304" title="Nashville" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287586" start="23314" end="23339" title="Joseph Vann" label="&amp;#x27;Rich Joe&amp;#x27; Vann"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="23439" end="23448" title="steamboat" label="steamboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="23456" end="23471" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q672085" start="23545" end="23554" title="Red Stick" label="Red Stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186260" start="23589" end="23598" title="Creek War" label="Creek War"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="23610" end="23621" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q938906" start="23648" end="23659" title="Major Ridge" label="Major Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="23691" end="23705" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871247" start="23728" end="23752" title="Battle of Horseshoe Bend (1814)" label="Battle of Horseshoe Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580" start="23786" end="23799" title="Rome, Georgia" label="Rome, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097132" start="23818" end="23835" title="Chieftains (Rome, Georgia)" label="substantial house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024844" start="23889" end="23905" title="Oostanaula River" label="Oostanaula River"/>
<link wikidata="Q984347" start="24054" end="24063" title="John Ross (Cherokee chief)" label="John Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="24226" end="24248" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q313595" start="24406" end="24414" title="Sequoyah" label="Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q26549" start="24683" end="24701" title="Cherokee syllabary" label="Cherokee syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922461" start="24777" end="24792" title="Mesoamerican scripts" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024844" start="25213" end="25223" title="Oostanaula River" label="Oostanaula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022996" start="25242" end="25258" title="Calhoun, Georgia" label="Calhoun, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007061" start="25347" end="25357" title="New Echota" label="New Echota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16860515" start="25369" end="25386" title="Overhill Cherokee" label="Overhill Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105371" start="25405" end="25410" title="Chota (Cherokee town)" label="Chota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254886" start="25763" end="25773" title="John Ridge" label="John Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q984347" start="25906" end="25915" title="John Ross (Cherokee chief)" label="John Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="25990" end="25997" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412967" start="26009" end="26025" title="Samuel Worcester" label="Samuel Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q51754" start="26056" end="26070" title="Elias Boudinot (Cherokee)" label="Elias Boudinot"/>
<link wikidata="Q51753" start="26102" end="26118" title="Elias Boudinot" label="white benefactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="26136" end="26156" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="26161" end="26171" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26549" start="26216" end="26234" title="Cherokee syllabary" label="Cherokee syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070337" start="26296" end="26312" title="Cherokee Phoenix" label="Cherokee Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="26486" end="26494" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="26496" end="26504" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="26599" end="26606" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="26611" end="26620" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="26659" end="26667" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="26672" end="26681" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="26774" end="26781" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="26852" end="26859" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="26864" end="26875" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8319" start="27051" end="27065" title="Arkansas River" label="Arkansas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813795" start="27094" end="27105" title="White River (Arkansas)" label="White River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719549" start="27107" end="27119" title="The Bowl (Cherokee chief)" label="Di&amp;#x27;wali"/>
<link wikidata="Q313595" start="27132" end="27140" title="Sequoyah" label="Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943926" start="27315" end="27332" title="Missouri Bootheel" label="Missouri Bootheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336809" start="27376" end="27385" title="Delaware Nation" label="Delawares"/>
<link wikidata="Q253436" start="27390" end="27397" title="Shawnee" label="Shawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515638" start="27429" end="27447" title="Missouri Territory" label="Missouri Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q355348" start="27566" end="27579" title="William Clark (explorer)" label="William Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q947650" start="27610" end="27622" title="Osage Nation" label="Osage Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870759" start="27634" end="27659" title="Battle of Claremore Mound" label="Battle of Claremore Mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q79535" start="27694" end="27704" title="Fort Smith, Arkansas" label="Fort Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q19107489" start="27752" end="27778" title="Treaty of St. Louis (1825)" label="Treaty of St. Louis (1825)"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="28035" end="28049" title="Muscogee Creek" label="Muscogee Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719549" start="28253" end="28277" title="The Bowl (Cherokee chief)" label="&amp;quot;Di&amp;#x27;wali&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505587" start="28287" end="28300" title="Spanish Texas" label="Spanish Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q970482" start="28324" end="28335" title="Nacogdoches, Texas" label="Nacogdoches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707560" start="28437" end="28452" title="Texas Cherokees" label="Texas Cherokees"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="28484" end="28509" title="Texas War of Independence" label="Texas War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="28562" end="28573" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q456633" start="28630" end="28644" title="Mirabeau Lamar" label="Mirabeau Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186260" start="28754" end="28767" title="Red Stick War" label="Red Stick War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092177" start="28897" end="28909" title="Old Settlers" label="Old Settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="28993" end="29009" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="29022" end="29030" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317152" start="29072" end="29087" title="Return J. Meigs Sr." label="Return J. Meigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q85770466" start="29131" end="29156" title="Jackson and McMinn Treaty" label="Jackson and McMinn Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="29320" end="29331" title="Muscogee (Creek)" label="Lower Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q357728" start="29350" end="29362" title="George Troup" label="George Troup"/>
<link wikidata="Q437314" start="29378" end="29394" title="William McIntosh" label="William McIntosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q28433149" start="29433" end="29457" title="Treaty of Indian Springs (1825)" label="Treaty of Indian Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="29483" end="29499" title="Muscogee (Creek)" label="Muscogee (Creek)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068297" start="29575" end="29588" title="Chattahoochee River" label="Chattahoochee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003662" start="29657" end="29666" title="Dahlonega, Georgia" label="Dahlonega"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453701" start="29709" end="29726" title="Georgia Gold Rush" label="Georgia Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="29840" end="29854" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="29925" end="29935" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q786008" start="29965" end="29983" title="Indian Removal Act" label="Indian Removal Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="30053" end="30064" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201024" start="30249" end="30256" title="Mohegan" label="Mohegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q609726" start="30262" end="30274" title="Narragansett tribe" label="Narragansett"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="30284" end="30292" title="Lenape" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021965" start="30644" end="30658" title="Indian country" label="Indian country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541747" start="30721" end="30746" title="National Republican Party" label="National Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="30755" end="30765" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q106231" start="30770" end="30784" title="Daniel Webster" label="Daniel Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412967" start="30786" end="30802" title="Samuel Worcester" label="Samuel Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="30890" end="30909" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370836" start="30915" end="30961" title="Emerson&amp;#x27;s letter to Martin Van Buren" label="Emerson&amp;#x27;s 1838 letter to Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070324" start="31073" end="31099" title="Cherokee Nation v. Georgia" label="Cherokee Nation v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412967" start="31142" end="31158" title="Samuel Worcester" label="Samuel Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885071" start="31231" end="31244" title="Milledgeville, Georgia" label="Milledgeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q976845" start="31255" end="31275" title="Worcester v. Georgia" label="Worcester v. Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="31297" end="31310" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188089" start="31311" end="31324" title="Chief Justice" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="31325" end="31338" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="31573" end="31584" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q472699" start="31824" end="31844" title="Nullification Crisis" label="Nullification Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210371" start="31967" end="31979" title="Georgia Land Lottery" label="Land Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007061" start="32012" end="32022" title="New Echota" label="New Echota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303900" start="32081" end="32089" title="Red Clay State Park" label="Red Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q938906" start="32479" end="32490" title="Major Ridge" label="Major Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254886" start="32492" end="32502" title="John Ridge" label="John Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q51754" start="32507" end="32521" title="Elias Boudinot (Cherokee)" label="Elias Boudinot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049395" start="32836" end="32856" title="Treaty of New Echota" label="Treaty of New Echota"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="33006" end="33022" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="33408" end="33424" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="33486" end="33500" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="33598" end="33614" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="33654" end="33668" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="33817" end="33826" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="33828" end="33836" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="33838" end="33846" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="33848" end="33856" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="33861" end="33869" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="34038" end="34046" title="slavery" label="enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="34136" end="34148" title="missionaries" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q288408" start="34740" end="34751" title="Stand Watie" label="Stand Watie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="34794" end="34802" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q313595" start="34814" end="34822" title="Sequoyah" label="Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q85790238" start="35290" end="35307" title="Oconaluftee River" label="Oconaluftee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360486" start="35315" end="35336" title="Great Smoky Mountains" label="Great Smoky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137567" start="35524" end="35546" title="Little Tennessee River" label="Little Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="35550" end="35564" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012426" start="35605" end="35627" title="William Holland Thomas" label="William Holland Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q502521" start="35675" end="35705" title="Jackson County, North Carolina" label="Jackson County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q471385" start="35737" end="35748" title="Cherokee, North Carolina" label="Qualla Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849337" start="35932" end="35937" title="Tsali" label="Tsali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091574" start="35997" end="36009" title="Cheoah River" label="Cheoah River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330004" start="36365" end="36397" title="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians" label="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="36486" end="36504" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012426" start="36584" end="36598" title="William Holland Thomas" label="William Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="36698" end="36716" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q288408" start="36793" end="36804" title="Stand Watie" label="Stand Watie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="36859" end="36870" title="Confederate Army" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q984347" start="36888" end="36897" title="John Ross (Cherokee chief)" label="John Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="37032" end="37044" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="37494" end="37510" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="37515" end="37523" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="37559" end="37569" title="steamboats" label="steamboats"/>
<link wikidata="Q193993" start="37637" end="37656" title="Battle of Pea Ridge" label="Battle of Pea Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="37709" end="37727" title="Confederate States" label="Confederate States"/>
<link wikidata="Q951847" start="37807" end="37820" title="Ely S. Parker" label="Ely S. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="37877" end="37890" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744652" start="37906" end="37916" title="Appomattox Court House National Historical Park" label="Appomattox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="38219" end="38231" title="abolitionism in the United States" label="emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092231" start="38284" end="38301" title="Cherokee Freedmen" label="Cherokee Freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q272893" start="38695" end="38703" title="easement" label="easement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017330" start="38766" end="38784" title="Oklahoma Territory" label="Oklahoma Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q763104" start="39001" end="39010" title="Dawes Act" label="Dawes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007791" start="39332" end="39350" title="Curtis Act of 1898" label="Curtis Act of 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q319421" start="39647" end="39668" title="Five Civilized Tribes" label="Five Civilized Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="39676" end="39692" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536163" start="39722" end="39739" title="State of Sequoyah" label="State of Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017330" start="39842" end="39850" title="Oklahoma Territory" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="39855" end="39873" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="39908" end="39916" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="40014" end="40024" title="Racial segregation" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="40054" end="40068" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282172" start="40189" end="40203" title="Disfranchisement after Reconstruction era (United States)" label="disenfranchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="40323" end="40336" title="Jim Crow laws" label="Jim Crow laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="40846" end="40867" title="Civil Rights Movement" label="Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="41097" end="41124" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q96392414" start="41140" end="41157" title="McGirt v. Oklahoma" label="McGirt v Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q58322517" start="41371" end="41382" title="Kevin Stitt" label="Kevin Stitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="41628" end="41636" title="Seminole" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q11595" start="41850" end="41858" title="John Adair" label="J. Adair"/>
<link wikidata="Q527835" start="41968" end="41984" title="James Oglethorpe" label="James Oglethorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q709129" start="42356" end="42368" title="Arthur Dobbs" label="Arthur Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817778" start="42525" end="42543" title="Anglo-Cherokee War" label="Anglo-Cherokee War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11595" start="42583" end="42591" title="John Adair" label="J. Adair"/>
<link wikidata="Q455133" start="42898" end="42911" title="George Catlin" label="George Catlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="42961" end="42968" title="Trail of Tears" label="removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="43150" end="43166" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q715889" start="43180" end="43197" title="Henry Schoolcraft" label="Henry Schoolcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="43337" end="43353" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330004" start="43509" end="43525" title="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians" label="Eastern Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370358" start="43697" end="43709" title="James Mooney" label="James Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501172" start="43721" end="43741" title="Frederick Webb Hodge" label="Frederick Webb Hodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330004" start="44316" end="44340" title="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians" label="Eastern Band of Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651031" start="44463" end="44484" title="United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians" label="United Keetoowah Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="44499" end="44514" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q471385" start="44796" end="44820" title="Cherokee, North Carolina" label="Cherokee, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q25383153" start="44977" end="45006" title="Museum of the Cherokee Indian" label="Museum of the Cherokee Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330004" start="45227" end="45259" title="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians" label="Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571409" start="45292" end="45322" title="Southwestern Community College (North Carolina)" label="Southwestern Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050078" start="45327" end="45354" title="Western Carolina University" label="Western Carolina University"/>
<link wikidata="Q26549" start="45713" end="45731" title="Cherokee syllabary" label="Cherokee syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q33388" start="45804" end="45821" title="Cherokee language" label="Cherokee language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571409" start="45890" end="45920" title="Southwestern Community College (North Carolina)" label="Southwestern Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092155" start="45992" end="46016" title="Cherokee Heritage Center" label="Cherokee Heritage Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281349" start="46021" end="46040" title="Park Hill, Oklahoma" label="Park Hill, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="46311" end="46326" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651031" start="46349" end="46382" title="United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee" label="United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="46481" end="46489" title="polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="46550" end="46561" title="matrilineal" label="matrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="46698" end="46702" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066144" start="46861" end="46871" title="matrifocal" label="matrifocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254886" start="47623" end="47633" title="John Ridge" label="John Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q51754" start="47638" end="47652" title="Elias Boudinot (Cherokee)" label="Elias Boudinot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377445" start="48571" end="48590" title="Common law marriage" label="Common law marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242314" start="48707" end="48718" title="Dawes Rolls" label="Dawes Rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q193579" start="48860" end="48872" title="cultural assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="49499" end="49503" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="49517" end="49532" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="49990" end="49998" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50097" end="50116" title="Hernando de Soto#De Soto&amp;#x27;s exploration of North America" label="De Soto exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049395" start="50226" end="50246" title="Treaty of New Echota" label="Treaty of New Echota"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="50344" end="50352" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="50595" end="50603" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="50726" end="50744" title="Missionary" label="white missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818899" start="50755" end="50762" title="settler" label="settler"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="50782" end="50798" title="manifest destiny" label="manifest destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="51001" end="51011" title="George Washington" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="51016" end="51025" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q301702" start="51324" end="51334" title="two-spirit" label="two-spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48279" start="51445" end="51457" title="third gender" label="third gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="51485" end="51496" title="patriarchal" label="patriarchal"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="51620" end="51641" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="51956" end="51968" title="Colonial history of the United States" label="colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044394" start="51970" end="51980" title="Province of Carolina" label="Carolinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q123418478" start="52023" end="52032" title="Slavery among the indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="as slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539244" start="52144" end="52157" title="Slavery among Native Americans in the United States" label="Indian slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="52360" end="52386" title="Slavery in the United States" label="enslaved African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="52547" end="52561" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="52614" end="52630" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33623" start="52716" end="52725" title="Iroquoian languages" label="Iroquoian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48641" start="52745" end="52758" title="polysynthetic language" label="polysynthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182133" start="52779" end="52788" title="syllabary" label="syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q313595" start="52801" end="52809" title="Sequoyah" label="Sequoyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="53017" end="53024" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665761" start="53878" end="53893" title="Delaware languages" label="Delaware Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="54856" end="54880" title="Representative democracy" label="Representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="55603" end="55610" title="mulatto" label="mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="56180" end="56196" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="56219" end="56227" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490243" start="56706" end="56721" title="Larry Echo Hawk" label="Larry Echo Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909614" start="57114" end="57129" title="Bill John Baker" label="Bill John Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q280377" start="57665" end="57671" title="Gadugi" label="Gadugi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092184" start="57858" end="57883" title="Cherokee National Holiday" label="Cherokee National Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q736809" start="57965" end="57984" title="Tahlequah, Oklahoma" label="Tahlequah, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070337" start="58030" end="58046" title="Cherokee Phoenix" label="Cherokee Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="58373" end="58395" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q482993" start="58399" end="58414" title="Park City, Utah" label="Park City, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330573" start="58658" end="58673" title="Qualla Boundary" label="Qualla Boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="58789" end="58807" title="The Trail of Tears" label="The Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897736" start="59091" end="59107" title="Unto These Hills" label="Unto These Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q897793" start="59473" end="59498" title="Indian Reorganization Act" label="Indian Reorganization Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="60462" end="60476" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="60691" end="60704" title="US West Coast" label="US West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="60747" end="60756" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021393" start="60840" end="60873" title="Indian Relocation Act of 1956" label="Federal Indian Relocation program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="61000" end="61019" title="Greater Los Angeles area" label="Greater Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="61024" end="61046" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242314" start="61379" end="61390" title="Dawes Rolls" label="Dawes Rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927888" start="61410" end="61423" title="blood quantum" label="blood quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q121590561" start="61898" end="61908" title="Baker Roll" label="Baker Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="62163" end="62183" title="United States census" label="United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092232" start="62656" end="62680" title="Cherokee Heritage Groups" label="Cherokee Heritage Groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707560" start="63043" end="63057" title="Texas Cherokee" label="Texas Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986583" start="63162" end="63186" title="Indian Claims Commission" label="Indian Claims Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q110773" start="63540" end="63558" title="Rusk County, Texas" label="Rusk County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242308" start="63670" end="63686" title="Dawes Commission" label="Dawes Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q984347" start="64066" end="64075" title="John Ross (Cherokee chief)" label="John Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836989" start="64271" end="64297" title="Treaty of Bird&amp;#x27;s Fort" label="Treaty of Bird&amp;#x27;s Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010563" start="65078" end="65102" title="Bureau of Indian Affairs" label="Bureau of Indian Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201622" start="65810" end="65827" title="Antebellum Period" label="Antebellum Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="65947" end="65965" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242308" start="66570" end="66586" title="Dawes Commission" label="Dawes Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611017" start="67854" end="67865" title="Black drink" label="Black drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q11334570" start="67868" end="67902" title="Black Indians in the United States" label="Black Indians in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208918" start="67905" end="67917" title="Booger Dance" label="Booger Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q113158882" start="67920" end="67927" title="Kanuchi" label="Kanuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26914827" start="67930" end="67946" title="Moon-eyed people" label="Moon-eyed people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154577" start="67949" end="67962" title="One-drop rule" label="One-drop rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453488" start="68859" end="68881" title="William G. McLoughlin" label="McLoughlin, William G."/>
<link wikidata="Q1370358" start="69226" end="69239" title="James Mooney" label="Mooney, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082247" start="70827" end="70854" title="Oklahoma Historical Society" label="Oklahoma Historical Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50495" wikidata="Q848811" url="?curid=50495" title="Clapham Sect">
<text>The Clapham Sect, or Clapham Saints, were a group of social reformers associated with Holy Trinity Clapham in the period from the 1780s to the 1840s. Despite the label &quot;sect&quot;, most members remained in the established (and dominant) Church of England, which was highly interwoven with offices of state.

== History ==

The Clapham movement grew from 18th-century evangelical trends in the Church of England (the Anglican Church) and started to coalesce around residents of Clapham, especially during the rectorship there of John Venn (in office: 1792-1813)
and came to engage in systematically advocating social reform.

In the course of time the growth of evangelical Christian revivalism in England
and the movement for Catholic emancipation fed into a waning of the old precept that every Englishman automatically counted as an Anglican.
Some new Christian groups (such as the Methodists and the Plymouth Brethren) moved away from Anglicanism, and the Christian social reformers who succeeded the Claphamites from about the 1830s
often exemplified Nonconformist conscience
and identified with groups functioning outside the established Anglican Church.

==Summary and context==
These were reformists and abolitionists, being contemporary terms as the &#x27;Sect&#x27; was – until 1844 – unnamed. They figured and heard readings, sermons and lessons from prominent and wealthy Evangelical Anglicans who called for the liberation of slaves, abolition of the slave trade and the reform of the penal system, and recognised and advocated other cornerstone civil-political rights and socio-economic rights. Defying the status quo of labour exploitation and consequent vested interests in the legislature was laborious and was motivated by their Christian faith and concern for social justice and fairness for all human beings. Their most famous member was William Wilberforce, widely commemorated in monuments and credited with hastening the end of the slave trade.

Electoral and other political rights were a main cause of all Radicals then their Northern successors the Chartists, their shared earliest success being the Great Reform Act 1832. Many of the other key rights saw a comparative context in treatises of the Age of Enlightenment, and Age of Revolutions. France&#x27;s 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, together with the 1689 English Bill of Rights, the 1776 United States Declaration of Independence, and the 1789 United States Bill of Rights, inspired, in large part, the 1948 United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

==Campaigns and successes==

The name stems from most of its figures being non-dissenting parishioners of Clapham, then a village south of London (today part of south-west London), where Wilberforce and Thornton, its two most influential leaders, often lived and met. Liturgy, sermons and sometimes meetings at Holy Trinity Church on Clapham Common were a central feature, largely neighboured by upmarket new homes and expensive single-home plots of land (fashionable villas in the terms of the time).

Henry Venn, since seen as the founder, was lesser clergy, Curate, there (from at least 1754) and his son John became rector (parish priest) (1792–1813). The House of Commons politicians (MPs) William Wilberforce (first elected 1780) and Henry Thornton (first elected 1782), two of the most influential of the sect were parishioners and many of the meetings were held in their houses. They were encouraged by Beilby Porteus, the Bishop of London, himself an abolitionist and reformer, who sympathised with many of their aims. The term &quot;Clapham Sect&quot; is an almost non-contemporaneous invention by James Stephen in an article of 1844 which celebrated and romanticised the work of these reformers.

The reformers included members from St Edmund Hall, Oxford and Magdalene College, Cambridge, where the Vicar of Holy Trinity Church, Charles Simeon had preached to students from the university, some of whom underwent an evangelical conversion experience and later became associated with the Clapham Sect.

Lampooned in their day as &quot;the saints&quot;, the group published a journal, the &quot;Christian Observer&quot;, edited by Zachary Macaulay and were also credited with the foundation of several missionary and tract societies, including the British and Foreign Bible Society and the Church Missionary Society.

After many decades of work both in British society and in Parliament, the reformers saw their efforts rewarded with the final passage of the Slave Trade Act 1807, banning the trade throughout the British Empire and, after many further years of campaigning, the total emancipation of British slaves with the passing of the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. They also campaigned vigorously for Britain to use its influence to work towards abolishing slavery throughout the world.

Some of the group, Granville Sharp, Thomas Clarkson and William Wilberforce, were responsible for the founding in 1787 of Sierra Leone as a settlement for some of the African-Americans freed by the British during the American Revolutionary War; it thus became the first non trading-post British &quot;colony&quot; akin to a fledgling mission state in Africa, whose purpose in Clarkson&#x27;s words was &quot;the abolition of the slave trade, the civilisation of Africa, and the introduction of the gospel there&quot;. Later, in 1792, another of the group John Clarkson was instrumental in the creation of its capital Freetown.

The group are described by the historian Stephen Tomkins as &quot;a network of friends and families in England, with William Wilberforce as its centre of gravity, who were powerfully bound together by their shared moral and spiritual values, by their religious mission and social activism, by their love for each other, and by marriage&quot;.

By 1848 when evangelical bishop John Bird Sumner became Archbishop of Canterbury, it is said that between a quarter and a third of Anglican clergy were linked to the movement, which by then had diversified greatly in its goals, although they were no longer considered an organised faction.

Members of the group founded or were involved with a number of other societies, including the Abolition Society, formally known as the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade (founded by Clarkson, Sharp and others) and run largely by white middle-class women of Quaker, Unitarian and Evangelical faiths
The Society for the Mitigation and Gradual Abolition of Slavery Throughout the British Dominions followed, in 1823, and there was also the Proclamation Society, the Sunday School Society, the Bettering Society, and the Small Debt Society.

The Clapham Sect have been credited with playing a significant part in the development of Victorian morality, through their writings, their societies, their influence in Parliament, and their example in philanthropy and moral campaigns, especially against slavery. In the words of Tomkins, &quot;The ethos of Clapham became the spirit of the age.&quot;

==Members==
Members of the Clapham Sect, and those associated with them, included:

* Thomas Fowell Buxton (1786–1845), leader of the movement for the abolition of slavery, MP for Weymouth and Melcombe Regis and brewer
* William Dealtry (1775–1847), Rector of Holy Trinity Church, Clapham, mathematician
* Edward James Eliot (1758–97), MP for St Germans and Liskeard
* Samuel Gardiner (1755-1827) and his wife Mary Boddam of Coombe Lodge, Whitchurch-on-Thames
* Thomas Gisborne (1758–1846), Prebendary of Durham Cathedral and author
* Charles Grant (1746–1823), administrator, chairman of the directors of the British East India Company, father of the first Lord Glenelg
* Zachary Macaulay (1768–1838), estate manager, governor of Sierra Leone, father of Thomas Babington Macaulay
* Hannah More (1745–1833), bluestocking, playwright, religious writer and philanthropist
* Granville Sharp (1735–1813), campaigner for social justice, scholar and administrator
* Charles Simeon (1759–1836), Anglican cleric, minister of Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge, promoter of missions
* William Smith (1756–1835), MP for Sudbury and Norwich
* James Stephen (1758–1832), Master of Chancery, great-grandfather of Virginia Woolf
* Lord Teignmouth (1751–1834), Governor-general of India
* John Thornton (1720-1790), prominent Clapham resident, philanthropist and founder member of the group
* Henry Thornton (1760–1815), economist, banker, philanthropist, Member of Parliament (MP) for Southwark, son of John Thornton and great-grandfather of writer E.M. Forster
* Marianne Thornton (1797-1887), daughter of Henry Thornton
* Henry Venn (1725–97), curate of Holy Trinity Church, Clapham, and founder of the group, father of John Venn (priest) and great-grandfather of John Venn (originator of the Venn diagram)
* John Venn (1759–1813), Rector of Holy Trinity Church, Clapham
* William Wilberforce (1759–1833), MP for Kingston upon Hull, Yorkshire and Bramber, abolitionist, and leader of the campaign against the slave trade

==See also==

* List of abolitionist forerunners

==References==
==Further reading==
* Brown, Ford K. &quot;Fathers of the Victorians: The Age of Wilberforce&quot; (1961).
* Burton, Ann M. &quot;British Evangelicals, Economic Warfare and the Abolition of the Atlantic Slave Trade, 1794–1810.&quot; &quot;Anglican and Episcopal History&quot; 65#2 (1996): 197–225. in JSTOR
*Butler, Ryan J. &quot;Transatlantic Discontinuity? The Clapham Sect&#x27;s Influence in the United States.&quot; Church history 88, no. 3 (2019): 672–695.
* Cowper, William. &quot;&#x27;The Better Hour Is Near&#x27;: Wilberforce And Transformative Religion.&quot; (Evangelical History Association Lecture 2013) online
* Danker, Ryan Nicholas. &quot;Wesley and the Anglicans: Political Division in Early Evangelicalism&quot; (InterVarsity Press, 2016).
* Hennell, Michael. &quot;John Venn and the Clapham Sect&quot; (1958).
* Hilton, Boyd. &quot;The Age of Atonement: The Influence of Evangelicalism on Social and Economic Thought, 1795-‐1865&quot; (1988).
* Hilton, Boyd. &quot;A Mad, Bad, Dangerous People? England 1783–1846&quot; (2006), pp 174–88, passim.
* Himmelfarb, Gertrude. &quot;From Clapham to Bloomsbury: A Genealogy of Morals.&quot; &quot;Commentary&quot; 79.2 (1985): 36.
* Howse, Ernest Marshall. &quot;Saints in Politics: The &#x27;Clapham Sect&#x27; and the Growth of Freedom&quot; (University of Toronto Press, 1952)
* Klein, Milton M. &quot;Amazing Grace: John Thornton &amp; the Clapham Sect&quot; (2004), 160 pp.
* Spring, David. &quot;The Clapham Sect: Some Social and Political Aspects.&quot; &quot;Victorian Studies&quot; 5#1 (1961): 35–48. in JSTOR
* Tomkins, Stephen. &quot;The Clapham Sect: How Wilberforce&#x27;s Circle Changed Britain&quot; (Oxford: Lion Hudson, 2010)
* Tomkins, Stephen. &quot;William Wilberforce: A Biography&quot; (Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 2007).
* Ward, William Reginald. &quot;The Protestant Evangelical Awakening&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 2002).
* Wolffe, John/ &quot;Clapham Sect (act. 1792–1815)&quot;, &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot; 2005; online edn, Oct 2016 accessed 13 Nov 2017

== External links ==
* The Clapham Group – 1701–1800 – Church History Timeline
* William Wilberforce (1759–1833): The Shrimp Who Stopped Slavery by Christopher D. Hancock
* William Wilberforce &#x27;condoned slavery&#x27;, Colonial Office papers reveal – The Guardian – Davies, Caroline. Monday 2 August 2010.
* Do-gooders in 1790s London – The Economist – Aug 26th 2010</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q848811" start="4" end="16" title="Clapham Sect" label="Clapham Sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q848811" start="21" end="35" title="Clapham Sect" label="Clapham Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q17552842" start="86" end="106" title="Holy Trinity Clapham" label="Holy Trinity Clapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="174" end="178" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="215" end="226" title="Established Church" label="established"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="242" end="259" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q146659" start="332" end="339" title="Clapham" label="Clapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="421" end="436" title="Anglican Church" label="Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990332" start="533" end="542" title="John Venn (priest)" label="John Venn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146522" start="678" end="695" title="Christian revival" label="Christian revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="731" end="752" title="Catholic emancipation" label="Catholic emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="889" end="899" title="Methodism" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q685812" start="908" end="925" title="Plymouth Brethren" label="Plymouth Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017613" start="1060" end="1084" title="Nonconformist conscience" label="Nonconformist conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455161" start="1388" end="1408" title="Evangelical Anglican" label="Evangelical Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="1429" end="1449" title="Abolitionism" label="liberation of slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="1468" end="1479" title="History of slavery" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245788" start="1488" end="1514" title="Prison reform" label="reform of the penal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="1625" end="1635" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5853443" start="1639" end="1658" title="labour exploitation" label="labour exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1751" end="1766" title="Christian faith" label="Christian faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="1783" end="1797" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q207672" start="1862" end="1881" title="William Wilberforce" label="William Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687668" start="2035" end="2043" title="Radicals (UK)" label="Radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q193974" start="2079" end="2088" title="Chartism" label="Chartists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="2130" end="2151" title="Great Reform Act 1832" label="Great Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="2228" end="2248" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691908" start="2254" end="2272" title="Age of Revolutions" label="Age of Revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q169759" start="2293" end="2344" title="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" label="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="2369" end="2391" title="English Bill of Rights" label="English Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="2402" end="2443" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="2458" end="2486" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="United States Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2522" end="2536" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="2537" end="2574" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q146659" start="2683" end="2690" title="Clapham" label="Clapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q17552842" start="2888" end="2907" title="Holy Trinity Church, Clapham" label="Holy Trinity Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975448" start="2911" end="2925" title="Clapham Common" label="Clapham Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534575" start="3080" end="3090" title="Henry Venn (Clapham Sect)" label="Henry Venn"/>
<link wikidata="Q207672" start="3272" end="3291" title="William Wilberforce" label="William Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133106" start="3317" end="3331" title="Henry Thornton (reformer)" label="Henry Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881237" start="3488" end="3502" title="Beilby Porteus" label="Beilby Porteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587771" start="3508" end="3524" title="Bishop of London" label="Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="3537" end="3549" title="abolitionism" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143554" start="3685" end="3698" title="James Stephen (civil servant)" label="James Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q973884" start="3821" end="3843" title="St Edmund Hall, Oxford" label="St Edmund Hall, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="3848" end="3876" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5886471" start="3897" end="3916" title="Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge" label="Holy Trinity Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082512" start="3918" end="3932" title="Charles Simeon" label="Charles Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="3967" end="3977" title="Cambridge University" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q814999" start="4017" end="4027" title="Conversion to Christianity" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109987" start="4182" end="4200" title="Christian Observer" label="Christian Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076768" start="4218" end="4234" title="Zachary Macaulay" label="Zachary Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="4289" end="4299" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q920404" start="4335" end="4368" title="British and Foreign Bible Society" label="British and Foreign Bible Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089760" start="4377" end="4402" title="Church Missionary Society" label="Church Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="4463" end="4473" title="British Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q770832" start="4546" end="4566" title="Slave Trade Act 1807" label="Slave Trade Act 1807"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="4601" end="4615" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q487420" start="4727" end="4753" title="Slavery Abolition Act 1833" label="Slavery Abolition Act 1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="4836" end="4846" title="Abolitionism" label="abolishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="4847" end="4854" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q726029" start="4897" end="4912" title="Granville Sharp" label="Granville Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032151" start="4914" end="4929" title="Thomas Clarkson" label="Thomas Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="5000" end="5012" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="5095" end="5121" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="5165" end="5191" title="Crown colony" label="British &amp;quot;colony&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226249" start="5433" end="5446" title="John Clarkson (abolitionist)" label="John Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="5495" end="5503" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q207672" start="5623" end="5642" title="William Wilberforce" label="William Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="5863" end="5874" title="evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q549733" start="5882" end="5898" title="John Bird Sumner" label="John Bird Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="5906" end="5930" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157093" start="6276" end="6330" title="Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade" label="Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="6418" end="6424" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="6426" end="6435" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407842" start="6463" end="6555" title="Society for the Mitigation and Gradual Abolition of Slavery Throughout the British Dominions" label="Society for the Mitigation and Gradual Abolition of Slavery Throughout the British Dominions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932042" start="6598" end="6618" title="Proclamation Society" label="Proclamation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605771" start="6624" end="6645" title="Sunday School Society" label="Sunday School Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6651" end="6668" title="Bettering Society" label="Bettering Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6678" end="6696" title="Small Debt Society" label="Small Debt Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900116" start="6789" end="6807" title="Victorian morality" label="Victorian morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591064" start="7139" end="7159" title="Thomas Fowell Buxton" label="Thomas Fowell Buxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990377" start="7233" end="7260" title="Weymouth and Melcombe Regis (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Weymouth and Melcombe Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007710" start="7274" end="7289" title="William Dealtry" label="William Dealtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q146659" start="7334" end="7341" title="Clapham" label="Clapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343726" start="7359" end="7377" title="Edward James Eliot" label="Edward James Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593256" start="7396" end="7406" title="St Germans (UK Parliament constituency)" label="St Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797264" start="7411" end="7419" title="Liskeard (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Liskeard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415951" start="7492" end="7512" title="Whitchurch-on-Thames" label="Whitchurch-on-Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525160" start="7515" end="7530" title="Thomas Gisborne" label="Thomas Gisborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640328" start="7544" end="7554" title="Prebendary" label="Prebendary"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="7558" end="7574" title="Durham Cathedral" label="Durham Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078364" start="7588" end="7601" title="Charles Grant (British East India Company)" label="Charles Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824534" start="7615" end="7628" title="Administrator of the government" label="administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="7663" end="7689" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q333452" start="7711" end="7723" title="Lord Glenelg" label="Lord Glenelg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076768" start="7726" end="7742" title="Zachary Macaulay" label="Zachary Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="7772" end="7780" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="7784" end="7796" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q315989" start="7808" end="7833" title="Thomas Babington Macaulay, 1st Baron Macaulay" label="Thomas Babington Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q25880" start="7836" end="7847" title="Hannah More" label="Hannah More"/>
<link wikidata="Q11729628" start="7861" end="7873" title="bluestocking" label="bluestocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q726029" start="7925" end="7940" title="Granville Sharp" label="Granville Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082512" start="8013" end="8027" title="Charles Simeon" label="Charles Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5886471" start="8070" end="8100" title="Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge" label="Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="8114" end="8122" title="Christian mission" label="missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018541" start="8125" end="8138" title="William Smith (abolitionist)" label="William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633491" start="8159" end="8166" title="Sudbury (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Sudbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061462" start="8171" end="8178" title="Norwich (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143556" start="8181" end="8194" title="James Stephen (British politician)" label="James Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641418" start="8208" end="8214" title="Master (judiciary)" label="Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q284804" start="8218" end="8226" title="Court of Chancery" label="Chancery"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="8249" end="8263" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390829" start="8266" end="8281" title="John Shore, 1st Baron Teignmouth" label="Lord Teignmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="8295" end="8311" title="Governor-general" label="Governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8315" end="8320" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260749" start="8323" end="8336" title="John Thornton (philanthropist)" label="John Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133106" start="8427" end="8441" title="Henry Thornton (abolitionist)" label="Henry Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="8490" end="8510" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571116" start="8520" end="8529" title="Southwark (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260749" start="8538" end="8551" title="John Thornton (philanthropist)" label="John Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q189119" start="8584" end="8596" title="E.M. Forster" label="E.M. Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q52154601" start="8599" end="8616" title="Marianne Thornton" label="Marianne Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133106" start="8642" end="8656" title="Henry Thornton (reformer)" label="Henry Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534575" start="8659" end="8669" title="Henry Venn (Clapham Sect)" label="Henry Venn"/>
<link wikidata="Q146659" start="8712" end="8719" title="Clapham" label="Clapham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990332" start="8757" end="8775" title="John Venn (priest)" label="John Venn (priest)"/>
<link wikidata="Q216811" start="8801" end="8810" title="John Venn" label="John Venn"/>
<link wikidata="Q190763" start="8830" end="8842" title="Venn diagram" label="Venn diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990332" start="8846" end="8855" title="John Venn (priest)" label="John Venn"/>
<link wikidata="Q207672" start="8910" end="8929" title="William Wilberforce" label="William Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="8943" end="8945" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413650" start="8950" end="8968" title="Kingston upon Hull (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055661" start="8970" end="8979" title="Yorkshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956101" start="8984" end="8991" title="Bramber (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bramber"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="8993" end="9005" title="abolitionist" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981973" start="9046" end="9057" title="History of slavery" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962346" start="9075" end="9107" title="List of abolitionist forerunners" label="List of abolitionist forerunners"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="50496" wikidata="Q4769020" url="?curid=50496" title="Annesley Hall">
<text>Annesley Hall is the all-female residence at Victoria College, University of Toronto. The residence is located across from the Royal Ontario Museum and is designated a National Historic Site of Canada.

Built in 1903 in the Queen Anne style, Annesley Hall is the first university residence built for women in Canada. It was designed by architect George Martel Miller. Annesley Hall was home to the first female resident at the University, as well as the first woman to graduate from a Canadian medical school.

Annesley is noted for its close-knit community life and is also known for its elegance and uniqueness. No two rooms are the same, and students in Annesley are able to enjoy exclusive common space, such as the Tackaberry Library and the Music Room, found on the main floor.

Annesley Hall was a location used in the shoot of the 1974 horror movie &quot;Black Christmas&quot;. It was renovated and restored in 1988–1989.

==References==
==Further reading==
* O&#x27;Grady, Jean (2001). &quot;Margaret Addison: A Biography&quot;. McGill-Queens University Press. — Biography of the founding dean of Annesley Hall who served from 1903 until 1931.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4769020" start="0" end="13" title="Annesley Hall" label="Annesley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551503" start="45" end="61" title="Victoria University in the University of Toronto" label="Victoria College"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="63" end="84" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q649250" start="127" end="147" title="Royal Ontario Museum" label="Royal Ontario Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568567" start="168" end="200" title="National Historic Sites of Canada" label="National Historic Site of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q529819" start="224" end="240" title="Queen Anne style architecture" label="Queen Anne style"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="494" end="508" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q783069" start="863" end="878" title="Black Christmas (1974 film)" label="Black Christmas"/>
</links>
</doc>
