<doc id="44772" wikidata="Q1458" url="?curid=44772" title="Calabria">
<text>Calabria is a region in Southern Italy. It is a peninsula bordered by Basilicata to the north, the Ionian Sea to the east, the Strait of Messina to the southwest, which separates it from Sicily, and the Tyrrhenian Sea to the west. It has almost 2 million residents across a total area of . Catanzaro is the region&#x27;s capital.

Calabria is the birthplace of the name of Italy, given to it by the Ancient Greeks who settled in this land starting from the 8th century BC. They established the first cities, mainly on the coast, as Greek colonies. During this period Calabria was the heart of Magna Graecia, home of key figures in history such as Pythagoras, Herodotus and Milo.

In Roman times, it was part of the &quot;Regio III Lucania et Bruttii&quot;, a region of Augustan Italy. After the Gothic War, it became and remained for five centuries a Byzantine dominion, fully recovering its Greek character. Cenobitism flourished, with the rise throughout the peninsula of numerous churches, hermitages and monasteries in which Basilian monks were dedicated to transcription. The Byzantines introduced the art of silk in Calabria and made it the main silk production area in Europe. In the 11th century, the Norman conquest started a slow process of Latinization.

In Calabria there are three historical ethnolinguistics minorities: the Grecanici, speaking Calabrian Greek; the Arbëreshë people; and the Occitans of Guardia Piemontese. This extraordinary linguistic diversity makes the region an object of study for linguists from all over the world.

Calabria is famous for its crystal clear sea waters and is dotted with ancient villages, castles and archaeological parks. Three national parks are found in the region: the Pollino National Park (which is the largest in Italy), the Sila National Park and the Aspromonte National Park.

==Etymology==
Starting in the third century BC, the name &quot;Calabria&quot; was originally given to the Adriatic coast of the Salento peninsula in modern Apulia. In the late first century BC this name came to extend to the entirety of the Salento, when the Roman emperor Augustus divided Italy into regions. The whole region of Apulia received the name &quot;Regio II Apulia et Calabria&quot;. By this time modern Calabria was still known as &quot;Bruttium&quot;, after the Bruttians who inhabited the region. Later in the seventh century AD, the Byzantine Empire created the Duchy of Calabria from the Salento and the Ionian part of Bruttium. Even though the Calabrian part of the duchy was conquered by the Lombards during the eighth and ninth centuries AD, the Byzantines continued to use the name &quot;Calabria&quot; for their remaining territory in Bruttium.

Originally the Greeks used &quot;Italoi&quot; to indicate the native population of modern Calabria, which according to some ancient Greek writers was derived from a legendary king of the Oenotri, Italus. 

Over time the Greeks started to use &quot;Italoi&quot; for the rest of the southern Italian peninsula as well. After the Roman conquest of the region, the name was used for the entire Italian peninsula and eventually the Alpine region too.
==Geography==

The region is generally known as the &quot;toe&quot; of the Italian Peninsula, and is a long and narrow peninsula which stretches from north to south for , with a maximum width of . Some 42% of Calabria&#x27;s area, corresponding to 15,080 km2, is mountainous, 49% is hilly, while plains occupy only 9% of the region&#x27;s territory. It is surrounded by the Ionian and Tyrrhenian seas. It is separated from Sicily by the Strait of Messina, where the narrowest point between Capo Peloro in Sicily and Punta Pezzo in Calabria is only .

Three mountain ranges are present: Pollino, La Sila, and Aspromonte, each with its own flora and fauna. The Pollino Mountains in the north of the region are rugged and form a natural barrier separating Calabria from the rest of Italy. Parts of the area are heavily wooded, while others are vast, wind-swept plateaus with little vegetation. These mountains are home to a rare Bosnian Pine variety and are included in the Pollino National Park, which is the largest national park in Italy, covering 1,925.65 square kilometres.

La Sila, which has been referred to as the &quot;Great Wood of Italy&quot;, is a vast mountainous plateau about above sea level and stretches for nearly along the central part of Calabria. The highest point is Botte Donato, which reaches . The area boasts numerous lakes and dense coniferous forests. La Sila also has some of the tallest trees in Italy which are called the &quot;Giants of the Sila&quot; and can reach up to in height. The Sila National Park is also known to have the purest air in Europe.

The Aspromonte massif forms the southernmost tip of the Italian peninsula bordered by the sea on three sides. This unique mountainous structure reaches its highest point at Montalto, at , and is full of wide, man-made terraces that slope down toward the sea.

Most of the lower terrain in Calabria has been agricultural for centuries, and exhibits indigenous scrubland as well as introduced plants such as the prickly pear cactus. The lowest slopes are rich in vineyards and orchards of citrus fruit, including the Diamante citron. Further up, olives and chestnut trees appear while in the higher regions there are often dense forests of oak, pine, beech and fir trees.

===Climate===
Calabria&#x27;s climate is influenced by the sea and mountains. The Mediterranean climate is typical of the coastal areas with considerable differences in temperature and rainfall between the seasons, with an average low of during the winter months and an average high of during the summer months. Mountain areas have a typical mountainous climate with frequent snow during winter. The erratic behavior of the Tyrrhenian Sea can bring heavy rainfall on the western slopes of the region, while hot air from Africa makes the east coast of Calabria dry and warm. The mountains that run along the region also influence the climate and temperature of the region. The east coast is much warmer and has wider temperature ranges than the west coast. The geography of the region causes more rain to fall along the west coast than that of the east coast, which occurs mainly during winter and autumn and less during the summer months.

Below are the two extremes of climate in Calabria, the warm mediterranean subtype on the coastline and the highland climate of Monte Scuro.

==Geology==

Calabria is commonly considered part of the &quot;Calabrian Arc&quot;, an arc-shaped geographic domain extending from the southern part of the Basilicata Region to the northeast of Sicily, and including the Peloritano Mountains (although some authors extend this domain from Naples in the north to Palermo in the southwest). The Calabrian area shows basement (crystalline and metamorphic rocks) of Paleozoic and younger ages, covered by (mostly Upper) Neogene sediments. Studies have revealed that these rocks comprise the upper part of a pile of thrust sheets which dominate the Apennines and the Sicilian Maghrebides.

The Neogene evolution of the Central Mediterranean system is dominated by the migration of the Calabrian Arc to the southeast, overriding the African Plate and its promontories.) The main tectonic elements of the Calabrian Arc are the southern Apennines fold-and-thrust belt, the &quot;Calabria-Peloritani&quot;, or simply Calabrian block and the Sicilian Maghrebides fold-and-thrust belt. The foreland area is formed by the Apulia Platform, which is part of the Adriatic Plate, and the Ragusa or Iblean Platform, which is an extension of the African Plate. These platforms are separated by the Ionian Basin. The Tyrrhenian oceanized basin is regarded as the back-arc basin. This subduction system therefore shows the southern plates of African affinity subducting below the northern plates of European affinity.

The geology of Calabria has been studied for more than a century. The earlier works were mainly dedicated to the evolution of the basement rocks of the area. The Neogene sedimentary successions were merely regarded as &quot;post-orogenic&quot; infill of &quot;neo-tectonic&quot; tensional features. In the course of time, however, a shift can be observed in the temporal significance of these terms, from post-Eocene to post-Early Miocene to post-middle Pleistocene.

The region is seismically active and is generally ascribed to the re-establishment of an equilibrium after the latest (mid-Pleistocene) deformation phase. Some authors believe that the subduction process is still ongoing, which is a matter of debate.

==History==
Calabria has one of the oldest records of human presence in Italy, which date back to around 700,000 BC when a type of &quot;Homo erectus&quot; evolved leaving traces around coastal areas. During the Paleolithic period Stone Age humans created the &quot;Bos Primigenius&quot;, a figure of a bull on a cliff which dates back around 12,000 years in the Romito Cave in the town of Papasidero. When the Neolithic period came the first villages were founded around 3,500 BC.

===Antiquity===


Around 1500 BC a tribe called the Oenotri (&quot;vine-cultivators&quot;), settled in the region. Ancient sources state they were Greeks who were led to the region by their king, Oenotrus. However it is believed they were an ancient Italic people who spoke an Italic language.
During the eighth and seventh centuries BC, Greek settlers founded many colonies (settlements) on the coast of southern Italy. In Calabria they founded Chone (Pallagorio), Cosentia (Cosenza), Clampetia (Amantea), Scyllaeum (Scilla), Sybaris (Sibari), Hipponion (Vibo Valentia), Locri Epizephyrii (Locri), Kaulon (Monasterace), Krimisa (Cirò Marina), Kroton (Crotone), Laüs (&quot;comune&quot; of Santa Maria del Cedro), Medma (Rosarno), Metauros (Gioia Tauro), Petelia (Strongoli), Rhégion (Reggio Calabria), Scylletium (Borgia), Temesa (Campora San Giovanni), Terina (Nocera Terinese), Pandosia (Acri) and Thurii, (Thurio, &quot;comune&quot; of Corigliano Calabro).

Rhegion was the birthplace of one of the famed nine lyric poets, Ibycus and Metauros was the birthplace of another, Stesichorus, who was amongst the first lyric poets of the western world. Kroton spawned many victors during the ancient Olympics and other Panhellenic Games. Amongst the most famous were Milo of Croton, who won six wrestling events in six Olympics in a row, along with seven events in the Pythian Games, nine events in the Nemean Games and ten events in the Isthmian Games and also Astylos of Croton, who won six running events in three Olympics in a row. Through Alcmaeon of Croton (a philosopher and medical theorist) and Pythagoras (a mathematician and philosopher), who moved to Kroton in 530 BC, the city became a renowned center of philosophy, science and medicine. The Greeks of Sybaris created &quot;Intellectual Property.&quot; The Sybarites founded at least 20 other colonies, including Poseidonia (Paestum in Latin, on the Tyrrhenian coast of Lucania), Laüs (on the border with Lucania) and Scidrus (on the Lucanian coast in the Gulf of Taranto). Locri was renowned for being the town where Zaleucus created the first Western Greek law, the &quot;Locrian Code&quot; and the birthplace of ancient epigrammist and poet Nossis.

The Greek cities of Calabria came under pressure from the Lucanians who conquered the north of Calabria and pushed further south, taking over part of the interior, probably after they defeated the Thurians near Laus in 390 BC. A few decades later the Bruttii took advantage of the weakening of the Greek cites caused by wars between them and took over Hipponium, Terina and Thurii. The Bruttii helped the Lucanians fight Alexander of Epirus (334–32 BC), who had come to the aid of Tarentum (in Apulia), which was also pressured by the Lucanians. After this, Agathocles of Syracuse ravaged the coast of Calabria with his fleet, took Hipponium and forced the Bruttii into unfavourable peace terms. However, they soon seized Hipponium again. After Agathloces&#x27; death in 289 BC the Lucanians and Bruttii pushed into the territory of Thurii and ravaged it. The city sent envoys to Rome to ask for help in 285 BC and 282 BC. On the second occasion, the Romans sent forces to garrison the city. This was part of the episode which sparked the Pyrrhic war.

===Romanisation===

At the beginning of the 3rd century BC the cities of southern Italy, which had been allies of the Samnites, were still independent but inevitably came into conflict as a result of Rome&#x27;s continuous expansion as their expansion in central and northern Italy had not been sufficient to provide new arable lands they needed.

====Pyrrhic War====

During the Pyrrhic War (280–275 BC) the Lucanians and Bruttii sided with Pyrrhus and provided contingents which fought with his army. 

After Pyrrhus was eventually defeated, to avoid Roman revenge the Bruttii submitted willingly and gave up half of the Sila, a mountainous plateau valuable for its pitch and timber. Rome subjugated southern Italy by means of treaties with the cities.

====Punic Wars====

During the Second Punic War (218–201 BC) the Bruttii allied with Hannibal, who sent Hanno, one of his commanders, to Calabria. Hanno marched toward Capua (in Campania) with Bruttian soldiers to take them to Hannibal&#x27;s headquarters there twice, but he was defeated on both occasions. When his campaign in Italy came to a dead end, Hannibal took refuge in Calabria, whose steep mountains provided protection against the Roman legions. He set up his headquarters in Kroton and stayed there for four years until he was recalled to Carthage. The Romans fought a battle with him near Kroton, but its details are unknown. Many Calabrian cities surrendered to the Romans and Calabria was put under a military commander.

===Roman era===

Nearly a decade after the war, the Romans set up colonies in Calabria: at Tempsa and Kroton (Croto in Latin) in 194 BC, Copiae in the territory of Thurii (Thurium in Latin) in 193 BC, and Vibo Valentia in the territory of Hipponion in 192 BC. 

Starting in the third century BC, the name &quot;Calabria&quot; was given to the Adriatic coast of the Salento peninsula in modern Apulia. In the late first century BC this name came to extend to the entirety of the Salento, when the Roman emperor Augustus divided Italy into regions and modern Calabria was known as Regio III Lucania et Bruttii.

After sacking Rome in 410, Alaric I (King of the Visigoths) went to Calabria with the intention of sailing to Africa. He contracted malaria and died in Cosentia (Cosenza), probably of fever. Legend has it that he along with the treasure of Rome were buried under the bed of the River Busento.

===Middle Ages===
With the fall of the western part of the Roman Empire in 476, Italy was taken over by the Germanic chieftain Odoacer and later became part of the Ostrogothic Kingdom in 489. The Ostrogothic kings ruled officially as Magistri Militum of the Byzantine Emperors and all government and administrative positions were held by the Romans, while all primary laws were legislated by the Byzantine Emperor. Therefore, during the sixth century, under the Ostrogoths&#x27; rule, Romans could still be at the center of government and cultural life, such as the Roman Cassiodorus who, like Boethius and Symmachus, emerged as one of the most prominent men of his time. He was an administrator, politician, scholar and historian who was born in Scylletium (near Catanzaro). He spent most of his career trying to bridge the divides of East and West, Greek and Latin cultures, Romans and Goths, and official Christianity and Arian Christianity, which was the form of Christianity of the Ostrogoths and which had earlier been banned. He set up his Vivarium (monastery) in Scylletium. He oversaw the collation of three editions of the Bible in Latin. Seeing the practicality of uniting all the books of the Bible in one volume, he was the first who produced Latin Bibles in single volumes. The most well-known of them was the Codex Grandior which was the ancestor of all modern western Bibles.

Cassiodorus was at the heart of the administration of the Ostrogothic kingdom. Theodoric made him quaestor sacri palatii (quaestor of the sacred palace, the senior legal authority) in 507, governor of Lucania and Bruttium, consul in 514 and magister officiorum (master of offices, one of the most senior administrative officials) in 523. He was praetorian prefect (chief minister) under the successors of Theodoric: under Athalaric (Theodoric&#x27;s grandson, reigned 526–34) in 533 and, between 535 and 537, under Theodahad (Theodoric&#x27;s nephew, reigned 534–36) and Witiges (Theodoric&#x27;s grandson-in-law, reigned, 536–40). The major works of Cassiodorus, besides the mentioned bibles, were the Historia Gothorum, a history of the Goths, the Variae and account of his administrative career and the Institutiones divinarum et saecularium litterarum, an introduction to the study of the sacred scriptures and the liberal arts which was very influential in the Middle Ages.

Byzantine (Eastern Roman) Emperor Justinian I, retook Italy from the Ostrogoths between 535 and 556. They soon lost much of Italy to the Lombards between 568 and 590, but retained the south for around 500 years until 1059–1071, where they thrived and where the Greek language was the official and vernacular language. In Calabria and towns such as Stilo and Rossano and San Demetrio Corone achieved great religious status. From the 7th Century many monasteries were built in the Amendolea and Stilaro Valleys and Stilo was the destination of hermits and Basilian monks. Many Byzantine churches are still seen in the region. The 10th-century church in Rossano, together with the &quot;twin&quot; church of Sant&#x27;Adriano in San Demetrio Corone (foundation 955, rebuilt by the Normans on the, still, visible foundations of the previous Byzantine church), are considered between the best preserved Byzantine churches in Italy. They were both built by St. Nilus the Younger as a retreat for the monks who lived in the tufa grottos underneath. The present name of Calabria comes from the duchy of Calabria.

Around the year 800, Saracens began invading the shores of Calabria, attempting to wrest control of the area from the Byzantines. This group of Arabs had already been successful in Sicily and knew that Calabria was another key spot. The people of Calabria retreated into the mountains for safety. Although the Arabs never really got a stronghold on the whole of Calabria, they did control some villages while enhancing trade relations with the eastern world. In 918, Saracens captured Reggio (which was renamed &quot;Rivà&quot;), holding many of its inhabitants to ransom or keeping them prisoners as slaves. It is during this time of Arab invasions that many staples of today&#x27;s Calabrian cuisine came into fashion: Citrus fruits and eggplants for example. Exotic spices such as cloves and nutmeg were also introduced.

Under the Byzantine dominion, between the end of the 9th and the beginning of the 10th century, Calabria was one of the first regions of Italy to introduce silk production to Europe.
According to André Guillou, mulberry trees for the production of raw silk were introduced to southern Italy by the Byzantines at the end of the ninth century.
Around 1050 the theme of Calabria had 24,000, mulberry trees cultivated for their foliage, and their number tended to expand.

At the beginning of the tenth century (), the city of Catanzaro was occupied by the Muslim Saracens, who founded an emirate and took the Arab name of قطنصار – Qaṭanṣār. An Arab presence is evidenced by findings at an eighth-century necropolis which had items with Arabic inscriptions. Around the year 1050, Catanzaro rebelled against Saracen dominance and returned to a brief period of Byzantine control.
In the 1060s the Normans, under the leadership of Robert Guiscard&#x27;s brother, Roger I of Sicily, established a presence in this borderland, and organized a government modeled on the Eastern Roman Empire and was run by the local magnates of Calabria. Of note is that the Normans established their presence here, in southern Italy (namely Calabria), 6 years prior to their conquest of England, (see The Battle of Hastings). The purpose of this strategic presence in Calabria was to lay the foundations for the Crusades 30 years later, and for the creation of two Kingdoms: the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and the Kingdom of Sicily. Ships would sail from Calabria to the Holy Land. This made Calabria one of the richest regions in Europe as princes from the noble families of England, France and other regions, constructed secondary residences and palaces here, on their way to the Holy Land. Guiscard&#x27;s son Bohemond, who was born in San Marco Argentano, would be one of the leaders in the first crusade. Of particular note is the Via Francigena, an ancient pilgrim route that goes from Canterbury to Rome and southern Italy, reaching Calabria, Basilicata and Apulia, where the crusaders lived, prayed and trained, respectively.

In 1098, Roger I of Sicily was named the equivalent of an apostolic legate by Pope Urban II. His son Roger II of Sicily later became the first King of Sicily and formed what would become the Kingdom of Sicily, which lasted nearly 700 years. Under the Normans southern Italy was united as one region and started a feudal system of land ownership in which the Normans were made lords of the land while peasants performed all the work on the land.

In 1147, Roger II of Sicily attacked Corinth and Thebes, two important centers of Byzantine silk production, capturing the weavers and their equipment and establishing his own silkworks in Calabria, thereby causing the Norman silk industry to flourish.

In 1194, Frederick II, took control of the region, after inheriting the Kingdom from his mother Constance, Queen of Sicily. He created a kingdom that blended cultures, philosophy and customs and would build several castles, while fortifying existing ones which the Normans previously constructed. After the death of Frederick II in 1250, Calabria was controlled by the Capetian House of Anjou, under the rule of Charles d’Anjou after being granted the crown of the Sicilian Kingdom by Pope Clement IV. In 1282, under Charles d’Anjou, Calabria became a domain of the newly created Kingdom of Naples, and no longer of the Kingdom of Sicily, after he lost Sicily due to the rebellion of the Sicilian Vespers. During the 14th century, would emerge Barlaam of Seminara who would be Petrarch&#x27;s Greek teacher and his disciple Leonzio Pilato, who would translate Homer&#x27;s works for Giovanni Boccaccio.

While the cultivation of mulberry was moving first steps in northern Italy, silk made in Calabria reached the peak of 50% of the whole Italian/European production. As the cultivation of mulberry was difficult in Northern and Continental Europe, merchants and operators used to purchase in Calabria raw materials to finish the products and resell them for a better price. The Genoese silk artisans used fine Calabrian silk for the production of velvets.
In particular, the silk of Catanzaro supplied almost all of Europe and was sold in a large market fair to Spanish, Venetian, Genoese, Florentine and Dutch merchants.
Catanzaro became the lace capital of Europe with a large silkworm breeding facility that produced all the laces and linens used in the Vatican. The city was known for its fabrication of silks, velvets, damasks and brocades.

===Early modern period===
In the 15th century, Catanzaro was exporting both its silk cloth and its technical skills to neighbouring Sicily. By the middle of the century, silk spinning was taking place in Catanzaro, on a large scale.

In 1442, the Aragonese took control under Alfonso V of Aragon who became ruler under the Crown of Aragon. In 1501 Calabria came under the control of Ferdinand II of Aragon, whose wife Queen Isabella of Castille is famed for sponsoring the first voyage of Christopher Columbus in 1492. Calabria suffered greatly under Aragonese rule with heavy taxes, feuding landlords, starvation and sickness. After a brief period in the early 1700s under the Austrian Habsburgs, Calabria came into the control of the Spanish Bourbons in 1735. It was during the 16th century that Calabria would contribute to modern world history with the creation of the Gregorian calendar by the Calabrian doctor and astronomer Luigi Lilio.

In 1466, King Louis XI decided to develop a national silk industry in Lyon and called a large number of Italian workers, mainly from Calabria. The fame of the master weavers of Catanzaro spread throughout France and they were invited to Lyon to teach the techniques of weaving. In 1470, one of these weavers, known in France as Jean Le Calabrais, invented the first prototype of a Jacquard-type loom. He introduced a new kind of machine which was able to work the yarns faster and more precisely. Over the years, improvements to the loom were ongoing.

Charles V of Spain formally recognized the growth of the silk industry of Catanzaro in 1519 by allowing the city to establish a consulate of the silk craft, charged with regulating and check in the various stages of a production that flourished throughout the sixteenth century. At the moment of the creation of its guild, the city declared that it had over 500 looms. By 1660, when the town had about 16,000 inhabitants, its silk industry kept 1,000 looms, and at least 5,000 people, busy. The silk textiles of Catanzaro were not only sold at the kingdom&#x27;s markets, they were also exported to Venice, France, Spain and England.

In the 16th century, Calabria was characterized by a strong demographic and economic development, mainly due to the increasing demand of silk products and the simultaneous growth of prices, and became one of the most important Mediterranean markets for silk.

In 1563 philosopher and natural scientist Bernardino Telesio wrote &quot;On the Nature of Things according to their Own Principles&quot; and pioneered early modern empiricism. He would also influence the works of Francis Bacon, René Descartes, Giordano Bruno, Tommaso Campanella and Thomas Hobbes. In 1602 philosopher and poet Tommaso Campanella wrote his most famous work, &quot;The City of the Sun&quot; and would later defend Galileo Galilei during his first trial with his work &quot;A Defense of Galileo&quot;, which was written in 1616 and published in 1622. In 1613 philosopher and economist Antonio Serra wrote &quot;A Short Treatise on the Wealth and Poverty of Nations&quot; and was a pioneer in the Mercantilist tradition.

During the 17th century, silk production in Calabria begin to suffer by the strong competition of new-raising competitors in Italian Peninsula and Europe (France), but also the increasing import from Ottoman Empire and Persia.

Foundation of the historical Italo-Albanian College and Library in 1732 by Pope Clement XII transferred from San Benedetto Ullano to San Demetrio Corone in 1794.

In 1783, a series of earthquakes across Calabria caused around 50,000 deaths and much damage to property, so that many of the buildings in the region were rebuilt after this date.

At the end of the 18th century, the French took control and in 1808 Napoleon Bonaparte gave the Kingdom of Naples to his brother-in-law Joachim Murat. Murat controlled the kingdom until the return of the Bourbons in 1815. The population of Calabria in 1844 was 1,074,558.

Calabria experienced a series of peasant revolts as part of the European Revolutions of 1848. This set the stage for the eventual unification with the rest of Italy in 1861, when the Kingdom of Naples was brought into the union by Giuseppe Garibaldi. The unification was orchestrated by Great Britain in an attempt to nationalize the production of sulfur from the two volcanoes located in Naples and Sicily respectively. The Aspromonte was the scene of a famous battle of the unification of Italy. During the late 19th or early 20th century, pianist and composer Alfonso Rendano invented the &quot;Third Pedal&quot;, which augmented the interpretative resources of the piano.

The ancient Greek colonies from Naples and to the south, had been completely Latinized, but from the fifth century AD onward Greeks had once again emigrated there when pressed out of their homeland by invasions. This Greek Diaspora allowed the ancient Greek dialects to continue in southern Italy, much in the same way that the Italian Diaspora allowed long-lost dialects from Italy to thrive in countries where Italians emigrated to. Greek texts were also valued in monasteries and places of learning. However it was Charlemagne in the 8th century, who made Latin the &#x27;official&#x27; language of study and communication for Europe. For the sake of uniformity, he supplanted much of the Greek spoken, read or taught in Europe. It was through language (Latin) and education (Latin texts) that Charlemagne united Europe.

During the 13th century a French chronicler who traveled through Calabria stated that &quot;the peasants of Calabria spoke nothing but Greek&quot; given he had traveled to areas where Greek was still available. But the educated classes spoke Italian. Indeed, formal Italian has been taught in schools throughout Italy for nearly two centuries, causing the ancient languages and dialects to continually disappear, much to the chagrin of the cultural community. These lost dialects continue to thrive to this day in North America and Australia, places where Italians emigrated to, on account of the Diaspora.

===Modern era===
On 19 August 1860, Calabria was invaded from Sicily by Giuseppe Garibaldi and his Redshirts as part of the Expedition of the Thousand. Through King Francesco II of Naples had dispatched 16,000 soldiers to stop the Redshirts, who numbered about 3,500, after a token battle at Reggio Calabria won by the Redshirts, all resistance ceased and Garibaldi was welcomed as a liberator from the oppressive rule of the Bourbons wherever he went in Calabria. Calabria together with the rest of the Kingdom of Naples was incorporated in 1861 into the Kingdom of Italy. Garibaldi planned to complete the &quot;Risorgimento&quot; by invading Rome, still ruled by the pope protected by a French garrison, and began with semi-official encouragement to raise an army. Subsequently, King Victor Emmanuel II decided the possibility of war with France was too dangerous, and on 29 August 1862 Garibaldi&#x27;s base in the Calabrian town of Aspromonte was attacked by the &quot;Regio Esercito&quot;. The Battle of Aspromonte ended with the Redshirts defeated with several being executed after surrendering while Garibaldi was badly wounded.

In the newly unified Kingdom of Italy, there were significant differences in level of economic development between the &quot;Nord&quot; (north) of Italy and the &quot;Mezzogiorno&quot; (the south of Italy). Calabria together with the rest of the &quot;Mezzogiorno&quot; was neglected under the Kingdom of Italy with the general feeling in Rome being that the region was hopelessly backward and poor. In the late 19th century about 70% of the population of the &quot;Mezzogiorno&quot; were illiterate as the government never invested in education for the south. Owing to the Roman Question, until 1903 the Roman Catholic Church had prohibited on the pain of excommunication Catholic men from voting in Italian elections (Italian women were not granted the right to vote until 1946). As the devoutly Catholic population of Calabria tended to boycott elections, the deputies who were elected from the region were the products of the clientistic system, representing the interests of the land-owning aristocracy. In common with the deputies from other regions of the &quot;Mezzogiorno&quot;, they voted against more money for education under the grounds that an educated population would demand changes that would threaten the power of the traditional elite. Owing to a weak state, society in Calabria came to be dominated in the late 19th century by an organized crime group known as &#x27;Ndrangheta which, like the Mafia in Sicily and the Camorra in Campania, formed a &quot;parallel state&quot; that co-existed alongside the Italian state. Between 1901 and 1914 Calabrians began emigrating in large numbers, mostly for North America and South America, with the peak year being 1905 with 62,690. 

On 28 December 1908, Calabria together with Sicily was devastated by an earthquake and then by a tsunami caused by the earthquake, causing about 80,000 deaths. Within hours of the disaster, ships of the British and Russian navies had arrived on the coast to assist the survivors, but it took the &quot;Regia Marina&quot; two days to send a relief expedition from Naples. The bumbling and ineffectual response of the Italian authorities to the disaster caused by feuding officials who did not wish to co-operate with each other contributed to the high death toll as it took weeks for aid to reach some villages and caused much resentment in Calabria. To offset widespread criticism that the northern-dominated government in Rome did not care about the people of Calabria, King Victor Emmanuel III personally took over the relief operation and toured the destroyed villages of Calabria, which won the House of Savoy a measure of popularity in the region. Most notably, after the king took charge of the relief efforts, the feuding between officials ceased and relief aid was delivered with considerably more efficiency, winning Victor Emmanuel the gratitude of the Calabrians.  

Fascism was not popular in Calabria. In December 1924 when a false rumor spread in Reggio Calabria that Benito Mussolini had resigned as Prime Minister because of the Matteotti affair, joyous celebrations took place in the city that lasted all night. In the morning, the people of Reggio Calabria learned that Mussolini was still prime minister, but several Fascist officials were dismissed for not suppressing the celebrations. The landed aristocracy and gentry of Calabria, through generally not ideologically committed to Fascism, saw the Fascist regime as a force for order and social stability, and supported the dictatorship. Likewise, the prefects and the policemen of Calabria were conservatives who saw themselves as serving King Victor Emmanuel III first and Mussolini second, but supported Fascism as preferable to Socialism and Communism and persecuted anti-Fascists. Traditional elites in Calabria joined the Fascist Party to pursue their own interests, and local branches of Fascist Party were characterized by much jostling for power and influence between elite families. Under the Fascist regime, several concentration camps were built in Calabria and used to imprison foreigners whose presence in Italy was considered undesirable, such as Chinese immigrants and foreign Jews (though not Italian Jews) together with members of the Romani minority, whose nomadic lifestyle was viewed as anti-social. The camps which operated from 1938 to 1943 were not death camps, and the majority of those imprisoned survived, but conditions were harsh for the imprisoned.

On 3 September 1943, British and Canadian troops of the British 8th Army landed in Calabria in Operation Baytown, marking the first time that the Allies landed on the mainland of Italy. However, the landings in Calabria were a feint and the main Allied blow came on 8 September 1943 with the landing of the American 5th Army at Salerno in Campania that was intended to cut off Axis forces in the &quot;Mezzogiorno&quot;. The Germans anticipated that the Allies would land at Salerno, and as a consequence, there was relatively little fighting in Calabria. The Italian troops in Calabria mostly surrendered to the advancing 5th British Division and the 1st Canadian Division while there were relatively few German forces in the region to oppose their advance. The main obstacle to the advancing Anglo-Canadian troops turned out to be the trail of destruction left by German combat engineers who systematically blew up bridges and destroyed roads and railroads as the Wehrmacht retreated north. On the same day the Americans landed at Salerno, General Dwight Eisenhower announced on the radio the Armistice of Cassibile that had been signed on 3 September, and with the announcement of the armistice all Italian resistance ceased. The Germans committed most of their forces in the &quot;Mezzogiorno&quot; to the Battle of Salerno with the aim of driving the Allies back into the sea and pulled their remaining forces out of Calabria to send them to Salerno. Under the Allied occupation, some Fascists in Calabria waged a terrorist struggle on behalf of the Salo republic, though significantly many of the Fascists tended to be from well-off families concerned about the possibility of social reforms that might weaken their power and only a minority such as Prince Valerio Pignatelli were ideological Fascists. In June 1944, celebrations in Reggio Calabria over the news of the liberation of Rome were disturbed by local Fascists.  

The British historian Jonathan Dunnage wrote that there was an &quot;institutional continuity&quot; between the civil servants of the Liberal, Fascist and post-Fascist eras in Calabria as each change of regime saw the bureaucrats of the region adjust to whatever regime was in power in Rome and there was no purge of civil servants either after 1922 or 1943. The &quot;institutional continuity&quot; of the bureaucracy of Calabria were committed to preserving the social structure. On 2 June 1946 referendum Calabria, like the rest of the &quot;Mezzogiorno&quot;, voted solidly to retain the monarchy. The clientistic political system in Calabria under which elite families handed out patronage to their supporters and used violence against their opponents, which was the prevailing norm in the Liberal and Fascist eras continued after 1945. During the Second World War, the already low living standards of Calabria declined further and the region was notorious as one of the most violent and lawless areas of Italy. Attempts by the peasants of Calabria to take over the land owned by the elite were usually resisted by the authorities. On 28 October 1949 in Melissa the police opened fire on peasants who had seized the land of a local baron, killing three men who were shot in the back as they attempted to flee. Between 1949 and 1966 another wave of migration took place with the peak year of migration being 1957 with some 38, 090 Calabrians leaving that year.    

Under the First Republic, starting in the 1960s, investment plans were launched under which Italian state sponsored industrialisation and attempted to improve the infrastructure of Calabria by building modern roads, railroads, ports, etc. The plan was a notable failure with the infrastructure projects going wildly over-budget and taking far longer to complete then scheduled; for an example, construction started on the A3 highway in 1964 intended to link Reggio Calabria to Salerno, which was as of 2016 still unfinished. The failure to complete the A3 highway after 52 years of effort is regarded as a scandal in Italy, and many parts of Calabria were described as an &quot;industrial graveyard&quot; full of the closed down steel mills and chemical plants that all went bankrupt. From July 1970 to February 1971 the Reggio revolt took place as the decision to make Catanzaro instead of Reggio the regional capital prompted massive protests. The compromise decision to make Catanzaro the executive capital and Reggio the administrative capital has led to a bloated and inefficient administration. The high unemployment rate in Calabria has led to extensive migration and Calabria&#x27;s biggest export has been its own people as Calabrians have moved to either other parts of Italy and abroad, especially to the United States, Canada and Argentina, to seek a better life. In 2016, it was estimated that 18% of the people born in Calabria were living abroad.  

==Economy==
The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Calabria is subdivided as follows: service industry (28.94%), financial activities and real estate (21.09%), trade, tourism, transportation and communication (19.39%), taxation (11.49%), manufacturing (8.77%), construction (6.19%) and agriculture (4.13%). GDP per capita is 2.34 times less and unemployment is 4 times higher than in Lombardy. Calabria&#x27;s economy is still based mainly on agriculture.

The economy of the region is strongly affected by the presence of the &#x27;Ndrangheta (the local Mafia syndicate).

===Agriculture===

Calabria is agriculturally rich, with the Italy&#x27;s second highest number of organic farmers after Sicily.

The red onion of Tropea is cultivated during summer period on the Tyrrhenian coast of central Calabria. It has been awarded with the protected geographical indication (PGI).

The olive tree represents 29.6% of utilized agricultural area (UAA) and approximately 70% of tree crops. Olive tree cultivation extends from coastal lowland areas to hilly and lower mountainous areas.
The region is the second-highest for olive oil production with Carolea, Ogliarola, and Saracena olives as the main regional varieties.

In Calabria, there are 3 PDO oils: &quot;Bruzio&quot; in the province of Cosenza, &quot;Lametia&quot; in the area of Lamezia Terme and the more recent &quot;Alto Crotonese&quot;. In addition to DOP oils there are also PGI oils. The production area of &quot;Olio di Calabria&quot; PGI includes the entire territory of the Calabria region. The production is made exclusively from indigenous olives.

Calabria produces about a quarter of Italy&#x27;s citrus fruit. The contribution of this region to growing citrus fruit in Italy can be attributed mainly to clementines, oranges, mandarins and lemons. Calabria is by far the country&#x27;s most important clementine-growing region, which account for about 62% (16,164 ha) of the Italian surface dedicated to its cultivation and 69% (437,800 tons) of the total production. Clementina di Calabria is the PGI variety grown in the Calabria region. Also chinotto is cultivated and used to produce carbonated soft drink with the same name.

Minor fruits such as bergamot and citron and lemon-citron hybrids are found exclusively in Calabria. The south coast of the region produces 90% of the world&#x27;s bergamots, with a huge industry built around the extraction of bergamot oil. According to Harvard Atlas of Economic Complexity, last year with Italian net export of bergamot oil was 2009 in value of $253,000, after that between 2010 and 2018 was no export of it. The Bergamot orange has been intensively cultivated since the 18th century, but only in the coastal area nearby to Reggio, where geological and weather conditions are optimal. The Chabad Hasidic dynasty have a preference to take citrons (&quot;Etrog&quot;) from this region for the Sukkot festival.

There is special research Experimental Station for the Industry of the Essential oils and Citrus products in Reggio di Calabria.
The province of Cosenza represents an important area for figs growing belonging to cultivar &quot;Dottato&quot; that is used to produce the quality-branded dried figs &quot;Fichi di Cosenza&quot; PDO (protected designation of origin). The anona cherimoya, a plant of tropical origin cultivated in Europe only in Reggio di Calabria and Spain.

In the province of Catanzaro, between San Floro and Cortale, the ancient tradition of sericulture is still kept alive, thanks to young generations.

Calabria is the largest producer of porcini mushrooms in Italy, thanks to the heavily wooded forests of the mountains ranges of Pollino, Sila, Serre and Aspromonte. Chestnut production is also widespread in the Calabrian mountains. But not only porcini mushrooms, there is other popular red pine mushroom or rosito.

Peaches and nectarines from Calabria have greatly improved in terms of flavour, quality, safety and service. A part of the production is sold on the domestic market, mainly to retailers. The remaining is exported to Northern Europe, mainly Scandinavia and Germany.

The region boasts a very ancient tradition in the cultivation and production of liquorice. The eighty percent of the national production is concentrated in this region.

Calabria has long coast and produce some distinctive fish products:
===Manufacturing===
Food and textile industries are the most developed and vibrant. Within the industrial sector, manufacturing contributes to a gross value added of 7.2%. In the manufacturing sector the main branches are foodstuff, beverage and tobacco with a contribution to the sector very close to the national average.
Over the recent decades some petrochemical, engineering and chemical industries have emerged, within the areas of Crotone, Vibo Valentia and Reggio Calabria.

The province of Catanzaro boasts a great tradition in the textile manufacturing, especially silk. Recently, several young people have given new life to this activity, developing green and sustainable economy projects. In fact, among the municipalities of Girifalco, San Floro and Cortale, sericulture is still practiced, the breeding of silkworms combined with the cultivation of mulberry trees.

Tiriolo and Badolato are known above all for the manufacturing of the &quot;vancale&quot;, the typical Calabrian shawl, made of wool or silk, worn by women in ancient times on traditional costumes during the dance of tarantella, or as an ornamental decoration of the houses.
Typical in Tiriolo is also the manufacturing of carpets, linen and broom fibers, bobbin lace making, embroidery, precious ceramics, furnishing objects and artistic sculptures. The artistic production of weaving is also active in other centers such as in Platania and Petrizzi where once hemp fibers were also produced.

In Soveria Mannelli, Lanificio Leo, the oldest textile factory in Calabria founded in 1873, is still active. The factory still retains majestic and evocative tools dating back to the late nineteenth century.

The traditional production of artistic ceramics dating back to the Magna Graecia period is handed down in the ancient towns of Squillace and Seminara.

The small town of Serrastretta, a green village in the woods of Presila, is known for its wood production, in particular for its chairs characterized by a very original straw.

There is a plant of Hitachi Rail Italy in Reggio di Calabria, which manufactures railcars of regional trains such as Vivalto.

===Tourism===


Tourism in Calabria has increased over the years. The main tourist attractions are the coastline and the mountains. The coastline alternates between rugged cliffs and sandy beaches, and is sparsely interrupted by development when compared to other European seaside destinations. The sea around Calabria is clear, and there is a good level of tourist accommodation. The poet Gabriele D&#x27;Annunzio called the coast facing Sicily near Reggio Calabria &quot;... the most beautiful kilometer in Italy&quot; (&quot;il più bel chilometro d&#x27;Italia&quot;). The primary mountain tourist draws are Aspromonte and La Sila, with its national park and lakes. Some other prominent destinations include:
*Reggio Calabria is on the strait between the mainland and Sicily, the largest and oldest city in Calabria dating from the 8th century BC, known for its panoramic seaside with botanical gardens between the art nouveau buildings and the beaches, and its 3,000 years of history with its Aragonese Castle and the Museo Nazionale della Magna Grecia where the Riace bronzes (&quot;Bronzi di Riace&quot;) are located.
*Cosenza, birthplace of scientist and philosopher Bernardino Telesio and seat of the Cosentian Academy, known for its cultural institutions, the old quarter, a Hohenstaufen Castle, an open-air museum and an 11th-century Romanesque-Gothic Cathedral. On 12 October 2011, the Cathedral of Cosenza received UNESCO World Heritage status for being &quot;Heritage Witness to a Culture of Peace&quot;. This is the first award given by UNESCO to the region of Calabria.
*Scilla, on the Tyrrhenian Sea, &quot;pearl&quot; of the &quot;Violet Coast&quot;, has a delightful panorama and is the site of some of Homer&#x27;s tales.
*Tropea, on the Tyrrhenian Sea coast, is home to a dramatic seaside beach, and the Santa Maria dell&#x27;Isola sanctuary. It is also renowned for its sweet red onions (mainly produced in Ricadi).
*Capo Vaticano, on the Tyrrhenian Sea, is a wide bathing place near Tropea.
*Gerace, near Locri, is a medieval city with a Norman Castle and Norman Cathedral.
*Squillace, a seaside resort and important archaeological site. Nearby is the birthplace of Cassiodorus.
*Stilo, the birthplace of philosopher Tommaso Campanella, with its Norman Castle and Byzantine church, the &quot;Cattolica&quot;.
*Pizzo Calabro, on the Tyrrhenian Sea coast, known for its ice cream called &quot;Tartufo&quot;. Interesting places in Pizzo are Piazza Repubblica and the Aragonese castle where Murat was shot.
*Paola, a town situated on the Tyrrhenian Sea coast, renowned for being the birthplace of St. Francis of Paola, patron saint of Calabria and Italian sailors, and for the old Franciscan sanctuary built during the last hundred years of the Middle Ages by the will of St. Francis.
*Sibari, on the Ionian coast, a village situated near the archaeological site of the ancient city of &quot;Sybaris&quot;, a Greek colony of the 8th century BC.
*Lamezia Terme, the main transportation hub of the region with its international airport which links it to many destinations in Europe plus Canada and Israel and the train station. Several are the historical sights of the city, like the Norman-Swabian castle, the Jewish historical quarter and the Casa del Libro Antico (House of the Ancient Book) where books from the 16th to the 19th centuries, as well as old globes and ancient maps reproduction are well preserved and available to be seen by the public.
*Catanzaro, an important silk center since the time of the Byzantines, is located at the center of the narrowest point of Italy, from where the Ionian Sea and Tyrrhenian Sea are both visible, but not from Catanzaro. Of note are the well-known one-arch bridge (Viaduct Morandi-Bisantis, one of the tallest in Europe), the cathedral (rebuilt after World War II bombing), the castle, the promenade on the Ionian sea, the park of biodiversity and the archaeological park.
*Soverato on the Ionian Sea, also known as the &quot;Pearl&quot; of the Ionian Sea. Especially renowned for its beaches, boardwalk and nightlife.
*Badolato near Soverato is a well-preserved medieval hilltop village with 13 churches. It was selected as one of the 1000 marvels of Italy to mark the anniversary of the unification of Italy.
*Nicotera on the Tyrrhenian Sea, is a small medieval town with an ancient Ruffo&#x27;s castle.
*Ancient temples of the Roman gods on the sun-kissed hills of Catanzaro still stand as others are swept beneath the earth. Many excavations are going on along the east coast, digging up what seems to be an ancient burial ground.
*Samo, a village on the foot of the Aspromonte, is well known for its spring water and ruins of the old village destroyed in the 1908 Messina earthquake.
*Mammola, art center, tourist and gastronomic, has an ancient history. The old town, with its small houses attached to each other, the ancient churches and noble palaces. Of particular interest is the Museum Park Santa Barbara, a place of art and cultural events of many international artists and the Shrine of St. Nicodemo of the 10th century, in the highlands of Limina. Its gastronomy with the &quot;Stocco&quot; typical of Mammola, cooked in various ways, other typical products are smoked ricotta and goat cheese, salami pepper and wild fennel, bread &quot;pizza&quot; (corn bread) and wheat bread baked in a wood oven.
*Praia a Mare on the Tyrrhenian Sea, is a well-known tourist city, thanks to the Isola di Dino and the seaside beach.
*Spilinga is known for its spicy pork pâté, &#x27;Nduja.

Calabria attracts year-round tourism, offering both summer and winter activities, in addition to its cultural, historical, artistic heritage, it has an abundance of protected natural habitats and &#x27;green&#x27; zones. The of its coast make Calabria a tourist destination during the summer. The low industrial development and the lack of major cities in much of its territory have allowed the maintenance of indigenous marine life.

The most sought-after seaside destinations are: Tropea, Pizzo Calabro, Capo Vaticano, Reggio Calabria, Soverato, Scilla, Scalea, Sellia Marina, Montepaone, Montauro, Copanello (&quot;comune&quot; of Staletti), Tonnara di Palmi, Diamante, Paola, Fiumefreddo Bruzio, Amantea, Praia a Mare, Belvedere Marittimo, Roseto Capo Spulico, Corigliano Calabro, Cirò Marina, Amendolara, Roccella Ionica, Bagnara Calabra, Nicotera, Cariati, Zambrone, Isola di Capo Rizzuto, Caminia (&quot;comune&quot; of Staletti), Siderno, Parghelia, Ricadi and San Nicola Arcella.

In addition to the coastal tourist destinations, the interior of Calabria is rich in history, traditions, art and culture. Cosenza is among the most important cultural cities of Calabria, with a rich historical and artistic patrimony. Medieval castles, towers, churches, monasteries and other French castles and structures from the Norman to the Aragonese periods are common elements in both the interior and coastline of Calabria.

The mountains offer skiing and other winter activities: Sila, Pollino and Aspromonte are three national parks that offer facilities for winter sports, especially in the towns of Camigliatello (&quot;comune&quot; of Spezzano della Sila), Lorica (&quot;comune&quot; of San Giovanni in Fiore), Gambarie.

Calabria has many small and picturesque villages, 15 of them have been selected by (), a non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest, that was founded on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities.

===Unemployment rate===
The unemployment rate stood at 20.1% in 2020 and was the highest in Italy and one of the highest inside the European Union.
==Infrastructure and transport==

===Motorways and rail===

The region is served by three heavily used roads: two national highways along the coasts (the SS18 between Naples and Reggio Calabria and the SS106 between Reggio Calabria and Taranto) and the A2 motorway, which links Salerno to Reggio Calabria, passing by Cosenza along the old inland route. Building this motorway took 55 years and was extremely over budget due to organized crime infiltration.

The main road infrastructures can be classified into two separate groups, the first including the road infrastructures that cross the whole of Calabria from north to south:
The second group includes the roads, which run through the region from the Tyrrhenian coast to the Ionian coast (west-east) .

There is high-speed rail on Calabria&#x27;s Tyrrhenian Coast with the Frecciargento (Silver Arrow) offering a route from Rome to Reggio Calabria. There are also many ferries connecting Calabria with Sicily through the Strait of Sicily with the main one being from Villa San Giovanni to Messina.

===Shipping and ports===

The main Calabrian ports are in Gioia Tauro and in Reggio Calabria. 

The port of Gioia Tauro has seven loading docks with an extension of ; it is the largest in Italy and the eighth largest container port in Europe, with a 2018 throughput of s from more than 3,000 ships. In a 2006 report, Italian investigators estimated that 80% of Europe&#x27;s cocaine arrived from Colombia via Gioia Tauro&#x27;s docks. The port is also involved in the illegal arms trafficking. These activities are controlled by the &quot;&#x27;Ndrangheta&quot; criminal syndicate.

The port of Reggio is equipped with five loading docks of a length of .

Other ports:
*Port of Vibo Valentia
*Port of Villa San Giovanni
*Port of Corigliano Calabro
*Port of Crotone

===Air travel===
*Lamezia Terme International Airport,currently the first airport in Calabria for number of passengers per year.
*Reggio Calabria Airport,few kilometres from Reggio Calabria&#x27;s city center, built in 1939 was Calabria&#x27;s first airport.
*Crotone Airport

===Bridges===
Calabria has the two highest bridges in Italy:
*Italia Viaduct
*Sfalassa Viaduct (also the highest and longest span frame bridge in the world)

===Planned bridge===


Plans for a bridge linking Sicily to Calabria have been discussed since 1865. Throughout the last decade, plans were developed for a road and rail link to the mainland via what would be the world&#x27;s longest suspension bridge, the Strait of Messina Bridge. Planning for the project has experienced several false starts over the past few decades. On 6 March 2009, Silvio Berlusconi&#x27;s government declared that the construction works for the Messina Bridge would begin on 23 December 2009, and announced a pledge of €1.3 billion as a contribution to the bridge&#x27;s total cost, estimated at €6.1 billion.
The plan has been criticized by environmental associations and some local Sicilians and Calabrians, concerned with its environmental impact, economic sustainability and even possible infiltrations by organized crime.

==Demographics==
The following is a list of Calabrian municipalities with a population of over 20,000:
# Reggio Calabria – 186,013
# Catanzaro – 93,265
# Corigliano-Rossano – 77,220
# Lamezia Terme – 71,123
# Cosenza – 69,827
# Crotone – 61,529
# Rende – 35,352
# Vibo Valentia – 33,857
# Castrovillari – 22,518
# Acri – 21,263
# Montalto Uffugo – 20,553

==Government and politics==
===Sister jurisdictions===
* Burwood, Australia.
* State of West Virginia, United States.

==Administrative divisions==

Calabria is divided into five provinces:

==Language==

Although the official national language of Calabria has been Standard Italian since before unification in 1861, Calabria has dialects that have been spoken in the region for centuries. The Calabrian language is a direct derivative of Latin. Most linguists divide the various dialects into two different language groups. In the northern area of the region, the Calabrian dialects are considered part of the Neapolitan language and are grouped as Northern Calabrian. In the rest of the region, the Calabrian dialects are often grouped as Central and Southern Calabrian, and are considered part of the Sicilian language. However, in Guardia Piemontese, as well as some quarters of Reggio Calabria, a variety of Occitan called Gardiol can also be found. In addition, since Calabria was once ruled by the French and Spanish, some Calabrian dialects exhibit Spanish and French influences.
Another important linguistic minority, in the nine towns of Bovesìa in the province of Reggio Calabria, speaks a derivative of ancient Greek called Grecanico, a remnant of Byzantine rule and ancient Magna Graecia.

===Religion===
The majority of Calabrians are Roman Catholic. Historically, Calabrians were Greek Orthodox, and in 732 the dioceses of southern Italy were even moved to the jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople. There are also communities of Evangelicals in the region. Calabria has also been called &quot;The Land of Saints&quot; as the region was the birthplace of many saints spanning nearly 2,000 years. The most famous saint in Calabria and also the patron saint of the region is St. Francis of Paola. Calabria also has another patron saint called Saint Bruno of Cologne who was the founder of the Carthusian Order. Saint Bruno would build the charterhouse of Serra San Bruno, a town which bears his name, in 1095 and later die there in 1101.

Even though it is currently a very small community, there has been a long history of the presence of Jews in Calabria. The Jews have had a presence in the region for at least 1600 years and possibly as much as 2300 years. Calabrian Jews have had notably influence on many areas of Jewish life and culture. Although virtually identical to the Jews of Sicily, the Jews of Calabria are considered a distinct Jewish population due to historical and geographic considerations. There is a small community of Italian Anusim who have resumed the Jewish faith.

It is important to highlight the presence of Calabrians in Renaissance humanism and in the Renaissance. Indeed, the Hellenistics in this period frequently came from Calabria maybe because of the Greek influence. The rediscovery of Ancient Greek was very difficult because this language had been almost forgotten. In this period the presence of Calabrian humanists or refugees from Constantinople was fundamental. The study of Ancient Greek, in this period, was mainly a work of two monks of the monastery of Seminara: Barlaam, bishop of Gerace, and his disciple, Leonzio Pilato. Leonzio Pilato, in particular, was a Calabrian born near Reggio Calabria. He was an important teacher of Ancient Greek and translator, and he helped Giovanni Boccaccio in the translations of Homer&#x27;s works.

==Cuisine==
The cuisine is a typical southern Italian Mediterranean cuisine with a balance between meat-based dishes (pork, lamb, goat), vegetables (especially eggplant), and fish. Pasta (as in central Italy and the rest of southern Italy) is also very important in Calabria. In contrast to most other Italian regions, Calabrians have traditionally placed an emphasis on the preservation of their food and packing vegetables and meats in olive oil, and on making sausages and cold cuts (&quot;soppressata&quot;, &#x27;nduja, &quot;capocollo&quot;). Along the coast fish is cured, especially swordfish, sardines (&quot;sardelle rosamarina&quot;) and cod (&quot;baccalà&quot;). Local desserts are typically fried, honey-sweetened pastries such as &quot;cudduraci&quot;, nacatole, &quot;scalille&quot; or &quot;scalidde&quot;, or baked biscotti-type treats such as &quot;nzudda&quot;.

Some local specialties include &quot;caciocavallo&quot; cheese, &quot;cipolla rossa di Tropea&quot; (red onion), &quot;frìttuli&quot; and &quot;curcùci&quot; (fried pork), liquorice (&quot;liquirizia&quot;), &quot;lagane e cicciari&quot; (a pasta dish with chickpeas),&quot; pecorino crotonese&quot; (sheep cheese), and &quot;pignolata&quot;.

In ancient times Calabria was referred to as &quot;Enotria&quot; (from Ancient Greek , &#x27;, &#x27;land of wine&#x27;). According to ancient Greek tradition, (&#x27;), the youngest of the sons of Lycaon, was the eponym of Oenotria. Some vineyards have origins dating back to the ancient Greek colonists. The best known DOC wines are Cirò (province of Crotone) and Donnici (province of Cosenza). 3% of the total annual production qualifies as DOC. Important grape varieties are the red Gaglioppo and white Greco. Many producers are resurrecting local, ancient grape varieties which have been around for as long as 3000 years.

==Sport==

The most popular sport in Calabria is football. In the 2023–24 Serie B season, Calabria hosts 2 out of 20 teams: Cosenza Calcio and Catanzaro. Other big teams of the region are Crotone and Vibonese, who are playing in the 2023–24 Serie C.

Viola Reggio Calabria is an Italian professional basketball club based in Reggio Calabria, Calabria.

==Universities==
There are 3 public universities in the region of Calabria
*University of Calabria (Cosenza)
*Magna Graecia University (Catanzaro)
*Mediterranea University of Reggio Calabria

There is also the private University for Foreigners &quot;Dante Alighieri&quot; in Reggio Calabria.

==Health==

The health service in Calabria is organized into four main public hospitals and thirty secondary ones, and there are numerous private hospital facilities. Because of their debts, since 2009 they were administered by an extraordinary commissioner. It has been seen as an unavoidable step to return to an ordinary and cost-effective administration at a regional level, as it is provided by the Italian Constitution.

The four main public hospitals are

*Azienda Ospedaliera &quot;Pugliese-Ciaccio&quot;, Catanzaro
*Azienda Ospedaliera &quot;Mater Domini&quot;, Catanzaro
*Azienda Ospedaliera di Cosenza, Cosenza
*Ospedali Riuniti di Reggio Calabria, Reggio Calabria

==Notable people==
==See also==
* 1783 Calabrian earthquakes
* 1905 Calabria earthquake
* 1908 Messina earthquake
* Arbëreshë people
* Duke of Calabria
* Bruttians
* Grecanici
* Magna Graecia
* Oenotrians
* Strait of Messina Bridge
* Theme of Sicily
* &#x27;Ndrangheta

==Notes==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* 
==Further reading==
*Dal Lago, Enrico, and Rick Halpern, eds. &quot;The American South and the Italian Mezzogiorno: Essays in Comparative History&quot; (2002) 
*Dunston, Lara, and Terry Carter. &quot;Travellers Calabria&quot; (Travellers – Thomas Cook) (2009), guidebook
*Moe, Nelson. &quot;The View from Vesuvius: Italian Culture and the Southern Question&quot; (2002)
*Schneider, Jane. &quot;Italy&#x27;s &#x27;Southern Question&#x27;: Orientalism in One Country&quot; (1998)

==External links==
* Calabria Region</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="0" end="8" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="14" end="20" title="Regions of Italy" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="24" end="38" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="70" end="80" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="99" end="109" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="127" end="144" title="Strait of Messina" label="Strait of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="187" end="193" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="203" end="217" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="290" end="299" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121889" start="365" end="378" title="name of Italy" label="name of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="399" end="413" title="Ancient Greeks" label="Ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25346" start="457" end="471" title="8th century BC" label="8th century BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="532" end="546" title="Greek colonisation" label="Greek colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="593" end="606" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="647" end="657" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="659" end="668" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q338948" start="673" end="677" title="Milo of Croton" label="Milo"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="769" end="783" title="Roman Italy" label="Augustan Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q477973" start="795" end="805" title="Gothic War (535–554)" label="Gothic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="851" end="860" title="Byzantine empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149548" start="892" end="897" title="Culture of Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q674824" start="909" end="919" title="Cenobitism" label="Cenobitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q948392" start="1029" end="1043" title="Basilian monks" label="Basilian monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="1114" end="1118" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1176" end="1182" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q74011" start="1209" end="1224" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609155" start="1338" end="1347" title="Griko people" label="Grecanici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146398" start="1358" end="1373" title="Calabrian Greek" label="Calabrian Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q56975" start="1379" end="1395" title="Arbëreshë people" label="Arbëreshë people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573554" start="1405" end="1413" title="Occitans" label="Occitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q53888" start="1417" end="1435" title="Guardia Piemontese" label="Guardia Piemontese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072838" start="1726" end="1747" title="Pollino National Park" label="Pollino National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091298" start="1785" end="1803" title="Sila National Park" label="Sila National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q778921" start="1812" end="1836" title="Aspromonte National Park" label="Aspromonte National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="1967" end="1974" title="Salento" label="Salento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="1995" end="2001" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2098" end="2103" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2112" end="2120" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q994847" start="2315" end="2324" title="Bruttians" label="Bruttians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2388" end="2404" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="2460" end="2466" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="2550" end="2558" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722978" start="2903" end="2909" title="Italus" label="Italus"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="3228" end="3245" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="3527" end="3533" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="3538" end="3548" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="3576" end="3582" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="3590" end="3607" title="Strait of Messina" label="Strait of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257429" start="3643" end="3654" title="Capo Peloro" label="Capo Peloro"/>
<link wikidata="Q608369" start="3669" end="3680" title="Punta Pezzo" label="Punta Pezzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088265" start="3739" end="3746" title="Pollino" label="Pollino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088296" start="3748" end="3755" title="La Sila" label="La Sila"/>
<link wikidata="Q303853" start="3761" end="3771" title="Aspromonte" label="Aspromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088265" start="3812" end="3829" title="Pollino Mountains" label="Pollino Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q460531" start="4079" end="4091" title="Bosnian Pine" label="Bosnian Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072838" start="4124" end="4145" title="Pollino National Park" label="Pollino National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088296" start="4230" end="4237" title="La Sila" label="La Sila"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="4342" end="4357" title="above sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861251" start="4440" end="4452" title="Botte Donato" label="Botte Donato"/>
<link wikidata="Q303853" start="4742" end="4752" title="Aspromonte" label="Aspromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="5148" end="5167" title="prickly pear cactus" label="prickly pear cactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270651" start="5253" end="5268" title="Diamante citron" label="Diamante citron"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="5491" end="5512" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="6646" end="6656" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="6684" end="6690" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q599804" start="6710" end="6730" title="Peloritani" label="Peloritano Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="6778" end="6784" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="6801" end="6808" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="6901" end="6910" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="6955" end="6962" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="7083" end="7092" title="Apennines" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7110" end="7121" title="Maghrebides" label="Maghrebides"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="7128" end="7135" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="7549" end="7555" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="7587" end="7595" title="Adriatic" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13674" start="7611" end="7617" title="Ragusa, Italy" label="Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7621" end="7627" title="Iblean" label="Iblean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7719" end="7731" title="Ionian Basin" label="Ionian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="7737" end="7747" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q798367" start="7783" end="7797" title="back-arc basin" label="back-arc basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="7804" end="7814" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="8348" end="8354" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="8369" end="8376" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="8392" end="8403" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="8795" end="8807" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="8870" end="8881" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8924" end="8939" title="Romito Cave#Rock engravings" label="Bos Primigenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q750837" start="9021" end="9032" title="Romito Cave" label="Romito Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q53929" start="9048" end="9058" title="Papasidero" label="Papasidero"/>
<link wikidata="Q922562" start="9193" end="9200" title="Oenotrians" label="Oenotri"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="9288" end="9294" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715690" start="9337" end="9345" title="Oenotrus" label="Oenotrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54512" start="9594" end="9604" title="Pallagorio" label="Pallagorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13619" start="9617" end="9624" title="Cosenza" label="Cosenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q53827" start="9638" end="9645" title="Amantea" label="Amantea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439652" start="9648" end="9657" title="Scyllaeum" label="Scyllaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q157238" start="9659" end="9665" title="Scilla" label="Scilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q220583" start="9668" end="9675" title="Sybaris" label="Sybaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506929" start="9677" end="9683" title="Sibari" label="Sibari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13625" start="9686" end="9695" title="Hipponion" label="Hipponion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13625" start="9697" end="9710" title="Vibo Valentia" label="Vibo Valentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836325" start="9713" end="9730" title="Locri Epizephyrii" label="Locri Epizephyrii"/>
<link wikidata="Q54619" start="9732" end="9737" title="Locri" label="Locri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292498" start="9740" end="9746" title="Kaulon" label="Kaulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54628" start="9748" end="9759" title="Monasterace" label="Monasterace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817001" start="9762" end="9769" title="Krimisa" label="Krimisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q54502" start="9771" end="9782" title="Cirò Marina" label="Cirò Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681" start="9785" end="9791" title="Crotone" label="Kroton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681" start="9793" end="9800" title="Crotone" label="Crotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805723" start="9803" end="9807" title="Laüs" label="Laüs"/>
<link wikidata="Q53990" start="9831" end="9852" title="Santa Maria del Cedro" label="Santa Maria del Cedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q611318" start="9855" end="9860" title="Medma" label="Medma"/>
<link wikidata="Q54644" start="9862" end="9869" title="Rosarno" label="Rosarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q11936633" start="9872" end="9880" title="Metauros" label="Metauros"/>
<link wikidata="Q54614" start="9882" end="9893" title="Gioia Tauro" label="Gioia Tauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900811" start="9896" end="9903" title="Petelia" label="Petelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54522" start="9905" end="9914" title="Strongoli" label="Strongoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="9917" end="9924" title="Rhegion" label="Rhégion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="9926" end="9941" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084264" start="9944" end="9954" title="Scylletium" label="Scylletium"/>
<link wikidata="Q53497" start="9956" end="9962" title="Borgia, Calabria" label="Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983093" start="9965" end="9971" title="Temesa (ancient city)" label="Temesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37672" start="9973" end="9993" title="Campora San Giovanni" label="Campora San Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518014" start="9996" end="10002" title="Terina (ancient city)" label="Terina"/>
<link wikidata="Q53659" start="10004" end="10019" title="Nocera Terinese" label="Nocera Terinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655702" start="10022" end="10030" title="Pandosia (Bruttium)" label="Pandosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53819" start="10032" end="10036" title="Acri" label="Acri"/>
<link wikidata="Q602564" start="10042" end="10048" title="Thurii" label="Thurii"/>
<link wikidata="Q53870" start="10081" end="10099" title="Corigliano Calabro" label="Corigliano Calabro"/>
<link wikidata="Q890347" start="10150" end="10166" title="nine lyric poets" label="nine lyric poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q332802" start="10168" end="10174" title="Ibycus" label="Ibycus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332797" start="10219" end="10230" title="Stesichorus" label="Stesichorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q338948" start="10406" end="10420" title="Milo of Croton" label="Milo of Croton"/>
<link wikidata="Q705166" start="10601" end="10618" title="Astylos of Croton" label="Astylos of Croton"/>
<link wikidata="Q188332" start="10683" end="10701" title="Alcmaeon of Croton" label="Alcmaeon of Croton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="10743" end="10753" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q220583" start="10905" end="10912" title="Sybaris" label="Sybaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q220583" start="10960" end="10969" title="Sybaris" label="Sybarites"/>
<link wikidata="Q329967" start="11028" end="11035" title="Paestum" label="Paestum"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="11053" end="11063" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805723" start="11083" end="11087" title="Laüs" label="Laüs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433442" start="11121" end="11128" title="Scidrus" label="Scidrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192738" start="11159" end="11174" title="Gulf of Taranto" label="Gulf of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q54619" start="11177" end="11182" title="Locri" label="Locri"/>
<link wikidata="Q145090" start="11221" end="11229" title="Zaleucus" label="Zaleucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q559151" start="11347" end="11353" title="Nossis" label="Nossis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131978" start="11414" end="11421" title="Lucania" label="Lucania"/>
<link wikidata="Q602564" start="11553" end="11561" title="Thurii" label="Thurians"/>
<link wikidata="Q994847" start="11607" end="11614" title="Bruttii" label="Bruttii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518014" start="11719" end="11725" title="Terina (ancient city)" label="Terina"/>
<link wikidata="Q335658" start="11777" end="11796" title="Alexander I of Epirus" label="Alexander of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="11837" end="11845" title="Taranto" label="Tarentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="11850" end="11856" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312326" start="11914" end="11936" title="Agathocles of Syracuse" label="Agathocles of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="13250" end="13258" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525841" start="13269" end="13274" title="Hanno, son of Bomilcar" label="Hanno"/>
<link wikidata="Q58477" start="13333" end="13338" title="Capua" label="Capua"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="14268" end="14275" title="Salento" label="Salento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="14296" end="14302" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="14399" end="14404" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="14413" end="14421" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13619" start="14675" end="14682" title="Cosenza" label="Cosenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q583038" start="14971" end="14990" title="Ostrogothic Kingdom" label="Ostrogothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q192365" start="15379" end="15390" title="Cassiodorus" label="Cassiodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="15732" end="15750" title="Arian Christianity" label="Arian Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q902445" start="15854" end="15874" title="Vivarium (monastery)" label="Vivarium (monastery)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140213" start="16131" end="16145" title="Codex Grandior" label="Codex Grandior"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="17180" end="17189" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="17317" end="17325" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q54680" start="17528" end="17533" title="Stilo" label="Stilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q53952" start="17538" end="17545" title="Rossano" label="Rossano"/>
<link wikidata="Q53961" start="17550" end="17569" title="San Demetrio Corone" label="San Demetrio Corone"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="17958" end="17965" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q171807" start="18135" end="18152" title="Nilus the Younger" label="Nilus the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="18307" end="18314" title="Saracen" label="Saracen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="18430" end="18435" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="18464" end="18473" title="Emirate of Sicily" label="in Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="18771" end="18777" title="Reggio di Calabria" label="Reggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="19007" end="19013" title="Citrus" label="Citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540" start="19025" end="19033" title="eggplant" label="eggplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="19322" end="19336" title="Morus (plant)" label="mulberry trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="19671" end="19679" title="Saracens" label="Saracens"/>
<link wikidata="Q189898" start="19696" end="19703" title="emirate" label="emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="20002" end="20009" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q203792" start="20035" end="20050" title="Robert Guiscard" label="Robert Guiscard"/>
<link wikidata="Q315297" start="20067" end="20084" title="Roger I of Sicily" label="Roger I of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695" start="20117" end="20127" title="Marches" label="borderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83224" start="20386" end="20408" title="The Battle of Hastings" label="The Battle of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q220806" start="20893" end="20901" title="Bohemond I of Antioch" label="Bohemond"/>
<link wikidata="Q53974" start="20919" end="20938" title="San Marco Argentano" label="San Marco Argentano"/>
<link wikidata="Q542830" start="21016" end="21030" title="Via Francigena" label="Via Francigena"/>
<link wikidata="Q315297" start="21224" end="21241" title="Roger I of Sicily" label="Roger I of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q30578" start="21293" end="21306" title="Pope Urban II" label="Pope Urban II"/>
<link wikidata="Q193901" start="21316" end="21334" title="Roger II of Sicily" label="Roger II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q842151" start="21358" end="21372" title="List of monarchs of Sicily" label="King of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="21406" end="21423" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="21698" end="21705" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="21710" end="21716" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="21924" end="21936" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q170335" start="22011" end="22037" title="Constance I of Sicily" label="Constance, Queen of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="22284" end="22307" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Capetian House of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="22327" end="22342" title="Charles I of Naples" label="Charles d’Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q172928" start="22400" end="22415" title="Pope Clement IV" label="Pope Clement IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="22495" end="22512" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q207327" start="22603" end="22619" title="Sicilian Vespers" label="Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q384263" start="22659" end="22678" title="Barlaam of Seminara" label="Barlaam of Seminara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="22692" end="22700" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248865" start="22739" end="22753" title="Leonzio Pilato" label="Leonzio Pilato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="22798" end="22816" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="22844" end="22852" title="mulberry" label="mulberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="22879" end="22893" title="northern Italy" label="northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="23194" end="23201" title="Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="23299" end="23308" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="23387" end="23395" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="23397" end="23404" title="Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="23406" end="23416" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="23573" end="23580" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="23710" end="23719" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="23795" end="23801" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q312304" start="23939" end="23958" title="Alfonso V of Aragon" label="Alfonso V of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="23986" end="24001" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="24046" end="24068" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="24536" end="24554" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q436097" start="24594" end="24605" title="Luigi Lilio" label="Luigi Lilio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058" start="24622" end="24630" title="Louis XI" label="Louis XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="24678" end="24682" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369967" start="24989" end="24997" title="Jacquard machine" label="Jacquard"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="25161" end="25179" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="25235" end="25244" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q173056" start="25523" end="25527" title="loom" label="loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="25673" end="25682" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="25709" end="25716" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q457986" start="26098" end="26116" title="Bernardino Telesio" label="Bernardino Telesio"/>
<link wikidata="Q191850" start="26383" end="26401" title="Tommaso Campanella" label="Tommaso Campanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q913656" start="26436" end="26455" title="The City of the Sun" label="The City of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q605144" start="26655" end="26668" title="Antonio Serra" label="Antonio Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q133108" start="27094" end="27110" title="Pope Clement XII" label="Pope Clement XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q53961" start="27152" end="27171" title="San Demetrio Corone" label="San Demetrio Corone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348869" start="27203" end="27230" title="1783 Calabrian earthquakes" label="earthquakes across Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="27499" end="27512" title="Joachim Murat" label="Joachim Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="27709" end="27728" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="27819" end="27836" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="27867" end="27885" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q303853" start="28061" end="28071" title="Aspromonte" label="Aspromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q955152" start="28199" end="28214" title="Alfonso Rendano" label="Alfonso Rendano"/>
<link wikidata="Q747008" start="28390" end="28399" title="Latinization (historical)" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="28831" end="28842" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="29735" end="29743" title="Diaspora" label="Diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="29818" end="29836" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="29870" end="29896" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q303853" start="30683" end="30693" title="Aspromonte" label="Aspromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118637" start="30746" end="30766" title="Battle of Aspromonte" label="Battle of Aspromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351925" start="31458" end="31472" title="Roman Question" label="Roman Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q425698" start="32265" end="32281" title="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta" label="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348910" start="32653" end="32685" title="1908 Messina earthquake" label="earthquake and then by a tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994501" start="32784" end="32791" title="British Natives" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="33357" end="33376" title="Victor Emmanuel III" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="33842" end="33857" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="33863" end="33879" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="35046" end="35050" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605053" start="35063" end="35075" title="Italian Jews" label="Italian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="35106" end="35112" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="35366" end="35374" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572890" start="35428" end="35445" title="Operation Baytown" label="Operation Baytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="35661" end="35668" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="36383" end="36400" title="Dwight Eisenhower" label="Dwight Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="36428" end="36450" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Armistice of Cassibile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866231" start="39556" end="39569" title="Reggio revolt" label="Reggio revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="40581" end="40589" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q425698" start="40724" end="40740" title="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta" label="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18550" start="40752" end="40757" title="Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="40870" end="40882" title="organic farm" label="organic farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="40892" end="40898" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q622350" start="40905" end="40914" title="red onion" label="red onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q54747" start="40918" end="40924" title="Tropea" label="Tropea"/>
<link wikidata="Q363268" start="41034" end="41067" title="protected geographical indication" label="protected geographical indication"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="41080" end="41090" title="olive tree" label="olive tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="41314" end="41323" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="41438" end="41441" title="Protected designation of origin" label="PDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q13619" start="41486" end="41493" title="Cosenza" label="Cosenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q53643" start="41530" end="41543" title="Lamezia Terme" label="Lamezia Terme"/>
<link wikidata="Q363268" start="41631" end="41634" title="Protected geographical indication" label="PGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="41861" end="41873" title="citrus fruit" label="citrus fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q460517" start="41968" end="41978" title="clementine" label="clementine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="41981" end="41988" title="orange (fruit)" label="oranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q125337" start="41990" end="41999" title="mandarin orange" label="mandarins"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="42004" end="42009" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074438" start="42309" end="42317" title="Citrus myrtifolia" label="chinotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="42352" end="42373" title="carbonated soft drink" label="carbonated soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q950733" start="42383" end="42392" title="Chinotto (drink)" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q109196" start="42416" end="42424" title="Bergamot orange" label="bergamot"/>
<link wikidata="Q150064" start="42429" end="42435" title="citron" label="citron"/>
<link wikidata="Q109196" start="42826" end="42841" title="Bergamot orange" label="Bergamot orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="42937" end="42943" title="Reggio di Calabria" label="Reggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="43002" end="43008" title="Chabad" label="Chabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q150064" start="43051" end="43057" title="citron" label="citron"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="43104" end="43110" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968794" start="43148" end="43227" title="Stazione Sperimentale per le Industrie delle Essenze e dei Derivati dagli Agrumi" label="Experimental Station for the Industry of the Essential oils and Citrus products"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="43231" end="43249" title="Reggio di Calabria" label="Reggio di Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16162" start="43255" end="43274" title="province of Cosenza" label="province of Cosenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q36146" start="43308" end="43312" title="Common fig" label="figs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="43452" end="43483" title="protected designation of origin" label="protected designation of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158986" start="43490" end="43505" title="Cherimoya" label="anona cherimoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="43563" end="43581" title="Reggio di Calabria" label="Reggio di Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16159" start="43601" end="43622" title="province of Catanzaro" label="province of Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q53686" start="43632" end="43641" title="San Floro" label="San Floro"/>
<link wikidata="Q53512" start="43646" end="43653" title="Cortale" label="Cortale"/>
<link wikidata="Q864650" start="43680" end="43691" title="sericulture" label="sericulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19740" start="43779" end="43796" title="Boletus edulis" label="porcini mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088265" start="43871" end="43878" title="Pollino" label="Pollino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088296" start="43880" end="43884" title="La Sila" label="Sila"/>
<link wikidata="Q117670" start="43886" end="43891" title="Serre calabresi" label="Serre"/>
<link wikidata="Q303853" start="43896" end="43906" title="Aspromonte" label="Aspromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q129324" start="43908" end="43916" title="Chestnut" label="Chestnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q19740" start="43988" end="44005" title="Boletus edulis" label="porcini mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q62138" start="44030" end="44057" title="Lactarius deliciosus" label="red pine mushroom or rosito"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="44060" end="44067" title="Peaches" label="Peaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="44300" end="44311" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q257106" start="44406" end="44415" title="liquorice" label="liquorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681" start="45002" end="45009" title="Crotone" label="Crotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13625" start="45011" end="45024" title="Vibo Valentia" label="Vibo Valentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="45029" end="45044" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q53528" start="45302" end="45311" title="Girifalco" label="Girifalco"/>
<link wikidata="Q53686" start="45313" end="45322" title="San Floro" label="San Floro"/>
<link wikidata="Q53512" start="45327" end="45334" title="Cortale" label="Cortale"/>
<link wikidata="Q864650" start="45336" end="45347" title="sericulture" label="sericulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q134747" start="45384" end="45393" title="silkworms" label="silkworms"/>
<link wikidata="Q44789" start="45427" end="45441" title="Morus (plant)" label="mulberry trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q53732" start="45444" end="45451" title="Tiriolo" label="Tiriolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q53495" start="45456" end="45464" title="Badolato" label="Badolato"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="45572" end="45576" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q324617" start="45661" end="45671" title="tarantella" label="tarantella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426327" start="45776" end="45781" title="linen" label="linen"/>
<link wikidata="Q910358" start="45786" end="45791" title="Spartium junceum" label="broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q64407093" start="45800" end="45811" title="bobbin lace" label="bobbin lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281" start="45820" end="45830" title="embroidery" label="embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="45841" end="45849" title="ceramics" label="ceramics"/>
<link wikidata="Q53681" start="45973" end="45981" title="Platania" label="Platania"/>
<link wikidata="Q53671" start="45986" end="45994" title="Petrizzi" label="Petrizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="46006" end="46010" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q53724" start="46042" end="46058" title="Soveria Mannelli" label="Soveria Mannelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="46315" end="46328" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53727" start="46375" end="46384" title="Squillace" label="Squillace"/>
<link wikidata="Q54667" start="46389" end="46397" title="Seminara" label="Seminara"/>
<link wikidata="Q53716" start="46418" end="46430" title="Serrastretta" label="Serrastretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="46569" end="46574" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q568840" start="46597" end="46615" title="Hitachi Rail Italy" label="Hitachi Rail Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="46619" end="46637" title="Reggio di Calabria" label="Reggio di Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46658" end="46666" title="Passenger car (rail)#Coach" label="railcars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46694" end="46701" title=":it:Vivalto" label="Vivalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q193236" start="47094" end="47118" title="Gabriele D&amp;#x27;Annunzio" label="Gabriele D&amp;#x27;Annunzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q303853" start="47315" end="47325" title="Aspromonte" label="Aspromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088296" start="47330" end="47337" title="La Sila" label="La Sila"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="47417" end="47432" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="47475" end="47481" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="47622" end="47633" title="art nouveau" label="art nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q519204" start="47726" end="47760" title="Museo Nazionale della Magna Grecia" label="Museo Nazionale della Magna Grecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q205259" start="47771" end="47784" title="Riace bronzes" label="Riace bronzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13619" start="47829" end="47836" title="Cosenza" label="Cosenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q457986" start="47878" end="47896" title="Bernardino Telesio" label="Bernardino Telesio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603931" start="47913" end="47930" title="Cosentian Academy" label="Cosentian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="47988" end="48000" title="House of Hohenstaufen" label="Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q54666" start="48290" end="48296" title="Scilla, Calabria" label="Scilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="48305" end="48319" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="48425" end="48430" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54747" start="48446" end="48452" title="Tropea" label="Tropea"/>
<link wikidata="Q54731" start="48632" end="48638" title="Ricadi" label="Ricadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034760" start="48642" end="48655" title="Capo Vaticano" label="Capo Vaticano"/>
<link wikidata="Q54612" start="48718" end="48724" title="Gerace" label="Gerace"/>
<link wikidata="Q54619" start="48731" end="48736" title="Locri" label="Locri"/>
<link wikidata="Q53727" start="48801" end="48810" title="Squillace" label="Squillace"/>
<link wikidata="Q192365" start="48892" end="48903" title="Cassiodorus" label="Cassiodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54680" start="48906" end="48911" title="Stilo" label="Stilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191850" start="48943" end="48961" title="Tommaso Campanella" label="Tommaso Campanella"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="48990" end="48999" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q747888" start="49018" end="49027" title="Cattolica di Stilo" label="Cattolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q54727" start="49036" end="49049" title="Pizzo Calabro" label="Pizzo Calabro"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="49213" end="49218" title="Joachim Murat" label="Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q53928" start="49230" end="49235" title="Paola, Italy" label="Paola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506929" start="49508" end="49514" title="Sibari" label="Sibari"/>
<link wikidata="Q220583" start="49614" end="49621" title="Sybaris" label="Sybaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q53643" start="49668" end="49681" title="Lamezia Terme" label="Lamezia Terme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431860" start="49748" end="49755" title="Lamezia Terme Airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969913" start="49833" end="49846" title="Lamezia Terme Centrale railway station" label="train station"/>
<link wikidata="Q22054963" start="49931" end="49956" title="La Giudecca" label="Jewish historical quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q692409" start="49965" end="50014" title="Lamezia Terme Town Library" label="Casa del Libro Antico (House of the Ancient Book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="50176" end="50185" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q53723" start="50644" end="50652" title="Soverato" label="Soverato"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="50660" end="50670" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q53495" start="50790" end="50798" title="Badolato" label="Badolato"/>
<link wikidata="Q53723" start="50804" end="50812" title="Soverato" label="Soverato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618109" start="50940" end="50979" title="anniversary of the unification of Italy" label="anniversary of the unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54724" start="50982" end="50990" title="Nicotera" label="Nicotera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="51138" end="51147" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q54645" start="51306" end="51310" title="Samo, Calabria" label="Samo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348910" start="51434" end="51457" title="1908 Messina earthquake" label="1908 Messina earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q54620" start="51460" end="51467" title="Mammola" label="Mammola"/>
<link wikidata="Q53938" start="52085" end="52097" title="Praia a Mare" label="Praia a Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q532450" start="52165" end="52178" title="Dino, Calabria" label="Isola di Dino"/>
<link wikidata="Q54745" start="52203" end="52211" title="Spilinga" label="Spilinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505085" start="52246" end="52257" title="&amp;#x27;Nduja" label="&amp;#x27;Nduja"/>
<link wikidata="Q54747" start="52743" end="52749" title="Tropea" label="Tropea"/>
<link wikidata="Q54727" start="52751" end="52764" title="Pizzo, Calabria" label="Pizzo Calabro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034760" start="52766" end="52779" title="Capo Vaticano" label="Capo Vaticano"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="52781" end="52796" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q53723" start="52798" end="52806" title="Soverato" label="Soverato"/>
<link wikidata="Q54666" start="52808" end="52814" title="Scilla, Calabria" label="Scilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q54000" start="52816" end="52822" title="Scalea" label="Scalea"/>
<link wikidata="Q53709" start="52824" end="52837" title="Sellia Marina" label="Sellia Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q53657" start="52839" end="52849" title="Montepaone" label="Montepaone"/>
<link wikidata="Q53656" start="52851" end="52859" title="Montauro" label="Montauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q53728" start="52894" end="52902" title="Staletti" label="Staletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q54633" start="52905" end="52921" title="Palmi, Calabria" label="Tonnara di Palmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53873" start="52923" end="52931" title="Diamante, Calabria" label="Diamante"/>
<link wikidata="Q53928" start="52933" end="52938" title="Paola, Calabria" label="Paola"/>
<link wikidata="Q53881" start="52940" end="52958" title="Fiumefreddo Bruzio" label="Fiumefreddo Bruzio"/>
<link wikidata="Q53827" start="52960" end="52967" title="Amantea" label="Amantea"/>
<link wikidata="Q53938" start="52969" end="52981" title="Praia a Mare" label="Praia a Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q53838" start="52983" end="53002" title="Belvedere Marittimo" label="Belvedere Marittimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q53951" start="53004" end="53023" title="Roseto Capo Spulico" label="Roseto Capo Spulico"/>
<link wikidata="Q53870" start="53025" end="53043" title="Corigliano Calabro" label="Corigliano Calabro"/>
<link wikidata="Q54502" start="53045" end="53056" title="Cirò Marina" label="Cirò Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q53828" start="53058" end="53068" title="Amendolara" label="Amendolara"/>
<link wikidata="Q54642" start="53070" end="53085" title="Roccella Ionica" label="Roccella Ionica"/>
<link wikidata="Q54565" start="53087" end="53102" title="Bagnara Calabra" label="Bagnara Calabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q54724" start="53104" end="53112" title="Nicotera" label="Nicotera"/>
<link wikidata="Q53850" start="53114" end="53121" title="Cariati" label="Cariati"/>
<link wikidata="Q54753" start="53123" end="53131" title="Zambrone" label="Zambrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q54509" start="53133" end="53154" title="Isola di Capo Rizzuto" label="Isola di Capo Rizzuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q53728" start="53187" end="53195" title="Staletti" label="Staletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q54672" start="53198" end="53205" title="Siderno" label="Siderno"/>
<link wikidata="Q54726" start="53207" end="53216" title="Parghelia" label="Parghelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54731" start="53218" end="53224" title="Ricadi" label="Ricadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53977" start="53229" end="53247" title="San Nicola Arcella" label="San Nicola Arcella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091298" start="53739" end="53743" title="Sila National Park" label="Sila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072838" start="53745" end="53752" title="Pollino National Park" label="Pollino"/>
<link wikidata="Q303853" start="53757" end="53767" title="Aspromonte" label="Aspromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q54008" start="53898" end="53917" title="Spezzano della Sila" label="Spezzano della Sila"/>
<link wikidata="Q53969" start="53950" end="53971" title="San Giovanni in Fiore" label="San Giovanni in Fiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q54664" start="53974" end="53982" title="Gambarie" label="Gambarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="54601" end="54607" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="54670" end="54677" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q30112688" start="54687" end="54698" title="Autostrada A2 (Italy)" label="A2 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="54712" end="54719" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q13619" start="54751" end="54758" title="Cosenza" label="Cosenza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54787" end="54809" title="Autostrada A3 (Italy)#Overview)" label="Building this motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752594" start="55262" end="55275" title="Frecciargento" label="Frecciargento"/>
<link wikidata="Q206975" start="55410" end="55426" title="Strait of Sicily" label="Strait of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q54689" start="55456" end="55474" title="Villa San Giovanni" label="Villa San Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q54614" start="55546" end="55557" title="Gioia Tauro" label="Gioia Tauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="55565" end="55580" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909236" start="55588" end="55607" title="port of Gioia Tauro" label="port of Gioia Tauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q492425" start="55705" end="55719" title="container port" label="container port"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="55863" end="55870" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="55884" end="55892" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431020" start="55956" end="55980" title="illegal arms trafficking" label="illegal arms trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909274" start="56075" end="56089" title="port of Reggio" label="port of Reggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431860" start="56272" end="56307" title="Lamezia Terme International Airport" label="Lamezia Terme International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432582" start="56384" end="56407" title="Reggio Calabria Airport" label="Reggio Calabria Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q687300" start="56514" end="56529" title="Crotone Airport" label="Crotone Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228912" start="56593" end="56607" title="Italia Viaduct" label="Italia Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459703" start="56609" end="56625" title="Sfalassa Viaduct" label="Sfalassa Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="56923" end="56940" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q373856" start="56946" end="56970" title="Strait of Messina Bridge" label="Strait of Messina Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="57078" end="57095" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="57647" end="57662" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="57675" end="57684" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q49390676" start="57696" end="57714" title="Corigliano-Rossano" label="Corigliano-Rossano"/>
<link wikidata="Q53643" start="57726" end="57739" title="Lamezia Terme" label="Lamezia Terme"/>
<link wikidata="Q13619" start="57751" end="57758" title="Cosenza" label="Cosenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681" start="57770" end="57777" title="Crotone" label="Crotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q53946" start="57789" end="57794" title="Rende" label="Rende"/>
<link wikidata="Q13625" start="57806" end="57819" title="Vibo Valentia" label="Vibo Valentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53857" start="57831" end="57844" title="Castrovillari" label="Castrovillari"/>
<link wikidata="Q53819" start="57856" end="57860" title="Acri" label="Acri"/>
<link wikidata="Q53917" start="57872" end="57887" title="Montalto Uffugo" label="Montalto Uffugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061925" start="57955" end="57962" title="Burwood, New South Wales" label="Burwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="57986" end="57999" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q617315" start="58378" end="58386" title="dialects of Calabria" label="dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="58509" end="58528" title="Neapolitan language" label="Neapolitan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="58702" end="58719" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q53888" start="58733" end="58751" title="Guardia Piemontese" label="Guardia Piemontese"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="58811" end="58818" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649613" start="58826" end="58833" title="Gardiol" label="Gardiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q848626" start="59046" end="59053" title="Bovesia" label="Bovesìa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="59073" end="59088" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="59113" end="59126" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35719" start="59134" end="59143" title="Griko language" label="Grecanico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="59158" end="59167" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="59185" end="59198" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="59247" end="59261" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="59293" end="59307" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="59453" end="59464" title="Evangelical" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q315640" start="59700" end="59716" title="Francis of Paola" label="Francis of Paola"/>
<link wikidata="Q312314" start="59770" end="59786" title="Bruno of Cologne" label="Bruno of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q220979" start="59814" end="59824" title="Carthusian" label="Carthusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q54739" start="59876" end="59891" title="Serra San Bruno" label="Serra San Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825224" start="60061" end="60077" title="History of the Jews in Calabria" label="Jews in Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q612845" start="60470" end="60476" title="Anusim" label="Anusim"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="60572" end="60592" title="Renaissance humanism" label="Renaissance humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="60604" end="60615" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q54667" start="61021" end="61029" title="Seminara" label="Seminara"/>
<link wikidata="Q384263" start="61031" end="61038" title="Barlaam of Calabria" label="Barlaam"/>
<link wikidata="Q871357" start="61040" end="61056" title="bishop of Gerace" label="bishop of Gerace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248865" start="61076" end="61090" title="Leonzio Pilato" label="Leonzio Pilato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248865" start="61092" end="61106" title="Leonzio Pilato" label="Leonzio Pilato"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="61149" end="61164" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="61241" end="61259" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="61283" end="61288" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q934309" start="61358" end="61379" title="Mediterranean cuisine" label="Mediterranean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540" start="61464" end="61472" title="eggplant" label="eggplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="61742" end="61751" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083561" start="61797" end="61808" title="soppressata" label="soppressata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505085" start="61816" end="61827" title="&amp;#x27;Nduja" label="&amp;#x27;nduja"/>
<link wikidata="Q384028" start="61835" end="61844" title="capocollo" label="capocollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164327" start="61895" end="61904" title="swordfish" label="swordfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141254" start="61906" end="61913" title="sardine" label="sardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="61953" end="61956" title="cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428509" start="61964" end="61971" title="Dried and salted cod" label="baccalà"/>
<link wikidata="Q769635" start="62137" end="62145" title="biscotti" label="biscotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q293037" start="62218" end="62249" title="Caciocavallo" label="&amp;quot;caciocavallo&amp;quot; cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q622350" start="62257" end="62280" title="Red onion" label="cipolla rossa di Tropea"/>
<link wikidata="Q868184" start="62306" end="62314" title="Frittole (meat dish)" label="frìttuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q868184" start="62331" end="62338" title="curcùci" label="curcùci"/>
<link wikidata="Q257106" start="62359" end="62368" title="liquorice" label="liquorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471877" start="62401" end="62418" title="Lagane e ceci" label="lagane e cicciari"/>
<link wikidata="Q81375" start="62444" end="62452" title="chickpea" label="chickpea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62462" end="62480" title="pecorino crotonese" label="pecorino crotonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q387673" start="62513" end="62522" title="pignolata" label="pignolata"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="62602" end="62615" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="62666" end="62679" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q501667" start="62729" end="62735" title="Lycaon (king of Arcadia)" label="Lycaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="62745" end="62751" title="eponym" label="eponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q654824" start="62852" end="62855" title="Denominazione di origine controllata" label="DOC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62866" end="62870" title="Calabrian wine#Cirò" label="Cirò"/>
<link wikidata="Q16165" start="62872" end="62891" title="province of Crotone" label="province of Crotone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13619" start="62897" end="62904" title="Cosenza" label="Donnici"/>
<link wikidata="Q16162" start="62906" end="62925" title="province of Cosenza" label="province of Cosenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454436" start="63018" end="63027" title="Gaglioppo" label="Gaglioppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932706" start="63038" end="63043" title="Vino Greco" label="Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="63208" end="63216" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q118110376" start="63225" end="63240" title="2023–24 Serie B" label="2023–24 Serie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136016" start="63283" end="63297" title="Cosenza Calcio" label="Cosenza Calcio"/>
<link wikidata="Q118727553" start="63392" end="63407" title="2023–24 Serie C" label="2023–24 Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q745603" start="63410" end="63431" title="Viola Reggio Calabria" label="Viola Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="63459" end="63469" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="63484" end="63499" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752540" start="63588" end="63610" title="University of Calabria" label="University of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q266537" start="63622" end="63646" title="Magna Graecia University" label="Magna Graecia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780716" start="63660" end="63702" title="Mediterranea University of Reggio Calabria" label="Mediterranea University of Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005936" start="63730" end="63802" title="Università per stranieri &amp;quot;Dante Alighieri&amp;quot; di Reggio Calabria" label="University for Foreigners &amp;quot;Dante Alighieri&amp;quot; in Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="64319" end="64328" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883" start="64376" end="64385" title="Catanzaro" label="Catanzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13619" start="64419" end="64426" title="Cosenza" label="Cosenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="64465" end="64480" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348869" start="64516" end="64542" title="1783 Calabrian earthquakes" label="1783 Calabrian earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305198" start="64545" end="64569" title="1905 Calabria earthquake" label="1905 Calabria earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348910" start="64572" end="64595" title="1908 Messina earthquake" label="1908 Messina earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q56975" start="64598" end="64614" title="Arbëreshë people" label="Arbëreshë people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570744" start="64617" end="64633" title="Duke of Calabria" label="Duke of Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q994847" start="64636" end="64645" title="Bruttians" label="Bruttians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609155" start="64648" end="64657" title="Griko people" label="Grecanici"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="64660" end="64673" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q922562" start="64676" end="64686" title="Oenotrians" label="Oenotrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q373856" start="64689" end="64713" title="Strait of Messina Bridge" label="Strait of Messina Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895939" start="64716" end="64731" title="Theme of Sicily" label="Theme of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q425698" start="64734" end="64750" title="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta" label="&amp;#x27;Ndrangheta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44773" wikidata="Q246558" url="?curid=44773" title="Messina (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Messina]] is the third largest city in Sicily.

Messina may also refer to:

==Places==
* Province of Messina, a former Italian province
* Strait of Messina, Italy
* Messina, South Africa (now called Musina)
* Messina Chasmata, a system of canyons on the Uranian moon Titania

==Other uses==
* Messina (name), a surname
* Messina Conference, a 1955 conference which led to the creation of the European Economic Community
* &quot;Messina&quot; (album), a 2012 album by French singer-songwriter Damien Saez
* F.C. Messina Peloro, a football club based in Messina
* , a German cargo ship
* 18 Infantry Division Messina, an Italian division during World War II
* Messina, a fictional small town in John Grisham&#x27;s &quot;Bleachers&quot;

==See also==
*Mesina (disambiguation)
*Messenia, a region in Greece </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246558" start="0" end="11" title="Messina (disambiguation)" label="[[Messina]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q246558" start="50" end="57" title="Messina (disambiguation)" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208" start="91" end="110" title="Province of Messina" label="Province of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="140" end="157" title="Strait of Messina" label="Strait of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025661" start="167" end="188" title="Messina, South Africa" label="Messina, South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734318" start="211" end="227" title="Messina Chasmata" label="Messina Chasmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q16876865" start="295" end="309" title="Messina (name)" label="Messina (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q544107" start="323" end="341" title="Messina Conference" label="Messina Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307068" start="424" end="451" title="Messina (album)" label="&amp;quot;Messina&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29390" start="508" end="527" title="F.C. Messina Peloro" label="F.C. Messina Peloro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3597856" start="588" end="616" title="18 Infantry Division Messina" label="18 Infantry Division Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818306" start="715" end="736" title="Bleachers (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Bleachers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855266" start="752" end="775" title="Mesina (disambiguation)" label="Mesina (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723843" start="777" end="785" title="Messenia" label="Messenia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44774" wikidata="Q183287" url="?curid=44774" title="Yakuza">
<text>, also known as , are members of transnational organized crime syndicates originating in Japan. The Japanese police and media (by request of the police) call them , while the yakuza call themselves . The English equivalent for the term &quot;yakuza&quot; is gangster, meaning an individual involved in a Mafia-like criminal organization.

The yakuza are known for their strict codes of conduct, their organized fiefdom nature, and several unconventional ritual practices such as &quot;yubitsume&quot;, or amputation of the left little finger. Members are often portrayed as males with heavily tattooed bodies and wearing &quot;fundoshi&quot;, sometimes with a kimono or, in more recent years, a Western-style &quot;sharp&quot; suit covering them.
At their height, the yakuza maintained a large presence in the Japanese media, and they also operated internationally. In 1963, the number of yakuza members and quasi-members reached a peak of 184,100. However, this number has drastically dropped, a decline attributed to changing market opportunities and several legal and social developments in Japan that discourage the growth of yakuza membership. In 1991, it had 63,800 members and 27,200 quasi-members, but by 2023 it had only 10,400 members and 10,000 quasi-members. The yakuza are aging because young people do not readily join, and their average age at the end of 2022 was 54.2 years: 5.4% in their 20s, 12.9% in their 30s, 26.3% in their 40s, 30.8% in their 50s, 12.5% in their 60s, and 11.6% in their 70s or older, with more than half of the members in their 50s or older.

The yakuza still regularly engage in an array of criminal activities, and many Japanese citizens remain fearful of the threat these individuals pose to their safety. There remains no strict prohibition on yakuza membership in Japan today, although many pieces of legislation have been passed by the Japanese government aimed at impeding revenue and increasing liability for criminal activities.

== Etymology ==
The name &quot;yakuza&quot; originates from the traditional Japanese card game &quot;Oicho-Kabu&quot;, a game in which the goal is to draw three cards adding up to a score of 9. If the sum of the cards is 10 or more, the second digit is the score. So a sum of 13 is a score of 3, a sum of 14 is a score of 4, etc. A sum of 10 or 20 is a score of 0. If the three cards drawn are 8-9-3 (pronounced ya-ku-za in archaic Japanese), the sum is 20 and therefore the score is zero, making one of the worst possible hands that can be drawn. In Japanese, the word &quot;yakuza&quot; is commonly written in katakana (ヤクザ).

== Origins ==
Despite uncertainty about the single origin of yakuza organizations, most modern yakuza derive from two social classifications which emerged in the mid-Edo period (1603–1868): &quot;tekiya&quot;, those who primarily peddled illicit, stolen or shoddy goods; and &quot;bakuto&quot;, those who were involved in or participated in gambling.

&quot;Tekiya&quot; (peddlers) ranked as one of the lowest social groups during the Edo period. As they began to form organizations of their own, they took over some administrative duties relating to commerce, such as stall allocation and protection of their commercial activities. During Shinto festivals, these peddlers opened stalls and some members were hired to act as security. Each peddler paid rent in exchange for a stall assignment and protection during the fair.

The &quot;tekiya&quot; were a highly structured and hierarchical group with the &quot;oyabun&quot; (boss) at the top and &quot;kobun&quot; (gang members) at the bottom. This hierarchy resembles a structure similar to the family – in traditional Japanese culture, the &quot;oyabun&quot; was often regarded as a surrogate father, and the &quot;kobun&quot; as surrogate children. During the Edo period, the government formally recognized the &quot;tekiya&quot;. At this time, within the &quot;tekiya&quot;, the &quot;oyabun&quot; were appointed as supervisors and granted near-samurai status, meaning they were allowed the dignity of a surname and two swords.

&quot;Bakuto&quot; (gamblers) had a much lower social standing even than traders, as gambling was illegal. Many small gambling houses cropped up in abandoned temples or shrines at the edges of towns and villages all over Japan. Most of these gambling houses ran loan-sharking businesses for clients, and they usually maintained their own security personnel. Society at large regarded the gambling houses themselves, as well as the &quot;bakuto&quot;, with disdain. Much of the undesirable image of the yakuza originates from &quot;bakuto&quot;; this includes the name &quot;yakuza&quot; itself.

Because of the economic situation during the mid-Edo period and the predominance of the merchant class, developing yakuza groups were composed of misfits and delinquents who had joined or formed the groups to extort customers in local markets by selling fake or shoddy goods.

Shimizu Jirocho (1820–1893) is Japan&#x27;s most famous yakuza and folk hero. He was born Chogoro Yamamoto, but changed his name when he was adopted, a common Japanese practice. His life and exploits were featured in sixteen films between 1911 and 1940.

The roots of the yakuza survive today in initiation ceremonies, which incorporate tekiya or bakuto rituals. Although the modern Yakuza has diversified, some gangs still identify with one group or the other; for example, a gang whose primary source of income is illegal gambling may refer to themselves as &quot;bakuto&quot;.

===Kyushu===

The island of Kyushu (and particularly its northern prefecture Fukuoka) has a reputation for being a large source of yakuza members, including many renowned bosses in the Yamaguchi-gumi. Isokichi Yoshida (1867–1936) from the Kitakyushu area was considered by some scholars and political watchers as one of the first renowned modern yakuza. Recently Shinobu Tsukasa and Kunio Inoue, the bosses of the two most powerful clans in the Yamaguchi-gumi, originate from Kyushu. Fukuoka, the northernmost part of the island, has the largest number of designated syndicates among all of the prefectures.

== Organization and activities ==

=== Structure ===
During the formation of the yakuza, they adopted the traditional Japanese hierarchical structure of oyabun-kobun where &quot;kobun&quot; (子分; lit. foster child) owe their allegiance to the . In a much later period, the code of was developed where loyalty and respect are a way of life. The oyabun-kobun relationship is formalized by ceremonial sharing of sake from a single cup. This ritual is not exclusive to the yakuza – it is also commonly performed in traditional Japanese Shinto weddings, and may have been a part of sworn brotherhood relationships.

The structure of yakuza organizations is characterized by a multi-layered hierarchical structure. The of an organization become and run their own subsidiary organizations, and the &quot;kobun&quot; of the subsidiary organizations also become &quot;oyabun&quot; and run their own subsidiary organizations. A large yakuza organization such as Yamaguchi-gumi is made up of five or six layered organizations. In other words, the heads of subsidiary organizations are often executives of the parent organizations.

The &quot;oyabun&quot; of the organization is generally called a or , the person corresponding to pseudo younger brother of the &quot;kumichō&quot; is called a , and the person corresponding to pseudo child of the &quot;kumichō&quot; (&quot;kobun&quot;) is called a or . means younger brother, and its status varies greatly depending on whose brother it is. From the perspective of the organization as a whole, &quot;shatei&quot; generally refers to the younger brother of an &quot;oyabun&quot;, and thus to a high-ranking person in the organization, but it is also possible for a lower-level member to refer to his pseudo younger brother as a &quot;shatei&quot;.

Although positions in yakuza organizations vary from clan to clan, the three most important yakuza positions are &quot;kumichō&quot;, , and . , , and , are also important positions. In general, the of an organization is run by the &quot;wakagashira&quot;, &quot;shateigashira&quot;, and &quot;honbuchō&quot;. Since the &quot;shatei&quot; are the pseudo-younger brothers of the &quot;kumichō&quot;, they are generally older and have higher nominal positions but relatively little real authority. In the Yamaguchi-gumi pecking order as of 2024, the order is &quot;kumichō&quot;, &quot;wakagashira&quot;, &quot;shateigashira&quot;, and &quot;honbuchō&quot;.

Yakuza groups are headed by an &quot;oyabun&quot; (&quot;kumichō&quot; or &quot;kaichō&quot;) who gives orders to his subordinates, the &quot;kobun&quot;. In this respect, the organization is a variation of the traditional Japanese senpai-kōhai (senior-junior) model. Members of yakuza cut their real family ties and transfer their loyalty to the &quot;oyabun&quot;. They refer to each other as family members—, , and . Among brothers, it is common to refer to a person equal to oneself as &quot;kyōdai&quot;, a younger brother as &quot;kyōdai&quot; or &quot;shatei&quot;, and an older brother as . The yakuza is populated almost entirely by men and the very few women who are acknowledged are the wives of bosses, who are referred to by the title . When the 3rd Yamaguchi-gumi boss (Kazuo Taoka) died in the early 1980s, his wife (Fumiko) took over as boss of Yamaguchi-gumi, albeit for a short time.

During the World War II period in Japan, the more traditional tekiya/bakuto form of organization declined as the entire population was mobilised to participate in the war effort and society came under the control of the strict military government. However, after the war, the Yakuza adapted again.

==== Rituals ====
Yubitsume, also referred to as &quot;otoshimae&quot;, or the cutting off of one&#x27;s finger, is a form of penance or apology. Upon a first offence, the transgressor must cut off the tip of his left little finger and give the severed portion to his boss. Sometimes an underboss may do this in penance to the oyabun if he wants to spare a member of his own gang from further retaliation. This practice has started to wane amongst the younger members, due to it being an easy identifier for police.

Its origin stems from the traditional way of holding a Japanese sword. The bottom three fingers of each hand are used to grip the sword tightly, with the thumb and index fingers slightly loose. The removal of digits starting with the little finger and moving up the hand to the index finger progressively weakens a person&#x27;s sword grip.

The idea is that a person with a weak sword grip then has to rely more on the group for protection—reducing individual action. In recent years, prosthetic fingertips have been developed to disguise this distinctive appearance.

Many yakuza have full-body tattoos (including their genitalia). These tattoos, known as irezumi in Japan, are still often &quot;hand-poked&quot;, that is, the ink is inserted beneath the skin using non-electrical, hand-made, and handheld tools with needles of sharpened bamboo or steel. The procedure is expensive and painful, and can take years to complete.

When yakuza play Oicho-Kabu cards with each other, they often remove their shirts or open them up and drape them around their waists. This enables them to display their full-body tattoos to each other. This is one of the few times that yakuza display their tattoos to others, as they normally keep them concealed in public with long-sleeved and high-necked shirts. When new members join, they are often required to remove their trousers as well and reveal any lower body tattoos.

==Syndicates==
=== Number of members and quasi-members ===
The total number of yakuza members and quasi-members peaked at 184,100 in 1963, and then continued to decline due to police crackdowns. The number of regular members decreased with the implementation of the in 1992, and the total number of members and quasi-members began to decline rapidly with the implementation of the yakuza exclusion ordinances in all 47 prefectures around 2010. Between 1990 and 2020, the total number of members and quasi-members decreased by 70 percent.

The National Police Agency reported that Japanese yakuza organizations had 10,400 members and 10,000 quasi-members in 2023.

=== Designated yakuza (&quot;Shitei Bōryokudan&quot;) ===
A is a &quot;particularly harmful&quot; yakuza group registered by the Prefectural Public Safety Commissions under the enacted in 1991. Groups are designated as if their members take advantage of the gang&#x27;s influence to do business, are structured to have one leader, and have a large portion of their members hold criminal records. After the Act on Prevention of Unjust Acts by Organized Crime Group Members was enacted, many yakuza syndicates made efforts to restructure to appear more professional and legitimate.

As of 2023, Under the Act on Prevention of Unjust Acts by Organized Crime Group Members, the Prefectural Public Safety Commissions have registered 25 syndicates as the designated yakuza groups. Three of these organizations have more than 1,000 regular members, eight have more than 100, and 14 have less than 100. Fukuoka Prefecture has the largest number of designated yakuza groups among all of the prefectures, at 5; the Kudo-kai, the Taishu-kai, the Fukuhaku-kai, the Dojin-kai, and the Namikawa-kai.

In August 2021, the Fukuoka District Court sentenced Satoru Nomura, the fifth head of Kudo-kai, to death for murder and attempted murder. This was the first death sentence handed down to a designated yakuza head. Kudo-kai is the only one of the designated yakuza to be designated as a , a more dangerous type of yakuza.

===Three largest syndicates and six major syndicates===
As of 2023, the National Police Agency has designated Yamaguchi-gumi, Kobe Yamaguchi-gumi, Kizuna-kai, Ikeda-gumi (ja), Sumiyoshi-kai, and Inagawa-kai as among the designated yakuza. These six organizations have a total of 7,700 members and 6,800 quasi-members, for a total of 14,500 members, or 71.1 percent of the total 20,400 yakuza members and quasi-members in Japan.

Kobe Yamaguchi-gumi split off from Yamaguchi-gumi in August 2015, Kizuna-kai split off from Kobe Yamaguchi-gumi in April 2017, and Ikeda-gumi split off from Kobe Yamaguchi-gumi in July 2020. These Yamaguchi-gumi and the three organizations that split from them are fighting each other.

In recent years, the three major yakuza syndicates have formed a loose alliance, and in April 2023, Kiyoshi Takayama, the &quot;wakagashira&quot; (second-in-command) of the Yamaguchi-gumi, Shuji Ogawa, the &quot;kaichō&quot; (chairman) of the Sumiyoshi-kai, and Kazuya Uchibori (ja), the &quot;kaichō&quot; of the Inagawa-kai, held a social gathering.

== Current activities ==
=== Japan ===
In the 2010s and 2020s, the yakuza&#x27;s main source of funding is a fraud called , which mainly targets the elderly to cheat them out of large amounts of money. Their methods include calling the homes of elderly people to beg for money by pretending to be the elderly person&#x27;s son, or visiting the homes of elderly people posing as employees of financial institutions to swindle them out of their money. In 2014, &quot;tokushu sagi&quot; accounted for 10.4 percent of all yakuza arrests, surpassing theft for the first time at 10.2 percent, and 34.6 percent of &quot;tokushu sagi&quot; perpetrators were yakuza and their associates. The total damage from &quot;tokushu sagi&quot; identified in 2019 exceeded 30 billion yen, and while yakuza accounted for just over 10 percent of the lowest level members of criminal groups, such as cash receivers who play the role of financial institution employees, yakuza accounted for nearly 40 percent of the main perpetrators leading fraud schemes.

The yakuza and its affiliated gangs control drug trafficking in Japan, especially methamphetamine. While many yakuza syndicates, notably the Yamaguchi-gumi, officially forbid their members from engaging in drug trafficking, some other yakuza syndicates, like the Dojin-kai, are heavily involved in it. The most common charge for yakuza and their associates arrested in 2014 was violation of the , which prohibits the import, export, sale, transfer, possession, and use of methamphetamine, accounting for 26.5 percent of arrests.

Some yakuza groups are known to deal extensively in human trafficking. In the Philippines Yakuza trick girls from impoverished villages into coming to Japan by promising them respectable jobs with good wages. Instead, they are forced into becoming sex workers and strippers.
Yakuza frequently engaged in a unique form of Japanese extortion known as &quot;sōkaiya&quot;. In essence, this is a specialized form of protection racket. Instead of harassing small businesses, the Yakuza harass a stockholders&#x27; meeting of a larger corporation. Yakuza operatives obtain the right to attend by making a small purchase of stock, and then at the meeting physically intimidate other stockholders. The number of has decreased over the years, and in 2023 there were only about 150 , of whom 30 worked in groups and 120 worked alone.

Yakuza also had ties to the Japanese real estate market and banking sector through &quot;jiageya&quot;. Jiageya specializes in inducing holders of small real estate to sell their property so that estate companies can carry out much larger development plans. The Japanese bubble economy of the 1980s is often blamed on real estate speculation by banking subsidiaries. After the collapse of the property bubble, a manager of a major bank in Nagoya was assassinated, prompting much speculation about the banking industry&#x27;s indirect connection to the Japanese underworld.
In 1989, Susumu Ishii, the Oyabun of the Inagawa-kai (a well-known yakuza group) bought US$255 million worth of Tokyo Kyuko Electric Railway&#x27;s stock. Japan&#x27;s Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission has knowledge of more than 50 listed companies with ties to organized crime, and in March 2008, the Osaka Securities Exchange decided to review all listed companies and expel those with yakuza ties.

Yakuza involvement in politics functions similarly to that of a lobbying group, with them backing those who share in their opinions or beliefs.

====Yakuza&#x27;s aid in earthquakes====
In the wake of the 1995 Kobe earthquake, the Yamaguchi-gumi yakuza group, who are based in the area, mobilized to provide disaster relief services (including the use of a helicopter). Media reports contrasted this rapid response with the much slower pace at which the Japanese government&#x27;s official relief efforts took place.

Following the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami on 11 March 2011, the yakuza sent hundreds of trucks filled with food, water, blankets, and sanitary accessories to aid the people in the affected areas of the natural disaster.
CNN México said that although the yakuza operates through extortion and other violent methods, they &quot;[moved] swiftly and quietly to provide aid to those most in need.&quot;

=== United States ===
The presence of individuals affiliated with the yakuza in the United States has increased tremendously since the 1960s, and although much of their activity is concentrated in Hawaii, they have made their presence known in other parts of the country, especially in Los Angeles and the San Francisco Bay Area, as well as Seattle, Las Vegas, Arizona, Virginia, Chicago, and New York City. The yakuza are said to use Hawaii as a midway station between Japan and mainland America, smuggling methamphetamine into the country and smuggling firearms back to Japan. They easily fit into the local population, since many tourists from Japan and other Asian countries visit the islands on a regular basis, and there is a large population of residents who are of full or partial Japanese descent. They also work with local gangs, funneling Japanese tourists to gambling parlors and brothels.

In California, the yakuza have made alliances with local Korean gangs as well as Chinese triads and Vietnamese gangs. The yakuza identified these gangs as useful partners due to the constant stream of Vietnamese cafe shoot-outs and home invasion burglaries throughout the 1980s and early 1990s. In New York City, they appear to collect finder&#x27;s fees from Russian, Irish and Italian gang members and businessmen for guiding Japanese tourists to gambling establishments, both legal and illegal.

Handguns manufactured in the US account for a large share (33%) of handguns seized in Japan, followed by handguns manufactured in China (16%) and in the Philippines (10%). In 1990, a Smith &amp; Wesson .38 caliber revolver that cost $275 in the US could sell for up to $4,000 in Tokyo.

In 2001, the FBI&#x27;s representative in Tokyo arranged for Tadamasa Goto, the head of the group Goto-gumi, to receive a liver transplant at the UCLA Medical Center in the United States, in return for information of Yamaguchi-gumi operations in the US. This was done without prior consultation of the NPA. The journalist who uncovered the deal received threats from Goto and was given police protection in the US and in Japan.

The FBI suspects that the yakuza were using various operations to launder money in the US .

=== Asia (outside Japan) ===
The yakuza have engaged in illegal activities in Southeast Asia since the 1960s; they are working there to develop sex tourism and drug trafficking. This is the area where they are still the most active today.

In addition to their presence in Southeast Asian countries such as Thailand, the Philippines, and Vietnam, yakuza groups also operate in South Korea, China, Taiwan, and in the Pacific Islands (mainly Hawaii).

Yakuza groups also have a presence in North Korea; in 2009, yakuza Yoshiaki Sawada was released from a North Korean prison after spending five years there attempting to bribe a North Korean official and smuggle drugs.

==Constituent members==
Prospective yakuza come from all walks of life. The most romantic tales tell how yakuza accept sons who have been abandoned or exiled by their parents. Many yakuza start out in junior high school or high school as common street thugs or members of bōsōzoku gangs. Perhaps because of its lower socio-economic status, numerous yakuza members come from burakumin and ethnic Korean backgrounds. Low-ranking youth may be referred to as &quot;chinpira&quot; or &quot;chimpira&quot;.

According to a 2006 speech by Mitsuhiro Suganuma, a former officer of the Public Security Intelligence Agency, around 60 percent of yakuza members come from burakumin, the descendants of a feudal outcast class and approximately 30 percent of yakuza are Japanese-born Koreans, and only 10 percent are from non-burakumin Japanese and Chinese ethnic groups.

=== Burakumin ===
The burakumin is a group that Japanese society socially discriminates against, and its recorded history goes back to the Heian period in the 11th century. The burakumin are the descendants of outcast communities which originated in the pre-modern, especially the feudal era, mainly those people with occupations which are considered tainted because they are associated with death or ritual impurity, such as butchers, executioners, undertakers, or leather workers. They traditionally lived in their own secluded hamlets and villages away from other groups.

According to David E. Kaplan and Alec Dubro, burakumin account for about 70% of the members of Yamaguchi-gumi, the largest yakuza syndicate in Japan.

=== Ethnic Koreans ===
While ethnic Koreans make up only 0.5% of the Japanese population, they are a prominent part of yakuza because they suffer discrimination in Japanese society along with the &quot;burakumin&quot;. In the early 1990s, 18 of 90 top bosses of &quot;Inagawa-kai&quot; were ethnic Koreans. The Japanese National Police Agency suggested Koreans composed 10% of the yakuza proper. Some of the representatives of the designated Bōryokudan are also Koreans. The Korean significance had been an untouchable taboo in Japan and one of the reasons that the Japanese version of Kaplan and Dubro&#x27;s &quot;Yakuza&quot; (1986) had not been published until 1991 with the deletion of Korean-related descriptions of the &quot;Yamaguchi-gumi&quot;.

Japanese-born people of Korean ancestry who retain South Korean nationality are considered resident aliens and are embraced by the yakuza precisely because they fit the group&#x27;s &quot;outsider&quot; image.

Notable yakuza of Korean ancestry include Hisayuki Machii, the founder of the Tosei-kai, Tokutaro Takayama, the head of the 4th-generation Aizukotetsu-kai, Jiro Kiyota, the head of the 5th-generation Inagawa-kai, Shinichi Matsuyama, the head of the 5th-generation Kyokuto-kai, and Hirofumi Hashimoto, the founder of the now-defunct Kyokushinrengo-kai.

==Law enforcement and indirect enforcement==
===Operation Summit===
Between 1964 and 1965, the Japanese police carried out mass arrests of yakuza leaders and executives in what they called the in response to public demands for the yakuza to be banished from society. As a result, crime declined and the number of arrested yakuza fell from about 59,000 in 1964 to 38,000 in 1967. The number of yakuza organizations and members also declined, from 5,216 organizations and 184,091 members in 1963 to 3,500 organizations and 139,089 members in 1969. As a result, 1963, the year before the First Operation Summit was launched, was the peak of yakuza power.

From around 1970, yakuza leaders and executives who had been imprisoned began to be released from prison, and yakuza organizations that had been disbanded during the First Operation Summit were revived and reorganized, leading the police to conduct the Second Operation Summit in 1970 and the Third Operation Summit in 1975. These series of police crackdowns led to a decline in the number of yakuza organizations and members, from 2957 organizations with 123,044 members in 1972 to 2517 organizations with 106,754 members in 1979. As a result, small yakuza organizations were forced to dissolve, and the total number of members decreased, but some members transferred to large yakuza organizations, so the number of members of large organizations actually increased during this period. The three major organizations, Yamaguchi-gumi, Sumiyoshi-kai, and Inagawa-kai, expanded during this period. During this period, Japan was in a recession following the energy crisis of the 1970s, and it became difficult for the yakuza to acquire sufficient financial resources through traditional methods alone, so it was inevitable that they would consolidate into large yakuza organizations with diverse or legal sources of funding.

===Anti-yakuza laws===
The , passed in 1991 and enacted in 1992, was a landmark piece of legislation that cracked down on the yakuza. The law prohibited 27 acts by yakuza, including demanding hush money or donations, collecting debts and conducting land grabbing activities in an unjustified manner. The law also made it illegal to demand and collect so-called from downtown restaurants and bars, which were the yakuza&#x27;s main source of funding. Police could issue two cease-and-desist orders to offenders who demanded &quot;mikajime-ryō&quot;, and could arrest offenders who still refused to comply. Until then, the yakuza had charged bouncer fees to restaurants and bars in their territory, especially those open at night, and made various threats, such as ramming dump trucks into businesses that refused, and business owners, fearing reprisals, had paid &quot;mikajime-ryō&quot;, but the new law resulted in more businesses refusing &quot;mikajime-ryō&quot; and the yakuza&#x27;s financial resources were lost. In 1991, the yakuza had 63,800 members, but by 1992, when the new law took effect, the number had dropped sharply to about 56,600, then to about 48,000 in 1994 and 43,100 in 2001.

Additional regulations can be found in a 2008 anti-yakuza amendment which allows prosecutors to place the blame on any yakuza-related crime on crime bosses. Specifically, the leader of the Yamaguchi-gumi has since been incarcerated and forced to pay upwards of 85 million yen in damages of several crimes committed by his gangsters, leading to the yakuza&#x27;s dismissal of around 2,000 members per year; albeit, some analysts claim that these dismissals are part of the yakuza&#x27;s collective attempt to regain a better reputation amongst the populace. Regardless, the yakuza&#x27;s culture, too, has shifted towards a more secretive and far less public approach to crime, as many of their traditions have been reduced or erased to avoid being identified as yakuza.

Beginning in 2009, led by agency chief Takaharu Ando, Japanese police began to crack down on the gangs. Yamaguchi-gumi&#x27;s number two and Kodo-kai chief Kiyoshi Takayama was arrested in late 2010. In December 2010, police arrested Yamaguchi-gumi&#x27;s alleged number three leader, Tadashi Irie.

=== Yakuza exclusion ordinances ===
In addition to the anti-yakuza laws, the Yakuza exclusion ordinances enacted by each of Japan&#x27;s 47 prefectures between 2009 and 2011 also contributed significantly to the decline of the yakuza. Ordinances were enacted in Osaka and Tokyo in 2010 and 2011 to try to combat yakuza influence by making it illegal for any business to do business with the yakuza. While the anti-yakuza laws prohibited the yakuza from making unreasonable demands on businesses and citizens, these ordinances prohibited businesses and citizens from offering benefits to the yakuza. This made it increasingly difficult for the yakuza to raise funds, as fewer businesses and citizens succumbed to the yakuza&#x27;s threats and offered benefits to the yakuza, such as contracting work or paying money to the yakuza. According to the media, encouraged by tougher anti-yakuza laws and yakuza exclusion ordinances, local governments and construction companies have begun to shun or ban yakuza activities or involvement in their communities or construction projects.

In addition, these ordinances have made it difficult for yakuza members to lead normal civilian lives. The ordinances also require businesses and citizens to refuse to rent meeting rooms or parking spaces to the yakuza, or to print business cards with the name of yakuza organizations on them. Companies can now also refuse to open bank accounts, sign mobile phone contracts, credit card contracts, lease real estate, or process various loans for people identified as yakuza under the anti-yakuza laws, making it more difficult for yakuza to live in society. Even companies that provide lifelines have become tough on the yakuza, with Osaka Gas terminating contracts if a contractor is discovered to be a yakuza. To prevent yakuza from nominally leaving the organization and signing contracts with companies, these ordinances allow companies to treat a person as a yakuza for five years even if he or she has nominally left the yakuza and become a civilian.

Since 2011, regulations outlawing business with yakuza members, government-ordered audits of yakuza finances, and the enactment of yakuza exclusion ordinances have hastened a decline in yakuza membership. The number of yakuza members and quasi-members fell from 78,600 in 2010 to 25,900 in 2020.

===Outside Japan===
Yakuza organizations also face pressure from the US government; in 2011, a federal executive order required financial institutions to freeze yakuza assets, and as of 2013, the U.S. Treasury Department had frozen about US$55,000 of yakuza holdings, including two Japan-issued American Express cards.

=== Current situation ===
The number of yakuza members and quasi-members fell by about 70 percent in the 30 years between 1990, before the anti-yakuza law, and 2020, after the anti-yakuza laws and the yakuza exclusion ordinances took effect.

With the addition of the employer liability clause in the 2008 amendment to the Anti-yakuza law, there have been a number of situations in which yakuza bosses have been held liable for crimes committed by members of the yakuza. For example, in a civil case, the Tokyo High Court held the head of Sumiyoshi-kai liable for a committed by members of Sumiyoshi-kai under the employer liability article of the Anti-yakuza law in 2021. As a result, Sumiyoshi-kai paid 652 million yen to the victims (approximately $6 million US dollars at the time), 35 million yen more than the amount of damages.

In criminal cases, Nomura Satoru became the first boss to be sentenced to death under the employer liability clause on August 24, 2021. Nomura was involved in one murder and assaults of three people. The presiding judge Adachi Ben of the Fukuoka District Court characterized the murders as extremely vicious attacks. On March 12, 2024, the Fukuoka High Court overturned Nomura&#x27;s death sentence and downgraded it to life imprisonment. The High Court found him not guilty of murder.

On top of the already staggering anti-yakuza legislation, Japan&#x27;s younger generation may be less inclined to gang-related activity, as modern society has made it easier, especially for young men, to gain even semi-legitimate jobs such as ownership in bars and massage parlors and pornography that can be more profitable than gang affiliation - all while protecting themselves by abiding by the strict anti-yakuza laws.

Citizens who take a stronger stance seem to also have taken action that does not lead to violent reactions from the yakuza. In Kyushu, although store owners initially were attacked by gang members, the region has reached stability after local business owners banned known yakuza and posted warnings against yakuza entering their premises.

==Legacy==
=== Yakuza in society ===
The yakuza have had mixed relations with Japanese society. Despite their pariah status, some of their actions may be perceived to have positive effects on society. For example, they stop other criminal organizations from acting in their areas of operation. They have been known to provide relief in times of disaster. These actions have at times painted yakuza in a fairly positive light within Japan. The yakuza also attract membership from traditionally scorned minority groups, such as the Korean-Japanese. However, gang wars and the use of violence as a tool have caused their approval to fall with the general public. According to Jake Adelstein, one study found that 1 in 10 adults under the age of 40 believed that the yakuza should be allowed to exist.

=== Film ===

The yakuza have been in media and culture in many different fashions. Creating its own genre of movies within Japan&#x27;s film industry, the portrayal of the yakuza mainly manifests in one of two archetypes; they are portrayed as either honorable and respectable men or as criminals who use fear and violence as their means of operation. Movies like &quot;Battles Without Honor and Humanity&quot; and &quot;Dead or Alive&quot; portray some of the members as violent criminals, with the focus being on the violence, while other movies focus more on the &quot;business&quot; side of the yakuza.

The 1992 film &quot;Minbo&quot;, a satirical view of yakuza activities, resulted in retaliation against the director, as real-life yakuza gangsters attacked the director Juzo Itami shortly after the release of the film.

Yakuza films have also been popular in the Western market with films such as the 1975 film &quot;The Yakuza&quot;, the 1989 films &quot;Black Rain&quot; and &quot;The Punisher&quot;, the 1995 film &quot;Johnny Mnemonic&quot;, the 2005 film &quot;Into the Sun&quot;, 2013&#x27;s &quot;The Wolverine&quot;, 2018 film &quot;The Outsider&quot;, and &quot;Snake Eyes&quot; in 2021.

===Television===

The yakuza feature prominently in the 2015 American dystopian series &quot;The Man in the High Castle&quot;. They are also the basis for the 2019 BBC TV Series &quot;Giri/Haji&quot;, which features a character whose life is put in danger after he comes under suspicion for a murder tied to the yakuza. The 2022 HBO Max series &quot;Tokyo Vice&quot; explores the dealings of the yakuza from the perspective of an American reporter Jake Adelstein. The anime series &quot;Akiba Maid War&quot; is a dark comedic parody in which maid cafés and yakuza culture are synonymous with one another.

=== Video games ===
The video game series &quot;Like a Dragon,&quot; formerly known as &quot;Yakuza&quot; outside of Japan, launched in 2005, portrays the actions of several different ranking members of the yakuza, as well as criminal associates such as dirty cops and loan sharks. The series addresses some of the same themes as the yakuza genre of film does, like violence, honor, politics of the syndicates, and the social status of the yakuza in Japan. The series has been successful, spawning sequels, spin-offs, a live-action movie and a web TV series.

&quot;Grand Theft Auto III&quot; features a yakuza clan that assists the protagonist in the second and third act after they cut their ties with the Mafia. The yakuza derive most of their income from a casino, Kenji&#x27;s, and are currently fighting to keep other gangs from peddling drugs in their territory while seeking to protect their activities from police interference. Towards the end of the third act, the player assassinates the leader of the clan, and the other members are later executed by Colombian gangsters. In &quot;Grand Theft Auto III&quot; prequel, &quot;Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories&quot;, the yakuza play a major role in the storyline. In &quot;Grand Theft Auto: Vice City&quot;, the yakuza are mentioned, presumably operating in Vice City.

&quot;Hitman 2: Silent Assassin&quot; features a mission set in Japan that sees Agent 47 assassinating the son of a wealthy arms dealer during his dinner meeting with a yakuza boss at his private estate. A mission in the 2016 game, &quot;Hitman&quot;, set at a secluded mountaintop hospital, features a notorious yakuza lawyer and fixer as one of two targets to be assassinated.

=== Manga, anime and television dramas ===
* &quot;Stop!! Hibari-kun!&quot;: manga (1981–1983), anime (1983–1984). The story focuses on Kōsaku Sakamoto, a high school student who goes to live with yakuza boss Ibari Ōzora and his four children—Tsugumi, Tsubame, Hibari and Suzume—after the death of his mother. Kōsaku is shocked to learn that Hibari, who looks and behaves as a girl, is male.
* &quot;Gokusen&quot;: manga (2000), drama (2002, 2005 and 2008) and anime (2004). The heiress of a clan becomes a teacher in a difficult high school and is assigned a class of delinquents, the 3-D. She will teach them mathematics, while gradually getting involved in several other levels, going so far as to get her students out of a bad situation by sometimes using her skills as heir to the clan.
* &quot;My Boss My Hero&quot;: Film stock (2001), drama (2002). A young gang leader, who seems to be too stupid to do his job, misses a big deal because he cannot count correctly, and on the other hand, is practically illiterate. In order to access the succession of the clan, his father then forces him to return to high school, to obtain his diploma. He must not reveal his membership in the yakuza, under penalty of being immediately excluded.
* &quot;Twittering Birds Never Fly&quot;: manga of the shōnen-ai genre (2011–?). Yashiro, a totally depraved masochist, boss of a yakuza clan and the Shinsei finance company, hires Chikara Dômeki, a secretive and not very talkative man, as his bodyguard. While Yashiro would like to take advantage of Dômeki&#x27;s body, the latter is helpless.
* &quot;Like the Beast&quot;: manga, yaoi (2008). Tomoharu Ueda, a police officer in a small local post, meets Aki Gotôda, son of the leader of a yakuza clan, in pursuit of an underwear thief. The next morning, Aki shows up at his house to thank him for his help and finds himself making a declaration of love for him. Taken aback, Ueda replies that it is better that they get to know each other, but that&#x27;s without counting Aki&#x27;s stubbornness, ready to do anything to achieve his ends.
* &quot;Odd Taxi&quot;: anime, manga (2021). A taxi driver becomes entangled in the rivalry of competing kobun and uses his position to undermine the local yakuza organization.

Several manga by Ryoichi Ikegami are located in the middle of the Japanese underworld:
* &quot;Sanctuary&quot; (1990): Hôjô and Asami, childhood friends, have only one goal: to give the Japanese back a taste of life, and to shake up the country. For this, they decide to climb the ladder of power, one in the light, as a politician, the other in the shadows, as yakuza.
* &quot;Heat&quot; (1999): Tatsumi Karasawa is the owner of a club in Tokyo who plans to expand his business. He gives a hard time not only to the police but also to the yakuza, of which he manages, however, to rally a certain number at his side.
* &quot;Nisekoi&quot; (2014): Nisekoi follows high school students Raku Ichijo, the son of a leader in the yakuza faction Shuei-gumi, and Chitoge Kirisaki, the daughter of a boss in a rival gang known as Muchi-Konkai.

== Yakuza-related terminology ==
== See also ==
* Bōsōzoku
* Camorra
* Crime in Japan
* Criminal tattoo
* Gopnik
* Irezumi
* Irish mob
* Kkangpae
* List of criminal enterprises, gangs and syndicates
* Mafia
* Ndrangheta
* Organized crime
* Punch perm
* Russian mafia
* Sicilian Mafia
* Triads
* Yakuza exclusion ordinances
* Yakuza members
==References==
==Bibliography==

* Bruno, A. (2007). &quot;The Yakuza, the Japanese Mafia&quot;. CrimeLibrary: Time Warner.
* Blancke, Stephan, ed. (2015). &quot;East Asian Intelligence and Organised Crime: China, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Mongolia&quot;. Berlin: Verlag Dr. Köster. .
* Kaplan, David; Dubro, Alec (1986). &quot;Yakuza&quot;. Addison-Wesley. .
** Kaplan, David; Dubro, Alec (2003). &quot;Yakuza: Expanded Edition&quot;. University of California Press. .
* Hill, Peter B. E. (2003). &quot;The Japanese Mafia: Yakuza, Law, and the State&quot;. Oxford University Press .
* Johnson, David T. (2001). &quot;The Japanese Way of Justice: Prosecuting Crime in Japan&quot;. Oxford University Press .
* By a member of a yakuza family.
* Saga, Junichi; Bester, John (1991). &quot;Confessions of a Yakuza: A Life in Japan&#x27;s Underworld&quot;. Kodansha America.
* Seymour, Christopher (1996). &quot;Yakuza Diary&quot;. Atlantic Monthly Press. .
* Schilling, Mark (2003). &quot;The Yakuza Movie Book&quot;. Stone Bridge Press. .
* Sterling, Claire (1994). &quot;Thieves&#x27; World&quot;. Simon &amp; Schuster. .
* Sho Fumimura (Writer), Ryoichi Ikegami (Artist) (1993–1997). &quot;Sanctuary&quot;. Viz Communications. A fiction manga about the rise of a young yakuza and a politician.
** Vol. 1: ; Vol. 2: ; Vol. 3: ; Vol. 4: ; Vol. 5: ; Vol. 6: ; Vol. 7: ; Vol. 8: ; Vol. 9: .
* Tendo, Shoko (2007). &quot;Yakuza Moon: Memoirs of a Gangster&#x27;s Daughter&quot;. Kodansha International. .
* &quot;Young Yakuza&quot;. Dir. Jean-Pierre Limosin. Cinema Epoch, 2007.
== Further reading ==
* 
* 

==External links==

* The Secret Lives of Yakuza WomenBBC Reel 
* 101 East – Battling the YakuzaAl Jazeera 
* FBI What We Investigate – Asian Transnational Organized Crime Groups
* Yakuza Portal site
* Blood Ties: Yakuza Daughter Lifts Lid on Hidden Hell of Gangsters&#x27; families
* Crime Library: Yakuza
* Japanese Mayor Shot Dead; CBS News, 17 April 2007
* Yakuza: The Japanese Mafia
* Yakuza: Kind-Hearted Criminals or Monsters in Suits?</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="47" end="73" title="organized crime" label="organized crime syndicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="89" end="94" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q154200" start="100" end="115" title="Japanese police" label="Japanese police"/>
<link wikidata="Q46961" start="258" end="266" title="gangster" label="gangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q18550" start="304" end="309" title="Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="411" end="415" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q519926" start="485" end="494" title="yubitsume" label="yubitsume"/>
<link wikidata="Q976963" start="627" end="635" title="fundoshi" label="fundoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q483444" start="660" end="666" title="kimono" label="kimono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459946" start="810" end="824" title="Media of Japan" label="Japanese media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002656" start="840" end="864" title="transnational crime" label="operated internationally"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1053" end="1090" title="Yakuza#Law enforcement and indirect enforcement" label="several legal and social developments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190574" start="1881" end="1900" title="Japanese government" label="Japanese government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100473" start="2079" end="2089" title="Oicho-Kabu" label="Oicho-Kabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="2529" end="2537" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="2590" end="2598" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="2773" end="2783" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075410" start="2803" end="2809" title="tekiya" label="tekiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q57262007" start="2845" end="2852" title="Illicit trade" label="illicit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929041" start="2888" end="2894" title="bakuto" label="bakuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519704" start="2948" end="2956" title="Gambling in Japan" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328489" start="3010" end="3030" title="Four occupations" label="lowest social groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="3247" end="3253" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15974353" start="3254" end="3263" title="Japanese festivals" label="festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554" start="3404" end="3414" title="Protection racket" label="protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="3678" end="3694" title="Culture of Japan" label="Japanese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="4007" end="4014" title="samurai" label="samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="4353" end="4366" title="Loan shark" label="loan-sharking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11561011" start="4964" end="4979" title="Shimizu Jirocho" label="Shimizu Jirocho"/>
<link wikidata="Q594939" start="5260" end="5281" title="initiation ceremony" label="initiation ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="5318" end="5325" title="rituals" label="rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q13987" start="5573" end="5579" title="Kyushu" label="Kyushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q123258" start="5622" end="5629" title="Fukuoka Prefecture" label="Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q763018" start="5730" end="5744" title="Yamaguchi-gumi" label="Yamaguchi-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188806" start="5784" end="5794" title="Kitakyushu" label="Kitakyushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952396" start="5908" end="5923" title="Shinobu Tsukasa" label="Shinobu Tsukasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123258" start="6029" end="6036" title="Fukuoka Prefecture" label="Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6101" end="6122" title="#Designated bōryokudan" label="designated syndicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q170219" start="6562" end="6566" title="sake" label="sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="6685" end="6691" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q763018" start="7105" end="7119" title="Yamaguchi-gumi" label="Yamaguchi-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33061411" start="8827" end="8833" title="senpai" label="senpai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33061411" start="8834" end="8839" title="kohai" label="kōhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319325" start="9379" end="9390" title="Kazuo Taoka" label="Kazuo Taoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9509" end="9521" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q519926" start="9815" end="9824" title="Yubitsume" label="Yubitsume"/>
<link wikidata="Q519926" start="9852" end="9861" title="yubitsume" label="otoshimae"/>
<link wikidata="Q249608" start="10369" end="10383" title="Kenjutsu" label="Japanese sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="10800" end="10810" title="prosthetic" label="prosthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="10936" end="10945" title="genitalia" label="genitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183723" start="10972" end="10979" title="irezumi" label="irezumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108352738" start="11012" end="11022" title="hand-poked" label="hand-poked"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100473" start="11261" end="11271" title="Oicho-Kabu" label="Oicho-Kabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967622" start="12106" end="12133" title="yakuza exclusion ordinances" label="yakuza exclusion ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q50337" start="12518" end="12529" title="Japanese prefectures" label="Prefectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q905830" start="12530" end="12555" title="National Public Safety Commission (Japan)" label="Public Safety Commissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q123258" start="13284" end="13302" title="Fukuoka Prefecture" label="Fukuoka Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441737" start="13394" end="13402" title="Kudo-kai" label="Kudo-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8190930" start="13408" end="13418" title="Taishu-kai" label="Taishu-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507633" start="13424" end="13436" title="Fukuhaku-kai" label="Fukuhaku-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002741" start="13442" end="13451" title="Dojin-kai" label="Dojin-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136700" start="13461" end="13473" title="Kyushu Seido-kai" label="Namikawa-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q55050795" start="13529" end="13542" title="Satoru Nomura" label="Satoru Nomura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441737" start="13562" end="13570" title="Kudo-kai" label="Kudo-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q763018" start="13907" end="13921" title="Yamaguchi-gumi" label="Yamaguchi-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q21045560" start="13923" end="13942" title="Kobe Yamaguchi-gumi" label="Kobe Yamaguchi-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29841227" start="13944" end="13954" title="Kizuna-kai" label="Kizuna-kai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13956" end="13966" title="Ikeda-gumi" label="Ikeda-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13968" end="13970" title=":ja:池田組" label="ja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349753" start="13973" end="13986" title="Sumiyoshi-kai" label="Sumiyoshi-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352920" start="13992" end="14003" title="Inagawa-kai" label="Inagawa-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6419125" start="14613" end="14629" title="Kiyoshi Takayama" label="Kiyoshi Takayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q763018" start="14686" end="14700" title="Yamaguchi-gumi" label="Yamaguchi-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14702" end="14713" title="Shuji Ogawa" label="Shuji Ogawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349753" start="14756" end="14769" title="Sumiyoshi-kai" label="Sumiyoshi-kai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14775" end="14790" title="Kazuya Uchibori" label="Kazuya Uchibori"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14792" end="14794" title=":ja:内堀和也" label="ja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352920" start="14827" end="14838" title="Inagawa-kai" label="Inagawa-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="15983" end="15998" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q763018" start="16042" end="16056" title="Yamaguchi-gumi" label="Yamaguchi-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="16107" end="16123" title="drug trafficking" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002741" start="16164" end="16173" title="Dojin-kai" label="Dojin-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5938851" start="16483" end="16500" title="human trafficking in Japan" label="human trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="16509" end="16520" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="16761" end="16770" title="extortion" label="extortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667594" start="16786" end="16793" title="sōkaiya" label="sōkaiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554" start="16843" end="16860" title="protection racket" label="protection racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500827" start="17518" end="17541" title="Japanese bubble economy" label="Japanese bubble economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="17695" end="17701" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q183287" start="17856" end="17862" title="Oyabun" label="Oyabun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352920" start="17870" end="17881" title="Inagawa-kai" label="Inagawa-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="17917" end="17920" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332242" start="17941" end="17969" title="Tokyo Kyuko Electric Railway" label="Tokyo Kyuko Electric Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444929" start="17997" end="18044" title="Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission" label="Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320224" start="18145" end="18170" title="Osaka Securities Exchange" label="Osaka Securities Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="18309" end="18323" title="lobbyist" label="lobbying group"/>
<link wikidata="Q214866" start="18450" end="18470" title="Great Hanshin earthquake" label="1995 Kobe earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q763018" start="18476" end="18490" title="Yamaguchi-gumi" label="Yamaguchi-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36204" start="18777" end="18806" title="2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami" label="Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931785" start="18985" end="18995" title="CNN en Español" label="CNN México"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="19361" end="19367" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="19450" end="19461" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="19470" end="19492" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="19505" end="19512" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403" start="19514" end="19523" title="Las Vegas metropolitan area" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="19525" end="19532" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="19534" end="19542" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="19544" end="19551" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="19557" end="19570" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="19672" end="19687" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q329978" start="20148" end="20162" title="Triad (organized crime)" label="Chinese triads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574963" start="20566" end="20573" title="Handgun" label="Handgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="20696" end="20701" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="20719" end="20730" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q463090" start="20749" end="20767" title="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson" label="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42754199" start="20768" end="20779" title=".38 caliber" label=".38 caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="20780" end="20788" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q986390" start="20914" end="20927" title="Tadamasa Goto" label="Tadamasa Goto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587929" start="20951" end="20960" title="Goto-gumi" label="Goto-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368191" start="20975" end="20991" title="liver transplant" label="liver transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169282" start="20999" end="21018" title="UCLA Medical Center" label="UCLA Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q154200" start="21155" end="21158" title="National Police Agency (Japan)" label="NPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="21286" end="21289" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="21453" end="21467" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="21682" end="21690" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="21696" end="21707" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="21713" end="21720" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="21752" end="21763" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="21765" end="21770" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="21772" end="21778" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="21791" end="21806" title="Pacific Islands" label="Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="21815" end="21821" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022116" start="22316" end="22324" title="bōsōzoku" label="bōsōzoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q548787" start="22924" end="22933" title="burakumin" label="burakumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193292" start="23041" end="23053" title="Heian period" label="Heian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q19671714" start="23097" end="23108" title="Lineal descendant" label="descendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488450" start="23183" end="23193" title="feudal Japan hierarchy" label="feudal era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060201" start="23303" end="23318" title="ritual impurity" label="ritual impurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207651" start="23338" end="23349" title="executioner" label="executioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q316490" start="23352" end="23362" title="undertaker" label="undertaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="23368" end="23382" title="leather worker" label="leather worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="23432" end="23439" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235847" start="23491" end="23506" title="David E. Kaplan (author)" label="David E. Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q763018" start="23573" end="23587" title="Yamaguchi-gumi" label="Yamaguchi-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q533312" start="23658" end="23672" title="Koreans in Japan" label="ethnic Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q548787" start="23831" end="23840" title="burakumin" label="burakumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352920" start="23897" end="23908" title="Inagawa-kai" label="Inagawa-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q154200" start="23940" end="23971" title="National Police Agency (Japan)" label="Japanese National Police Agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24060" end="24081" title="Bōryokudan#Designated bōryokudan" label="designated Bōryokudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360796" start="24637" end="24652" title="Hisayuki Machii" label="Hisayuki Machii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811330" start="24673" end="24682" title="Toa-kai" label="Tosei-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813775" start="24684" end="24701" title="Tokutaro Takayama" label="Tokutaro Takayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607263" start="24734" end="24749" title="Aizukotetsu-kai" label="Aizukotetsu-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352920" start="24795" end="24806" title="Inagawa-kai" label="Inagawa-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452031" start="24859" end="24870" title="Kyokuto-kai" label="Kyokuto-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574284" start="26555" end="26581" title="1970s energy crisis" label="energy crisis of the 1970s"/>
<link wikidata="Q763018" start="28212" end="28226" title="Yamaguchi-gumi" label="Yamaguchi-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28833" end="28846" title=":ja:安藤隆春" label="Takaharu Ando"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425390" start="28935" end="28943" title="Kodo-kai" label="Kodo-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6419125" start="28950" end="28966" title="Kiyoshi Takayama" label="Kiyoshi Takayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q925673" start="29079" end="29091" title="Tadashi Irie" label="Tadashi Irie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967622" start="29171" end="29198" title="Yakuza exclusion ordinances" label="Yakuza exclusion ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q385775" start="30807" end="30816" title="Osaka Gas" label="Osaka Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967622" start="31262" end="31289" title="yakuza exclusion ordinances" label="yakuza exclusion ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="31624" end="31648" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="U.S. Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q82679" start="32253" end="32269" title="Tokyo High Court" label="Tokyo High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349753" start="32287" end="32300" title="Sumiyoshi-kai" label="Sumiyoshi-kai"/>
<link wikidata="Q55050795" start="32603" end="32616" title="Satoru Nomura" label="Nomura Satoru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195495" start="32645" end="32663" title="Capital punishment in Japan" label="sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="33914" end="33930" title="Japanese society" label="Japanese society"/>
<link wikidata="Q533312" start="34366" end="34381" title="Koreans in Japan" label="Korean-Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q731194" start="34736" end="34741" title="yakuza film" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517358" start="35006" end="35040" title="Battles Without Honor and Humanity (film)" label="Battles Without Honor and Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180884" start="35057" end="35070" title="Dead or Alive (1999 film)" label="Dead or Alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q544747" start="35264" end="35269" title="Minbo" label="Minbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325171" start="35414" end="35424" title="Juzo Itami" label="Juzo Itami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044064" start="35562" end="35572" title="The Yakuza" label="The Yakuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048085" start="35601" end="35611" title="Black Rain (1989 American film)" label="Black Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153794" start="35628" end="35640" title="The Punisher (1989 film)" label="The Punisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129069" start="35668" end="35683" title="Johnny Mnemonic (film)" label="Johnny Mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671523" start="35711" end="35723" title="Into the Sun (2005 film)" label="Into the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q197491" start="35749" end="35762" title="The Wolverine (film)" label="The Wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767815" start="35786" end="35798" title="The Outsider (2018 film)" label="The Outsider"/>
<link wikidata="Q64027609" start="35816" end="35826" title="Snake Eyes (2021 film)" label="Snake Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844750" start="35936" end="35962" title="The Man in the High Castle (TV series)" label="The Man in the High Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775920" start="36027" end="36036" title="Giri/Haji" label="Giri/Haji"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="36172" end="36179" title="HBO Max" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q85809934" start="36187" end="36209" title="Tokyo Vice (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Tokyo Vice&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806267" start="36291" end="36305" title="Jake Adelstein" label="Jake Adelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q112685445" start="36330" end="36344" title="Akiba Maid War" label="Akiba Maid War"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="36356" end="36375" title="black comedy" label="dark comedic parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q8657160" start="36385" end="36395" title="maid cafés" label="maid cafés"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594935" start="36497" end="36510" title="Yakuza (franchise)" label="Like a Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q562135" start="36967" end="36986" title="Like a Dragon (film)" label="a live-action movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q149106" start="37015" end="37035" title="Grand Theft Auto III" label="Grand Theft Auto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q149106" start="37082" end="37093" title="Claude (Grand Theft Auto)" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q125752" start="37157" end="37162" title="American Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37584" end="37622" title="Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories" label="Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37686" end="37713" title="Grand Theft Auto: Vice City" label="Grand Theft Auto: Vice City"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37789" end="37814" title="Hitman 2: Silent Assassin" label="Hitman 2: Silent Assassin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996431" start="37863" end="37871" title="Agent 47" label="Agent 47"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630929" start="38021" end="38027" title="Hitman (2016 video game)" label="Hitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q840447" start="38214" end="38232" title="Stop!! Hibari-kun!" label="Stop!! Hibari-kun!"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="38240" end="38245" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="38259" end="38264" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q699321" start="38563" end="38570" title="Gokusen" label="Gokusen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="38578" end="38583" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="38624" end="38629" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355878" start="38963" end="38978" title="My Boss My Hero" label="My Boss My Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745370" start="38986" end="38996" title="Film stock" label="Film stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q63567845" start="39410" end="39436" title="Twittering Birds Never Fly" label="Twittering Birds Never Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q242488" start="39457" end="39466" title="shōnen-ai" label="shōnen-ai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="39777" end="39782" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q242488" start="39784" end="39788" title="yaoi" label="yaoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q105965081" start="40252" end="40260" title="Odd Taxi" label="Odd Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="40268" end="40273" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="40275" end="40280" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="40430" end="40435" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332841" start="40439" end="40454" title="Ryoichi Ikegami" label="Ryoichi Ikegami"/>
<link wikidata="Q669481" start="40517" end="40526" title="Sanctuary (manga)" label="Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129064" start="40800" end="40804" title="Heat (manga)" label="Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757796" start="41047" end="41054" title="Nisekoi" label="Nisekoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022116" start="41308" end="41316" title="Bōsōzoku" label="Bōsōzoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q468804" start="41319" end="41326" title="Camorra" label="Camorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q902956" start="41329" end="41343" title="Crime in Japan" label="Crime in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185640" start="41346" end="41361" title="Criminal tattoo" label="Criminal tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q634894" start="41364" end="41370" title="Gopnik" label="Gopnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183723" start="41373" end="41380" title="Irezumi" label="Irezumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843058" start="41383" end="41392" title="Irish mob" label="Irish mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059422" start="41395" end="41403" title="Kkangpae" label="Kkangpae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614668" start="41406" end="41456" title="List of criminal enterprises, gangs and syndicates" label="List of criminal enterprises, gangs and syndicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q18550" start="41459" end="41464" title="Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q425698" start="41467" end="41477" title="Ndrangheta" label="Ndrangheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="41480" end="41495" title="Organized crime" label="Organized crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259960" start="41498" end="41508" title="Punch perm" label="Punch perm"/>
<link wikidata="Q817144" start="41511" end="41524" title="Russian mafia" label="Russian mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="41527" end="41541" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q329978" start="41544" end="41550" title="Triad (organized crime)" label="Triads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967622" start="41553" end="41580" title="Yakuza exclusion ordinances" label="Yakuza exclusion ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41583" end="41597" title=":en:Category:Yakuza members" label="Yakuza members"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160041" start="42390" end="42448" title="Confessions of a Yakuza" label="Confessions of a Yakuza: A Life in Japan&amp;#x27;s Underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="42840" end="42845" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169515" start="43136" end="43155" title="Jean-Pierre Limosin" label="Jean-Pierre Limosin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43157" end="43169" title="Cinema Epoch" label="Cinema Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q747860" start="43260" end="43268" title="BBC Reel" label="BBC Reel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704134" start="43302" end="43312" title="Al Jazeera Media Network" label="Al Jazeera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44775" wikidata="Q527101" url="?curid=44775" title="Complete measure">
<text>In mathematics, a complete measure (or, more precisely, a complete measure space) is a measure space in which every subset of every null set is measurable (having measure zero). More formally, a measure space (&quot;X&quot;, Σ, &quot;μ&quot;) is complete if and only if

:formula_1

==Motivation==
The need to consider questions of completeness can be illustrated by considering the problem of product spaces.

Suppose that we have already constructed Lebesgue measure on the real line: denote this measure space by formula_2 We now wish to construct some two-dimensional Lebesgue measure formula_3 on the plane formula_4 as a product measure. Naively, we would take the -algebra on formula_4 to be formula_6 the smallest -algebra containing all measurable &quot;rectangles&quot; formula_7 for formula_8

While this approach does define a measure space, it has a flaw. Since every singleton set has one-dimensional Lebesgue measure zero,
formula_9
for subset formula_10 of formula_11 However, suppose that formula_10 is a non-measurable subset of the real line, such as the Vitali set. Then the formula_3-measure of formula_14 is not defined but
formula_15
and this larger set does have formula_3-measure zero. So this &quot;two-dimensional Lebesgue measure&quot; as just defined is not complete, and some kind of completion procedure is required.

==Construction of a complete measure==
Given a (possibly incomplete) measure space (&quot;X&quot;, Σ, &quot;μ&quot;), there is an extension (&quot;X&quot;, Σ0, &quot;μ&quot;0) of this measure space that is complete. The smallest such extension (i.e. the smallest &quot;σ&quot;-algebra Σ0) is called the completion of the measure space.

The completion can be constructed as follows:
* let &quot;Z&quot; be the set of all the subsets of the zero-&quot;μ&quot;-measure subsets of &quot;X&quot; (intuitively, those elements of &quot;Z&quot; that are not already in Σ are the ones preventing completeness from holding true);
* let Σ0 be the &quot;σ&quot;-algebra generated by Σ and &quot;Z&quot; (i.e. the smallest &quot;σ&quot;-algebra that contains every element of Σ and of &quot;Z&quot;);
* &quot;μ&quot; has an extension &quot;μ&quot;0 to Σ0 (which is unique if &quot;μ&quot; is &quot;σ&quot;-finite), called the outer measure of &quot;μ&quot;, given by the infimum

::formula_17

Then (&quot;X&quot;, Σ0, &quot;μ&quot;0) is a complete measure space, and is the completion of (&quot;X&quot;, Σ, &quot;μ&quot;).

In the above construction it can be shown that every member of Σ0 is of the form &quot;A&quot; ∪ &quot;B&quot; for some &quot;A&quot; ∈ Σ and some &quot;B&quot; ∈ &quot;Z&quot;, and

:formula_18

==Examples==
* Borel measure as defined on the Borel &quot;σ&quot;-algebra generated by the open intervals of the real line is not complete, and so the above completion procedure must be used to define the complete Lebesgue measure. This is illustrated by the fact that the set of all Borel sets over the reals has the same cardinality as the reals. While the Cantor set is a Borel set, has measure zero, and its power set has cardinality strictly greater than that of the reals. Thus there is a subset of the Cantor set that is not contained in the Borel sets. Hence, the Borel measure is not complete.
* &quot;n&quot;-dimensional Lebesgue measure is the completion of the &quot;n&quot;-fold product of the one-dimensional Lebesgue space with itself. It is also the completion of the Borel measure, as in the one-dimensional case.

==Properties==

Maharam&#x27;s theorem states that every complete measure space is decomposable into measures on continua, and a finite or countable counting measure.

==See also==
* 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q527101" start="18" end="34" title="Complete measure" label="complete measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q527101" start="58" end="80" title="Complete measure" label="complete measure space"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="87" end="100" title="measure (mathematics)" label="measure space"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="116" end="122" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201815" start="132" end="140" title="null set" label="null set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201815" start="163" end="175" title="measure zero" label="measure zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="452" end="468" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="476" end="485" title="real line" label="real line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572094" start="627" end="642" title="product measure" label="product measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q217357" start="671" end="679" title="Sigma algebra" label="-algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058212" start="839" end="852" title="measure space" label="measure space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165112" start="881" end="890" title="Singleton (mathematics)" label="singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055379" start="1022" end="1043" title="Non-measurable set" label="non-measurable subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q257387" start="1074" end="1084" title="Vitali set" label="Vitali set"/>
<link wikidata="Q291430" start="2229" end="2249" title="Σ-finite measure" label="&amp;quot;σ&amp;quot;-finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q258374" start="2263" end="2276" title="outer measure" label="outer measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="2308" end="2315" title="infimum" label="infimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q892585" start="2673" end="2686" title="Borel measure" label="Borel measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="2750" end="2754" title="Open set" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="2755" end="2764" title="Interval (mathematics)" label="intervals"/>
<link wikidata="Q273188" start="3018" end="3028" title="Cantor set" label="Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q6733278" start="3507" end="3529" title="Maharam&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Maharam&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174982" start="3604" end="3612" title="Continuum (set theory)" label="continua"/>
<link wikidata="Q247204" start="3640" end="3656" title="counting measure" label="counting measure"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44776" wikidata="Q1903" url="?curid=44776" title="Catania">
<text>Catania (, , ; ) is the second-largest municipality on Sicily, after Palermo, both by area and by population. Despite its reputation as the second city of the island, Catania is the largest Sicilian conurbation, and among the largest in Italy. It has important road and rail transport infrastructures, and hosts the main airport of Sicily (fifth-largest in Italy). The city is located on Sicily&#x27;s east coast, facing the Ionian Sea at the base of the active volcano Mount Etna. It is the capital of the 58-municipality region known as the Metropolitan City of Catania, which is the seventh-largest metropolitan area in Italy. The population of the city proper is 311,584, while the population of the Metropolitan City of Catania is 1,107,702.

Catania was founded in the 8th century BC by Chalcidian Greeks in Magna Graecia. The city has weathered multiple geologic catastrophes: it was almost completely destroyed by a catastrophic earthquake in 1169. A major eruption and lava flow from nearby Mount Etna nearly swamped the city in 1669 and it suffered severe devastation from the 1693 Sicily earthquake.

During the 14th century, and into the Renaissance period, Catania was one of Italy&#x27;s most important cultural, artistic and political centres. It was the site of Sicily&#x27;s first university, founded in 1434. It has been the native or adopted home of some of Italy&#x27;s most famous artists and writers, including the composers Vincenzo Bellini and Giovanni Pacini, and the writers Giovanni Verga, Luigi Capuana, Federico De Roberto and Nino Martoglio.

Catania today is the industrial, logistical, and commercial centre of Sicily. Its airport, the Catania–Fontanarossa Airport, is the largest in Southern Italy. The central &quot;old town&quot; of Catania features exuberant late-baroque architecture, prompted after the 1693 earthquake, and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

==Etymology==
The ancient indigenous population of Sicily, the Sicels, named their villages after geographical attributes of their location. The word &quot;katane&quot; means &quot;grater, flaying knife, skinning place&quot; or a &quot;crude tool apt to pare&quot;. Other translations of the name are &quot;harsh lands&quot;, &quot;uneven ground&quot;, &quot;sharp stones&quot;, or &quot;rugged or rough soil&quot;. The latter etymologies are easily justifiable since, for many centuries following an eruption, the city has always been rebuilt within its black-lava landscape.

Around 263 BC, the city was variously known as &quot;Catĭna&quot; () and &quot;Catăna&quot; (; ). The former has been primarily used for its supposed assonance with &quot;catina&quot;, the Latin feminization of the name &quot;catinus&quot;. &quot;Catinus&quot; has two meanings: &quot;a gulf, a basin or a bay&quot; and &quot;a bowl, a vessel or a trough&quot;, thanks to the city&#x27;s distinctive topography.

Around 900, when Catania was part of the emirate of Sicily, it was known in Arabic as &quot;Balad al-fīl&quot; () and &quot;Madīnat al-fīl&quot; (), respectively meaning &quot;the Village (or Country) of the Elephant&quot; and &quot;the City of the Elephant&quot;. The Elephant likely referred to the ancient lava sculpture, now placed over the fountain in Piazza Duomo. The sculpture is most likely a prehistoric sculpture that was reforged during the Byzantine Era, prized as a protective talisman against enemies, both human, natural or geologic. Another Arab toponym was &quot;Qaṭāniyyah&quot; (), allegedly from the Arabic word for the &quot;leguminous plants&quot;. Pulses like lentils, beans, peas, broad beans, and lupins were chiefly cultivated in the plains around the city well before the arrival of Aghlabids. Afterwards, many Arabic agronomists developed these crops and the citrus orchards in the area around the city. The toponym &quot;Wādī Mūsá&quot; (), or &quot;the Valley of Moses&quot; (from the Arabic name of the Simeto River), was rarely used.

==Geography==
As observed by Strabo, the location of Catania at the foot of Mount Etna has been both a curse and a blessing. On the one hand, violent outbursts of the volcano throughout history have destroyed large parts of the city, while on the other hand the volcanic ashes yield fertile soil, especially suited for the growth of vines. (Strab. vi. p. 269)

Two subterranean rivers run under the city; the Amenano, which surfaces at one single point south of Piazza Duomo, and the Longane (or Lognina).

===Climate===
Catania experiences a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen: &quot;Csa&quot;). The city has hot summers, one of the hottest in the whole country of Italy. Temperatures of are surpassed almost every year a couple of times.

Winters are mild, with significant nighttime cooling. Precipitation is concentrated from October to March, leaving late spring and summer virtually dry. The city receives around of rain per year, although the amount can vary greatly from year to year, from over to under .

During winter nights, lows can occasionally reach below freezing. Highs under may happen during winter. Snow, due to the presence of Etna that protects the city from the northern winds, is an uncommon occurrence, but occasional snow flurries have been seen over the recent years, especially in the hilly districts. More recently, light snowfalls occurred on 9 February 2015, 6 January 2017 and 5 January 2019, but the last heavy snowfall dates back to 17 December 1988.

== Demographics ==

In January 2015, there were 315,601 people residing in Catania, of whom 47.2% were male and 52.8% were female. Minors (people under age 18) totalled 20.50 percent of the population compared to pensioners who number 18.87 percent. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06 percent (minors) and 19.94 percent (pensioners).The average age of Catania residents is 41 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Catania declined by 3.35 percent, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.85 percent. The reason for this population decline in the &quot;comune&quot; di Catania is mainly due to a large segment of the population leaving the city centre to go to live in the uptown residential areas of the &quot;comuni&quot; of the Metropolitan area. As a result of this, while the population in the &quot;comune&quot; di Catania declines, the population of the hinterland &quot;comuni&quot; increases making the overall population of the Metropolitan area increase.

The current birth rate of Catania is 10.07 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births. , 98.03% of the population was Italian. The largest immigrant groups come from Sub-Saharan Africa: 0.69%, South Asia: 0.46%, and from other European countries (particularly from Ukraine and Poland): 0.33%. There is currently a small community of Samaritans from Israel.

==History==
===Foundation===
Around 729 BC, the ancient village of &quot;Katane&quot; was occupied by Chalcidian Greek settlers from nearby Naxos along the coast. It became the Chalcidian colony of &quot;Katánē&quot; under a leader named Euarchos (Euarchus) and the native population was rapidly Hellenised.

Thucydides states that it came into existence slightly later than Leontini (modern Lentini), which he claims was five years after Syracuse, or 730 BC.

The settlement&#x27;s acropolis was on the hill of Monte Vergine, a defensible hill immediately west of the current city centre. The port of Catania appears to have been much frequented in ancient time and was the chief place of export for the corn of the rich neighbouring plains.

===Greek Catania===

Catania was associated with the ancient legend of Amphinomos and Anapias, who, on occasion of a great eruption of Etna, abandoned all their property and carried off their aged parents on their shoulders. The stream of lava itself was said to have parted, and flowed aside so as not to harm them. Statues were erected to their honour, and the place of their burial was known as the &quot;Campus Piorum&quot;; the Catanaeans even introduced the figures of the youths on their coins, and the legend became a favorite subject of allusion and declamation among the Latin poets, of whom the younger Lucilius and Claudian have dwelt upon it at considerable length.

The Greek polis of Catania appears to have been a local center of learning. The philosopher and legislator Charondas (late 6th c. BC), born in Catania, putatively wrote program of laws used here and in other Chalcidic cities, both in Sicily and through Magna Graecia. suggesting a link between Catania and other cities during this time. The poets Ibycus and Stesichorus (–555 BC) lived in Catania. The latter putatively was buried in a magnificent sepulchre outside one of the gates, therefore named &quot;Porta Stesichoreia&quot;. Xenophanes (-475 BC), one of the founders of the Eleatic school of philosophy, also spent the latter years of his life in the city. The first introduction of dancing to accompany the flute was also ascribed to Andron, a citizen of Catania.

Catania appears to have remained independent until the conquest by the despot Hieron of Syracuse; in 476 BC, he expelled all the original inhabitants of Catania and replaced them with his subjects from the town of Leontini – said to have numbered no less than 10,000, consisting partly of Syracusans and Peloponnesians. Hieron changed the city&#x27;s name to (&quot;Aítnē&quot;, Aetna or Ætna, after the nearby Mount Etna, and proclaimed himself the Oekist or founder of the new city. For this he was celebrated by Pindar, and after his death he received heroic honours from the citizens of his new colony.

A few years after the death of Hieron and the expulsion of Thrasybulus of Syracuse, the Syracusans combined with Ducetius, king of the Sicels, to expel the newly settled inhabitants of Catania, who went on to settle in the fortress of Inessa (to which they gave the name Aetna). The old Chalcidic citizens returned to the city in 461 BC.

The period that followed appears to have been one of great prosperity for Catania, as well as for the Sicilian cities in general.

In 415 BC, Catania became involved with the expedition to Sicily pursued by the Athenians to punish Syracuse. Initially the Catanaeans refused to allow the Athenians into their city, but after the latter had forced an entrance, the Athenian leader Alcibiades made a famous speech in front of the assembly. Catania became an ally, and the headquarters of the Athenian army for the first year of the expedition, and a base of their subsequent operations against Syracuse. After the defeat of the Athenians, Catania was again threatened by Syracuse. In 403 BC, Dionysius I of Syracuse plundered the city, sold its citizens as slaves, and repopulated the town with Campanian mercenaries. However, the Carthaginians would take possession of Catania under Himilco and Mago, after the nearby great naval Battle of Catana (397 BC) where they defeated Leptines of Syracuse, and in 396 BC forcing the local Campanian mercenaries to relocate to Aetna.

Calippus, the assassin of Dion of Syracuse, held Catania for a time (Plut. &quot;Dion.&quot; 58); and when Timoleon landed in Sicily in 344 BC Catania was subject to the despot Mamercus who at first joined the Corinthian leader, but afterwards abandoned this allegiance for that of the Carthaginians. As a consequence he was attacked and expelled by Timoleon in 338 BC.

Catania was now restored to a fragile independence; changing sides during the wars starting in 311 BC of Agathocles of Syracuse with the Carthaginians. When Pyrrhus landed in Sicily in 278 BC, Catania was the first to open its gates to him, and welcomed him with great splendor.

===Roman rule===
During the First Punic War, Catania was one of the first cities of Sicily to submit to the Roman Republic after their first successes in 263 BC when it was taken by Valerius Messalla. A sundial was part of the booty which was placed in the Comitium in Rome. Since then the city became a &quot;civitas decumana&quot; i.e. was subject to the payment of a tenth of its agricultural income as a tax to Rome. The conqueror of Syracuse, Marcus Claudius Marcellus, built a gymnasium here.

It appears to have continued afterwards to maintain its friendly relations with Rome and though it did not enjoy the advantages of a confederate city (&quot;foederata civitas&quot;), like its neighbours Tauromenium (modern Taormina) and Messana (modern Messina), it rose to a position of great prosperity under the Roman rule.

Around 135 BC during the First Servile War, it was conquered by rebel slaves.

One of the most serious eruptions of Mount Etna happened in 121 BC, when a great part of Catania was overwhelmed by streams of lava, and the hot ashes fell in such quantities in the city itself, as to break in the roofs of the houses. Catana was in consequence exempted, for 10 years, from its usual contributions to the Roman state. The greater part of the broad tract of plain to the southwest of Catana (now called the &quot;Piana di Catania&quot;, a district of great fertility), appears to have belonged, in ancient times, to Leontini or Centuripa (modern Centuripe), but that portion of it between Catana itself and the mouth of the Symaethus was annexed to Catana and must have furnished abundant supplies of grain.

Cicero repeatedly mentions it as, in his time, a wealthy and flourishing city; it retained its ancient municipal institutions, its chief magistrate bearing the title of &quot;Proagorus&quot;; and appears to have been one of the principal ports of Sicily for the export of corn.

In the Sicilian revolt from 44 BC Sextus Pompeius selected Sicily as his base and Catania gave in to Sextus&#x27; revolt and joined his forces. Sextus amassed a formidable army and a large fleet of warships at his base at Messana, with many slaves joining from the villas of patricians. After the victory of Augustus in 36 BC much of the vast farmland in Sicily was either ruined or left empty, and much of this land was taken and distributed to members of the legions which had fought there. Catania suffered severely from the ravages but was afterwards one of the cities raised to the status of colony by Augustus which restored its prosperity through the settlement of veterans, so that in Strabo&#x27;s time it was one of the few cities in the island that was flourishing.

Another revolt led by the gladiator Selurus in 35 BC created mayhem for a while.

The Roman aqueduct of Catania was the longest in Roman Sicily at , starting from the springs of Santa Maria di Licodia.

It retained its colonial rank, as well as its prosperity, throughout the period of the Roman Empire; so that in the 4th century Ausonius in his &quot;Ordo Nobilium Urbium&quot;, notices Catania and Syracuse alone among the cities of Sicily.

===Middle Ages===

Catania was sacked by the Vandals of Gaiseric in 440–441. After a period under the Ostrogoths, it was reconquered in 535 by the Eastern Roman Empire, under which (aside from a short period in 550–555) it remained until the 9th century. It was the seat of the Byzantine governor of the island.

Catania was under an Islamic emirate for two centuries, after which it fell to the Normans of Roger I of Sicily. Subsequently, the city was ruled by a bishop-count (1072). In 1194–1197 the city was sacked by German soldiers during after the conquest of the island by emperor Henry VI. In 1232 it rebelled to the former&#x27;s son, Frederick II, who later built a massive castle, &quot;Castello Ursino&quot; and also made Catania a royal city, ending the dominance of the bishops.

Catania was one of the main centers of the Sicilian Vespers revolt (1282) against the House of Anjou and was the seat of the coronation of the new Aragonese king of Sicily, Peter I. The city remained a key Sicilian port during the War of the Sicilian Vespers. After a civil revolt in 1299, the city was captured by an Angevin army, which occupied the city until the Angevins evacuated their holdings on Sicily in 1302.

In the 14th century it gained importance as it was chosen by the Aragonese as a Parliament and Royal seat. Here, in 1347, it was signed the treaty of peace that ended the long War of the Vesper between Aragonese and Angevines. Catania lost its capital role when, in the early 15th century, Sicily was turned into a member of the Crown of Aragon, and kept its autonomy and original privileges specially during the period from 1282 to 1410.

In 1434 King Alfonso V founded here the &quot;Siciliae Studium Generale&quot;, the oldest university in the island.

===Early modern times===
With the unification of Castile and Aragon (early 16th century), Sicily became part of the Spanish Empire. It rebelled against the foreign government in 1516 and 1647.

In 1669 the city&#x27;s surroundings suffered great material damage from the 1669 Etna eruption. The city itself was largely saved by its walls that diverted most of the lava into the port. Afterwards, in 1693 the city was nearly completely destroyed by a heavy 1693 Sicily earthquake and its aftershocks. The city was then rebuilt in the Baroque architecture that nowadays characterizes it.

===Unified Italy===
Catania was one of the vanguards of the movement for Sicilian autonomy in the early 19th century.

In 1860 Giuseppe Garibaldi&#x27;s expedition of the Thousand conquered Sicily for Piedmont from the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Since the following year Catania was part of the newly unified Italy, whose history it shares since then.

The first half of the twentieth century was a cycle of repeated destruction and rebuilding for the city of Catania.

During the years 1923 and 1928, Catania endured two major eruptions of Mt. Etna. The 1923 eruption lasted twenty-nine days, from June 6 until June 29. A large lava flow occurred in the 1928 event and was the first to destroy a population center in over two hundred years.

At the onset of World War 1, Italy was part of a defensive alliance with Germany and Austria-Hungary referred to as the Triple Alliance.  After one year, Italy joined the Allied forces. Many promises made to secure Italy’s help during the war were not kept resulting in stability issues throughout the country leading to the adoption of fascist ideations. As the second World War began, the new regime opted to support Adolf Hitler, resulting in Catania and all the surrounding areas on Sicily being destroyed by Allied bombing.

 During World War II, Catania was heavily bombed by the Allied air forces, owing to the presence of two of the main Axis airfields in Sicily (Gerbini and Fontanarossa) and for its strategically important port and marshalling yard. Altogether, the city suffered eighty-seven air raids. The heaviest took place in the spring and summer of 1943, before and during the Allied invasion of Sicily; they caused heavy damage to the city (among others, twenty-eight churches and most historic palaces suffered damage), killed 750 inhabitants and prompted most of the population to flee to the countryside. After heavy fighting across eastern Sicily, Catania was eventually captured by the British 8th Army on 5 August 1943.

After the conflict, and the constitution of the Italian Republic (1946), Catania attempted to catch up with the economic and social development of Italy&#x27;s richer northern regions. The problems faced in Catania were emblematic of those faced by other towns in the Mezzogiorno, namely a heavy gap in industrial development and infrastructures, and the threat of the mafia. This notwithstanding, during the 1960s (and partly during the 1990s) Catania enjoyed development and a period of economic, social, and cultural success. In the first decade of the 21st century, Catania&#x27;s economic and social development somewhat faltered and the city is again facing economic and social stagnation. This was aggravated by the economic crisis left by the administration of mayor Scapagnini in 2008.

==Administrative divisions==
===Metropolitan City===
The Metropolitan City of Catania was established in 2015 and replaced the former Province of Catania. It includes the city proper and 57 &quot;comuni&quot; (municipalities). The population of the Metropolitan City is 1,107,702.

===Metropolitan area===
The Metropolitan area of Catania includes the &quot;comune&quot; of Catania (311,584 inhabitants) and 26 surrounding &quot;comuni&quot; forming an urban belt (498,650 inhabitants). The total population of the Metropolitan area of Catania is therefore 810,234. The &quot;comuni&quot; of the Metropolitan area are:

* Aci Bonaccorsi
* Aci Castello
* Aci Catena
* Aci Sant&#x27;Antonio
* Acireale
* Belpasso
* Biancavilla
* Camporotondo Etneo
* Catania
* Gravina di Catania
* Mascalucia
* Misterbianco
* Motta Sant&#x27;Anastasia
* Nicolosi
* Paternò
* Pedara
* Ragalna
* San Giovanni la Punta
* San Gregorio di Catania
* San Pietro Clarenza
* Sant&#x27;Agata li Battiati
* Santa Maria di Licodia
* Santa Venerina
* Trecastagni
* Tremestieri Etneo
* Valverde
* Viagrande
* Zafferana Etnea

These &quot;comuni&quot; form a system with the centre of Catania sharing its economical and social life and creating an organic urban texture.

===City proper===
The city of Catania proper (&quot;comune di Catania&quot;) is divided in six administrative areas called &quot;circoscrizioni&quot;. The current administrative setup was established in 2013, modifying previous setups dating back to 1971, 1978 and 1995.

The six areas are:


==Main sights==
The symbol of the city is &quot;u Liotru&quot;, or the &quot;Fontana dell&#x27;Elefante&quot;, assembled in 1736 by Giovanni Battista Vaccarini. It portrays an ancient lavic stone elephant and is topped by an Egyptian obelisk from Syene. Legend has it that Vaccarini&#x27;s original elephant was neuter, which the men of Catania took as an insult to their virility. To appease them, Vaccarini appropriately appended elephantine testicles to the original statue.

The Sicilian name &quot;u Liotru&quot; is a phonetic change of Heliodorus, a nobleman who, after trying without success to become bishop of the city, became a sorcerer and was therefore condemned to the stake. Legend has it that Heliodorus himself was the sculptor of the lava elephant and that he used to magically ride it in his fantastic travels from Catania to Constantinople. Another legend has it that Heliodorus was able to transform himself into an elephant.

The presence of an elephant in the history of Catania is surely connected to both zooarcheology and popular creeds. In fact, the prehistoric fauna of Sicily from the Upper Paleolithic, included dwarf elephants. Paleontologist Othenio Abel suggested that the presence of dwarf elephants in Sicily may be the origin of the legend of the Cyclops. Ancient Greeks, after finding the skulls of dwarf elephants, about twice the size of a human skull, with a large central nasal cavity (mistaken for a large single eye socket) supposed that they were skulls of giants with a single eye.

The &quot;Catanian Museum of Mineralogy, Paleontology and Vulcanology&quot; holds the integral unburied skeleton of an &quot;Elephas falconeri&quot; in an excellent state of conservation. The first inhabitants of Etna molded such lavic artifacts to idolize the mythical proboscidian.

===Classical buildings===
The city has been buried by lava a total of seventeen times in recorded history, and in layers under the present-day city are the Roman city that preceded it, and the Greek city before that. Many of the ancient monuments of the Roman city have been destroyed by these numerous incidents. Currently, different ancient remains can be seen and visited in the city centre, as part of an archaeological park (Parco Archeologico Greco-Romano di Catania).

Ancient edifices include:

*Greek-Roman Theatre of Catania and Odeon (2nd to 3rd century CE)
*Amphitheatre of Catania
*Greek Acropolis of Montevergine
*Roman Forum
*Christian basilicas, hypogea, burial monuments, and catacombs
*Thermae
**Achillean Baths
**&quot;Terme dell&#x27;Indirizzo&quot;
**&quot;Terme di Santa Maria Odigitria&quot;
**&quot;Terme della Rotonda&quot;
**Baths of the Four Quoins
**&quot;Terme di Palazzo Asmundo&quot;
**&quot;Terme di Casa Gagliano&quot;
**&quot;Terme della Chiesa di Sant&#x27;Antonio Abate&quot;

===Baroque and historical churches===

The Baroque city centre of Catania is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

*Catania Cathedral (1070–1093, rebuilt after 1693 earthquake) built atop &quot;Terme Achilliana&quot;
*Sant&#x27;Agata, Badia di (1620), church and monastery
*Sant&#x27;Agata la Vetere (254) church
*Sant&#x27;Agata al Borgo, built 1669, destroyed 1693, rebuilt 1709). The &quot;Borough&quot; (&quot;il Borgo&quot;) is an inner district of Catania.
*Sant&#x27;Agata al Carcere or &quot;Santo Carcere&quot; (1760). Church built above jail (carcere) where Ste Agatha was allegedly imprisoned during her martyrdom.
*Sant&#x27;Agata on the Lavic Runnels
*Sant&#x27;Anna church
*San Antonio Abate
*San Benedetto (1704–1713) church and adjacent &quot;Badìa Grande e Piccola del Chiostro delle Monache Benedettine&quot;
*San Biagio, church formerly called &quot;Sant&#x27;Agata alla Fornace&quot; (1098, rebuilt 1700)
*Basilica della Collegiata, Sicilian Baroque façade by Stefano Ittar
*San Camillo ai Crociferi, church
*Santa Caterina al Rinazzo church
*Santa Chiara (1563) church, and former convent of Poor Clares
*San Domenico or Santa Maria la Grande (1224), church and convent
*Sant&#x27;Euplio, ruins of church
*San Filippo Neri
*San Francesco d&#x27;Assisi all&#x27;Immacolata (1329), Franciscan church with tomb of its founding patron, Queen Eleanor of Sicily
*San Francesco Borgia church and adjacent former Jesuit college
*San Francesco di Paola
*San Gaetano alle Grotte (260) church
*San Gaetano alla Marina
*San Giovanni Battista, in the suburb of San Giovanni di Galermo
*San Giuliano church and convent
*San Giuseppe al Duomo church
*San Giuseppe al Transito church
*Madonna del Carmine (1729) Basilica church and sanctuary
*Santa Maria di Gesu church (1465, restored in 1706)
*Santa Maria della Guardia church
*Santa Maria dell&#x27;Indirizzo (1730) church
*Santa Maria della Mercede church
*Santa Maria della Mercede church
*Santa Maria di Ogninella
*Santa Maria della Purità or &quot;della Visitazione&quot; (1775), church and conservatory
*Santa Maria della Providenza al Borgo, church
*Santa Maria della Rotonda
*Santa Maria del Soccorso or Santa Maria della Palma church
*Santa Maria dell&#x27;Aiuto parish church and sanctuary
*&quot;Santa Maria dell&#x27;Itria&quot; or &quot;Odigitria&quot;, church
*Santa Marta
*San Martino dei Bianchi church
*San Michele the Lesser
*San Michele Arcangelo ai Minoriti (Franciscan) church, a second Minoritelli church is nearby
*San Nicolò l&#x27;Arena (1687), unfinished basilica church and extensive Benedictine Monastery of San Nicolò l&#x27;Arena (1558) 
*San Nicolas al Borgo
*San Placido (1769) church
*Madonna delle Grazie Chapel
*Santa Rita in Sant&#x27;Agostino church
*San Sebastiano (1313)
*Santa Teresa, Carmelitan church and convent
*Santissima Trinità, church
*Santa Ursula
*Chiesa delle Verginelle di Sant&#x27;Agata
*San Vincenzo de&#x27; Paoli, church
*Santissimo Sacramento al Borgo church
*Chapel of the &quot;Blind&#x27;s Housing&quot; (&quot;Ospizio dei Ciechi&quot;)
*&quot;Santissimo Sacramento al Duomo&quot;, church
*Church of the Holy Child
*Our Lady of Providence
*San Berillo in Santa Maria degli Ammalati, church
*Our Lady of the Poor
*Little Saviour&#x27;s Byzantine chapel
*Church of the &quot;Santissimo Sacramento Ritrovato&quot; (1796)
*Sanctuary of Our Lady of Ognina (1308). &quot;Ognina&quot; is the maritime quarter and the main fishing port in Catania. Many bareboats and sailing vessels gather here all year round. In its close vicinity is a cylindrical tower known as Saint Mary&#x27;s Tower (&quot;Torre Santa Maria&quot;), which was restructured in the 16th century to prevent the frequent plundering by the Saracen pirates. The church is the result of the gradual modification of the Greek Temple &quot;Athena Longatis&quot; or &quot;Parthenos Longatis&quot; that existed on the steep reef. This cult was imported from a Boeotian region of Greece called &quot;Longas&quot; from where the first Hellenic settlers of this borough probably came. After the earthquake of 1693 it was rebuilt in the same place, but with a different orientation.
*Our Lady of Montserrat (1755)
*Saint Mary of La Salette
*Our Lady of Concordia
*Our Lady of Consolation
*Santissimo Crocifisso Maiorana church
*&quot;Crucifix of Miracles&quot;
*Crucifix of Good Death
*Our Lady of La Mecca
*Most Holy Redeemer
*&quot;Divina Maternità&quot; church
*Chapel of Mary Auxiliatrix
*Chapel of the Sacred Heart of Jesus church
*&quot;Sacro Cuore al Fortino&quot; (1898) church
*Saints George and Denis
*Sacred Heart Church of the Capuchins
*Saint Christopher
*Saints Cosmas and Damian
*Saint Vitus
*&quot;Santi Angeli Custodi&quot; church
*&quot;Santissimo Salvatore&quot; church

===Other===

*Ursino Castle, built by emperor Frederick II in the 13th century.
*Elephants&#x27; Palace (or &quot;Palace of the Elephants&quot;), designed by Vaccarini, houses the municipality offices.
*University Central Palace, designed by the Battaglia family, is an offices seat and main library of the Catania University.
*Biscari Palace
*Tezzano Palace
*The Medieval Gothic-Catalan Arch of the Friars&#x27; Saint John the Baptist (&quot;San Giovanni de&#x27; Fleres&quot;)
*Porta Garibaldi, triumphal arch, originally &quot;Porta Ferdinandea&quot; erected in 1768 to celebrate the wedding of King Ferdinand I and Marie Caroline of Austria.
*Porta del Fortino (&quot;Redoubt Gate&quot;)
*Bellini Theatre
*Sangiorgi Theatre
*Palazzo Rosa (&quot;Pink Palace&quot;)
*Negozio Frigeri, or Palazzina Frigeri (&quot;Frigeri Shop&quot;, or &quot;Frigeri Little Palace&quot;)
*Palazzo dell&#x27;Esposizione
*The House of the War Mutilateds (&quot;Casa del Mutilato&quot;) built in Fascist-style architecture.
*Catania War Cemetery, a Commonwealth Graveyard located in the southern country hamlet of Bicocca.
*Palazzo delle Poste (&quot;Post Office Palace&quot;)
*Palazzo della Borsa (&quot;Stock Exchange Building&quot;)
*Bellini Garden, or Villa Bellini
*Catania Botanical Garden
*Pacini Garden, or Villa Pacini
*Gioeni Park
*Clementi Building
*Garage Musumeci
*Four sculpture reliefs&#x27; street lights, situated in the Piazza Universitaria (&quot;University Square&quot;), depicting legendary characters and events: Peix Nicolau; Amphinomus and Anapias; Gammazita; and the young knight Uzeta.

==Economy==

Catania is the first economic and industrial hub of Sicily. The city is famous for its mainly petrochemical industry, and the extraction of sulphur. In the year 2000, according to Census, Catania was the 14th richest city in Italy, with a GDP of US$6.6 billion (€6.304 billion), which was 0.54% of the Italian GDP, a GDP per capita of US$21,000 (€20,100) and an average GDP per employee of US$69,000 (€66,100).

In the late-19th century and early-20th century, Catania began to be heavily industrialised, with its several factories and chimneys, often being referred to as Southern Italy&#x27;s &quot;Manchester&quot;. The economy of Catania suffered heavily from the bad effects of World War I, and was marked by an economic crisis and recession that culminated in the 1920s. Since then, the city lost its industrial and entrepreneurial importance. In the 1930s, Catania remained a small fishing town with derelict and disused industries. However, after the destruction of World War II, Catania&#x27;s economy began to re-grow in the late-1950s and early-1960s. The city&#x27;s economic growth was so rapid and dynamic that it was often nicknamed the &quot;Milan of the South&quot;, or in Italian &quot;Milano del Sud&quot;. This rapid economic growth prompted a great number of Sicilians living in the more rural areas, or smaller towns such as Enna, Ragusa and Caltanissetta, to move to the city to seek new jobs.

Today, Catania, despite several problems, has one of the most dynamic economies in the whole of Southern Italy. It still has a strong industrial and agricultural sector, and a fast-growing tourist industry, with many international visitors coming to visit the city&#x27;s main sights and the nearby Etna volcano. It contains the headquarters or important offices of companies such as STMicroelectronics, and also several chemical and pharmaceutical businesses. There have been several new business developments to further boost Catania&#x27;s economy, including the construction of Etnapolis, a big shopping mall designed by Massimiliano Fuksas, the same architect who designed the FieraMilano industrial fair in Milan, or the Etna Valley, where several high-tech offices are located.

Tourism is a fast-growing industry in Catania. Lately, the administration and private companies have made several investments in the hospitality industry in order to make tourism a competitive sector in the Metropolitan City. Etnaland, a large amusement and water park located in Belpasso, is in the metropolitan area of Catania, from the city center. It is the largest of its kind in Southern Italy and attracts thousands of tourists, not only from Sicily, but also from the rest of Italy. According to Tripadvisor (2018) it is the third-largest water park in Europe.

The seaport of Catania is linked to the road-rail distribution hub of Bologna. In September 2020 Mercitalia Logistics opened the first full railway route to link the city to Northern Italy. It replaced an older mixed maritime-railway line.

==Education==

Established in 1434, the University of Catania is the oldest university in Sicily. Its academic nicknames are: &quot;Siculorum Gymnasium&quot; and &quot;Siciliae Studium Generale&quot;. It hosts 12 faculties and over 62,000 students; and offers undergraduate and postgraduate programs.

Catania hosts the &quot;Scuola superiore di Catania&quot;, linked to the University of Catania, aimed at excellence in education; they offer undergraduate and postgraduate programs for teachers.

Catania is home to the prestigious &quot;Istituto Musicale Vincenzo Bellini&quot; an advanced institute of musical studies (Conservatory) and the &quot;Accademia di Belle Arti&quot; an advanced institute of artistic studies. Both institutions offer programs of university level for musical and artistic education.

==Culture==

Opera composer Vincenzo Bellini was born in Palazzo Gravina-Cruyllas in the city center, the palace now houses a museum about him. The Teatro Massimo Vincenzo Bellini, which opened in 1890, presents a variety of works through a season, which run from December to May, including the works of its namesake.

Giovanni Verga was born in Catania in 1840. He became the greatest writer of &quot;Verismo&quot;, an Italian literary movement akin to Naturalism. His novels portray life among the lower levels of Sicilian society, such as fishermen and stonemasons, and were written in a mixture of both literary language and the local dialect. Francesco Longo Mancini was a painter known for his paintings of nudes, who was born in Catania in 1880.

The city&#x27;s patron saint is Saint Agatha, who is celebrated with religious pageantry, the Festival of Saint Agatha, on 5 February every year.

The city is the base of the newspaper &quot;La Sicilia&quot; and of the TV channel Antenna Sicilia, also known as the Sicilia Channel. Several other local television channels and free-press magazines have their headquarters in Catania.

Catania hosts Etna Comics, a successful comic book convention now in its 12th edition, and the Catania Tango Festival, an international Tango event. Its 22nd edition has welcomed tango dancers from 27 different countries, confirming the festival as one of the most important international events in its genre.

The city is home to the Catania Jazz Festival, which typically runs for several winter months with concerts in different locations. In the late 1980s and during the 1990s Catania had an energetic and unique popular music scene. Indie pop and indie rock bands, local radio stations, and dynamic independent music record labels sprung up as a result. As a result, in those years the city experienced a vital and effervescent cultural period. Artists like Carmen Consoli and Mario Venuti, and internationally known indie rock bands like Uzeda came out of this cultural &quot;milieu&quot;.

==Sport==

Catania is home to many sports clubs covering a wide range of disciplines. The most famous club is the Catania FC football team, followed by approximately half a million supporters. Another club standing out from the rest is AS Orizzonte Catania, which is the leading women&#x27;s water polo club in Italy, with 24 National Championship titles (15 in a row from 1992 to 2006), and also in Europe, with 8 European Champions Cup titles.

Catania is the most successful city in team sports in the entire south of Italy (including Sicily and Sardinia), leading (as of August 2024) with 77 National Championships titles, ahead of Naples and of Bari.

As for individual sports, 56 athletes from Catania have won world titles, 54 have won European titles and 139 have won national titles.

In the Olympic Games, over the years, Italian athletes from Catania have won a total of 7 gold medals, 8 silver medals, and 4 bronze medals.

National Championships Titles Teams (as of November 2024)
Champion Cups Titles Teams (as of November 2024)

Main Sports Facilities
Catania holds the Catania-Etna car competition, organized by the Automobile Club d&#x27;Italia. The competition dates back to 1923 and has been taking place on a regular basis (with some gaps) from 1947. Suspended in 2010 due to a serious accident, the 46th edition is planned for the end of June 2021.

From 1960 to 2011 Catania held the International event named &quot;Trofeo Sant&#x27;Agata&quot;, a road running competition which took place in the streets of the city center, every year on 3 February (the day the Festival of Saint Agatha begins).

The city also hosted a series of International Sports Events: 
* 1993 Rugby World Cup Sevens qualifying, and the associated Etna Cup, which was won by the host Sicily team. 
* 1994 UCI Road World Championships (together with Palermo and Agrigento). 
* 1997 Summer Universiade (together with Palermo and Messina). 
* 2003 Military World Games 
* 2011 Men&#x27;s EuroHockey Championship III. 
* 2011 World Fencing Championships (Italy came out of this competition as the top winning nation with 11 medals, one won by the local fencer Paolo Pizzo). 
* 2024 World Company Sports Games.

==Food and cuisine==
Food is an important part of Catania&#x27;s culture and way of life. Local cuisine emphasizes several traits of Sicilian cuisine, whilst developing some of its own character.

Street food is one of the best ways to experience traditional dishes. Arancini are perhaps the city&#x27;s most iconic: they are stuffed rice balls coated in breadcrumbs and deep fried; in Catania, they are shaped like a cone to remind of Mount Etna. Typical specialties from the city include &#x27; (puff pastry with onion, tomato, and prosciutto filling), &quot;bolognese&quot; (a small pizza topped with tomato, mozzarella, prosciutto, and boiled egg, and covered in puff pastry), &#x27; (deep fried dough balls with ricotta or anchovies filling).

During street fairs and religious festivals, street stalls sell &#x27; (toasted chickpeas and pumpkin seeds). Typical from old street markets are &#x27; (cooked pork blood), &#x27; (pork tripe), &#x27; (pork jelly), &#x27; (edible seaweed), and raw seafood. Horse meat is very traditional and is sold in shops called &#x27; (&quot;roast it and eat it&quot;), which roast the meat in streetside barbecues.

Apart from street food, typical dishes from Catania are: &quot;pasta alla Norma&quot; (pasta with fried aubergine, tomato sauce and ricotta salata cheese), named after the namesake opera by Vincenzo Bellini; &#x27; (pasta in cuttlefish ink), &#x27; (fava beans purée), &#x27; or &#x27; (stewed cauliflower or broccoli), &#x27; (sautéed vegetables) and &#x27; (a pie filled with tuma cheese) which is traditional during Christmastime.

Catania is also famous for its &quot;pasticceria&quot; (pastries and cakes). Pastries vary according to season and to seasonal events: during the Festival of Saint Agatha, patron saint of the city, there are the &#x27; (small cassatas) and &#x27; (olive shaped almond paste). In Easter, there are &#x27; (boiled eggs covered in biscuit). In summer there is granita. During the &quot;Festa dei morti&quot; (traditional celebrations in All Souls&#x27; Day) there are biscuits called &#x27;, &#x27; and &#x27;.

Drink kiosks are everywhere in town and serve soft drinks. Traditional soft drinks are made by mixing fruit syrups with soda and other flavors such as anisette.

Local products include blood oranges, pistachios from Bronte, extra-virgin olive oil, cactus fruit, cherries, grapes from Mazzarrone, strawberries from Maletto, mushrooms, honey and wine.

==Transport==

Catania has a commercial seaport (Catania seaport), an international airport (Catania Fontanarossa), several railway stations (Catania Centrale is the main one) and it is the main node of the Sicilian motorway system.

The motorways serving Catania are the A18 Messina-Catania and the A19 Palermo-Catania; and the prosecution of the A18 going from Catania to Syracuse and to Gela.

The Circumetnea is a narrow-gauge railway that runs for from Catania around the base of Mount Etna. It attains an elevation of above sea level before descending to rejoin the coast at Giarre-Riposto to the north.

In the late 1990s, the first line of an underground railway (&quot;Metropolitana di Catania&quot;) was built. The underground service started in 1999 and it is currently active on a route of , from the station Nesima (west of town), passing through the stations of San Nullo, Cibali, Milo, Borgo, Giuffrida, Italia, Galatea, Giovanni XXIII, to Stesicoro. The last two stations, bringing Catania&#x27;s underground into the city centre, opened on 20 December 2016. The line is planned to be extended from the satellite city of Paternò to Fontanarossa Airport.

===Catania public transport statistics===
The average amount of time people spend commuting on public transit in Catania on a weekday is 56 min. 13% of public transit riders ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 23 min, while 46% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is , while 3% travel for over in a single direction.

==Notable residents==

*Aaron ben Gershon abu al-Rabi, 15th century rabbi
*Oriana Bandiera (born 1971), economist and academic
*Pippo Baudo (born 1936), TV presenter
*Franco Battiato (1945–2021), singer-songwriter, composer and filmmaker
*Gianni Bella (born 1947), singer-songwriter
*Marcella Bella (born 1952), singer
*Vincenzo Bellini (1801–1835), composer
*Ornella Bertorotta (born 1967), politician
*Alfredo Bonanno (born 1937), anarchist
*Vitaliano Brancati (1907–1954), writer
*Giuseppa Bolognara Calcagno (1826–1884), freedom fighter of the Risorgimento
*Luigi Capuana (1839–1915), writer
*Charondas (6th c. BC), jurist
*Carmen Consoli (born 1974), singer-songwriter
*Angelo d&#x27;Arrigo (1961–2006), aviator
*Federico De Roberto (1861–1927), writer
*Tea Falco (born 1986), actress
*Giuseppe Fava (1925–1984), journalist, writer and playwright
*Turi Ferro (1921–2001), actor
*Rosario Fiorello (1960), comedian, singer, radio and TV presenter
*Libero Grassi (1924–1991), businessman
*Leo Gullotta (born 1946), actor
*Andrea Lo Cicero (born 1976), rugby footballer
*Miriam Leone (born 1985), Miss Italia 2008
*Ettore Majorana (1905–?), physicist
*Nino Martoglio (1870–1921), writer
*Massimo Maugeri (born 1968), writer and journalist
*Angelo Musco (1872–1937), actor
*Tuccio Musumeci (born 1934), actor
*Giovanni Pacini (1796–1867), composer
*Luca Parmitano (born 1976), astronaut
*Ercole Patti (1903–1976), writer and journalist
*Goliarda Sapienza (1924–1996), writer
*Giuseppe Sciuti (1834–1911), painter
*Piermaria Siciliano (born 1974), swimmer
*Stefania Spampinato (born 1982), actress
*Stesichorus ( – 555 BC), poet
*Giovanni Verga (1840–1922), writer
*Manlio Vinciguerra (born 1976), scientist

==International relations==
===Consulates===
The following countries have a consulate in Catania: Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Finland, France, United Kingdom, Greece, Malta, the Netherlands, Romania, Senegal, Spain, Sri Lanka, South Africa, Switzerland, and Ukraine.

===Twin towns – sister cities===
Catania is twinned with:

* Grenoble, France, since 1961
* Phoenix, United States, since 2001
* Ottawa, Canada, since 2002
* Oświęcim County, Poland, since 2010
* Oxford, England, UK, since 2012
* Borgo Maggiore, San Marino, since 2015 
* Kaliningrad, Russia, since 2017
* Alexandria, Egypt, since 2019
===Influence on the planning of Adelaide, Australia===
The site of what was to become the major Australian city of Adelaide was surveyed and laid out by Colonel William Light, the first Surveyor-General of South Australia. In 1823, Light had fondly written of Catania: &quot;The two principal streets cross each other at right angles in the square in the direction of north and south and east and west. They are wide and spacious and about a mile [1.6 km] long&quot;. This became the basis for his plan of Adelaide.

==See also==
==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* Ilaria Di Pietra, &quot;Catania. Viaggi e viaggiatori nella città del vulcano&quot;, Giuseppe Maimone Editore, Catania 2007
* Antonino Recupero, &quot;Catania. Città del mediterraneo&quot;, (Fotografia di Alfio Garozzo. Prefazione di Andrea Camilleri), Giuseppe Maimone Editore, Catania 2007, 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="0" end="7" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="55" end="61" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="69" end="76" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="425" end="435" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="470" end="480" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991246" start="543" end="571" title="Metropolitan City of Catania" label="Metropolitan City of Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991246" start="704" end="732" title="Metropolitan City of Catania" label="Metropolitan City of Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="814" end="827" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547554" start="951" end="955" title="1169 Sicily earthquake" label="1169"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="1000" end="1010" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732653" start="1038" end="1042" title="1669 eruption of Mount Etna" label="1669"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706283" start="1087" end="1109" title="1693 Sicily earthquake" label="1693 Sicily earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1150" end="1161" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248821" start="1298" end="1308" title="University of Catania" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q170209" start="1447" end="1463" title="Vincenzo Bellini" label="Vincenzo Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q357022" start="1468" end="1483" title="Giovanni Pacini" label="Giovanni Pacini"/>
<link wikidata="Q271814" start="1501" end="1515" title="Giovanni Verga" label="Giovanni Verga"/>
<link wikidata="Q468662" start="1517" end="1530" title="Luigi Capuana" label="Luigi Capuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641199" start="1532" end="1551" title="Federico De Roberto" label="Federico De Roberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q518152" start="1556" end="1570" title="Nino Martoglio" label="Nino Martoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q540273" start="1668" end="1696" title="Catania–Fontanarossa Airport" label="Catania–Fontanarossa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="1800" end="1820" title="baroque architecture" label="baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1867" end="1873" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1874" end="1893" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="1922" end="1943" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous population"/>
<link wikidata="Q959419" start="1959" end="1965" title="Sicels" label="Sicels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="2928" end="2945" title="emirate of Sicily" label="emirate of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2963" end="2969" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="3534" end="3551" title="Legume" label="leguminous plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="3571" end="3577" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="3593" end="3604" title="Vicia faba" label="broad beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q156811" start="3610" end="3615" title="lupin" label="lupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="3698" end="3706" title="Aghlabid" label="Aghlabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="3775" end="3781" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235338" start="3922" end="3928" title="Simeto" label="Simeto"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="3984" end="3990" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="4031" end="4041" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140845" start="4320" end="4338" title="subterranean river" label="subterranean river"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="4498" end="4530" title="hot-summer Mediterranean climate" label="hot-summer Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="4532" end="4538" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="5109" end="5113" title="Mount Etna" label="Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5974" end="5979" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q284137" start="6033" end="6051" title="population decline" label="population decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="6491" end="6501" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="6630" end="6637" title="Italian people" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="6678" end="6696" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="6705" end="6715" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="6739" end="6745" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="6777" end="6784" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="6789" end="6795" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q200133" start="6972" end="6982" title="Chalcis" label="Chalcidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233293" start="7010" end="7015" title="Naxos (Sicily)" label="Naxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="7166" end="7176" title="Hellenization" label="Hellenised"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="7179" end="7189" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q488240" start="7262" end="7269" title="Lentini" label="Lentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="7309" end="7317" title="Syracuse, Italy" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="8195" end="8206" title="List of Latin language poets" label="Latin poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873488" start="8228" end="8236" title="Lucilius" label="Lucilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="8241" end="8249" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256819" start="8401" end="8410" title="Charondas" label="Charondas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="8547" end="8560" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q332802" start="8641" end="8647" title="Ibycus" label="Ibycus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332797" start="8652" end="8663" title="Stesichorus" label="Stesichorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131671" start="8826" end="8836" title="Xenophanes" label="Xenophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q272968" start="8875" end="8882" title="Velia (town)" label="Eleatic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9036" end="9042" title="Andron of Catania" label="Andron"/>
<link wikidata="Q335634" start="9145" end="9163" title="Hiero I of Syracuse" label="Hieron of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="9356" end="9366" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracusans"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="9371" end="9385" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="9478" end="9488" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298687" start="9517" end="9523" title="Oekist" label="Oekist"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="9582" end="9588" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q605674" start="9734" end="9757" title="Thrasybulus of Syracuse" label="Thrasybulus of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264648" start="9788" end="9796" title="Ducetius" label="Ducetius"/>
<link wikidata="Q959419" start="9810" end="9816" title="Sicels" label="Sicels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292319" start="9910" end="9916" title="Aetna (city)" label="Inessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q844289" start="10189" end="10209" title="Sicilian Expedition" label="expedition to Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="10225" end="10234" title="Classical Athens" label="Athenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q187982" start="10393" end="10403" title="Alcibiades" label="Alcibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q332750" start="10703" end="10726" title="Dionysius I of Syracuse" label="Dionysius I of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="10806" end="10814" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="10842" end="10855" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q968600" start="10895" end="10902" title="Himilco (general)" label="Himilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732268" start="10907" end="10911" title="Mago (fleet commander)" label="Mago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4269619" start="10942" end="10967" title="Battle of Catana (397 BC)" label="Battle of Catana (397 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q586344" start="10988" end="11008" title="Leptines of Syracuse" label="Leptines of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292319" start="11079" end="11084" title="Aetna (city)" label="Aetna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377100" start="11087" end="11095" title="Calippus of Syracuse" label="Calippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q457885" start="11113" end="11129" title="Dion of Syracuse" label="Dion of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q451587" start="11194" end="11202" title="Timoleon" label="Timoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844124" start="11264" end="11272" title="Mamercus of Catane" label="Mamercus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="11297" end="11307" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q312326" start="11563" end="11585" title="Agathocles of Syracuse" label="Agathocles of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q172353" start="11615" end="11622" title="Pyrrhus of Epirus" label="Pyrrhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="11766" end="11781" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="11846" end="11860" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q715220" start="11920" end="11937" title="Manius Valerius Maximus Corvinus Messalla" label="Valerius Messalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114895" start="11995" end="12003" title="Comitium" label="Comitium"/>
<link wikidata="Q312306" start="12186" end="12211" title="Marcus Claudius Marcellus" label="Marcus Claudius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199952" start="12461" end="12469" title="Taormina" label="Taormina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="12491" end="12498" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q618066" start="12591" end="12608" title="First Servile War" label="First Servile War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692360" start="12669" end="12678" title="Volcanic eruption" label="eruptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="12682" end="12692" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="13158" end="13171" title="Ancient history" label="ancient times"/>
<link wikidata="Q56202" start="13206" end="13215" title="Centuripe" label="Centuripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="13369" end="13375" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096992" start="13500" end="13516" title="chief magistrate" label="chief magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730371" start="13655" end="13670" title="War between Sextus Pompey and the Second Triumvirate" label="Sicilian revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q295228" start="13682" end="13697" title="Sextus Pompeius" label="Sextus Pompeius"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="13870" end="13877" title="Messana" label="Messana"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="14245" end="14251" title="Colonia (Roman)" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="14341" end="14347" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="14716" end="14728" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q234593" start="14757" end="14765" title="Ausonius" label="Ausonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885491" start="14779" end="14799" title="Ordo urbium nobilium" label="Ordo Nobilium Urbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="14916" end="14923" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q152127" start="14927" end="14935" title="Gaiseric" label="Gaiseric"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="14973" end="14983" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="15018" end="15038" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="15205" end="15220" title="Emirate of Sicily" label="Islamic emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884809" start="15267" end="15274" title="Italo-Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q315297" start="15278" end="15295" title="Roger I of Sicily" label="Roger I of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="15459" end="15467" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="15515" end="15527" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048850" start="15569" end="15584" title="Castello Ursino" label="Castello Ursino"/>
<link wikidata="Q207327" start="15708" end="15724" title="Sicilian Vespers" label="Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="15751" end="15765" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="House of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q312311" start="15838" end="15845" title="Peter I of Sicily" label="Peter I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599340" start="15896" end="15923" title="War of the Sicilian Vespers" label="War of the Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q122463704" start="16003" end="16020" title="Angevin invasion of Sicily" label="occupied the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599340" start="16261" end="16278" title="War of the Vesper" label="War of the Vesper"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="16414" end="16429" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312304" start="16538" end="16547" title="Alfonso V of Aragon" label="Alfonso V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248821" start="16561" end="16602" title="University of Catania" label="the &amp;quot;Siciliae Studium Generale&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732653" start="16913" end="16931" title="1669 Etna eruption" label="1669 Etna eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706283" start="17098" end="17120" title="1693 Sicily earthquake" label="1693 Sicily earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="17175" end="17195" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="17356" end="17374" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="17382" end="17408" title="expedition of the Thousand" label="expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="17419" end="17425" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="17448" end="17475" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="17532" end="17545" title="unification of Italy" label="unified Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="18512" end="18524" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635555" start="18646" end="18653" title="Gerbini Airfield" label="Gerbini"/>
<link wikidata="Q540273" start="18658" end="18670" title="Catania-Fontanarossa Airport" label="Fontanarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q519608" start="18717" end="18733" title="marshalling yard" label="marshalling yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="18869" end="18894" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="19184" end="19200" title="British 8th Army" label="British 8th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="19268" end="19284" title="Italy" label="Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="19488" end="19499" title="Southern Italy" label="Mezzogiorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="19585" end="19594" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="the mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991246" start="20073" end="20101" title="Metropolitan City of Catania" label="Metropolitan City of Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154" start="20150" end="20169" title="Province of Catania" label="Province of Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q341290" start="20638" end="20652" title="Aci Bonaccorsi" label="Aci Bonaccorsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q341293" start="20655" end="20667" title="Aci Castello" label="Aci Castello"/>
<link wikidata="Q341299" start="20670" end="20680" title="Aci Catena" label="Aci Catena"/>
<link wikidata="Q341318" start="20683" end="20704" title="Aci Sant&amp;#x27;Antonio" label="Aci Sant&amp;#x27;Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q19319" start="20707" end="20715" title="Acireale" label="Acireale"/>
<link wikidata="Q478226" start="20718" end="20726" title="Belpasso" label="Belpasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q478232" start="20729" end="20740" title="Biancavilla" label="Biancavilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q478265" start="20743" end="20761" title="Camporotondo Etneo" label="Camporotondo Etneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q478338" start="20774" end="20792" title="Gravina di Catania" label="Gravina di Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q478384" start="20795" end="20805" title="Mascalucia" label="Mascalucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q478681" start="20808" end="20820" title="Misterbianco" label="Misterbianco"/>
<link wikidata="Q478703" start="20823" end="20848" title="Motta Sant&amp;#x27;Anastasia" label="Motta Sant&amp;#x27;Anastasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q478708" start="20851" end="20859" title="Nicolosi" label="Nicolosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q478741" start="20862" end="20869" title="Paternò" label="Paternò"/>
<link wikidata="Q478747" start="20872" end="20878" title="Pedara" label="Pedara"/>
<link wikidata="Q478763" start="20881" end="20888" title="Ragalna" label="Ragalna"/>
<link wikidata="Q478828" start="20891" end="20912" title="San Giovanni la Punta" label="San Giovanni la Punta"/>
<link wikidata="Q478836" start="20915" end="20938" title="San Gregorio di Catania" label="San Gregorio di Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q478854" start="20941" end="20960" title="San Pietro Clarenza" label="San Pietro Clarenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q478863" start="20963" end="20990" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Agata li Battiati" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Agata li Battiati"/>
<link wikidata="Q478889" start="20993" end="21015" title="Santa Maria di Licodia" label="Santa Maria di Licodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q478906" start="21018" end="21032" title="Santa Venerina" label="Santa Venerina"/>
<link wikidata="Q478925" start="21035" end="21046" title="Trecastagni" label="Trecastagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q478933" start="21049" end="21066" title="Tremestieri Etneo" label="Tremestieri Etneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q478939" start="21069" end="21077" title="Valverde, Sicily" label="Valverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q478954" start="21080" end="21089" title="Viagrande" label="Viagrande"/>
<link wikidata="Q140202" start="21092" end="21107" title="Zafferana Etnea" label="Zafferana Etnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="21349" end="21369" title="Local government" label="administrative areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q982543" start="21679" end="21706" title="Giovanni Battista Vaccarini" label="Giovanni Battista Vaccarini"/>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="21794" end="21799" title="Aswan" label="Syene"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="22030" end="22038" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011893" start="22255" end="22265" title="Heliodorus of Catania" label="Heliodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="22666" end="22677" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656368" start="22688" end="22702" title="dwarf elephant" label="dwarf elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q78571" start="22720" end="22732" title="Othenio Abel" label="Othenio Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656368" start="22764" end="22778" title="dwarf elephant" label="dwarf elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="22783" end="22789" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="22829" end="22836" title="Cyclopes" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="22838" end="22852" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656368" start="22882" end="22896" title="dwarf elephant" label="dwarf elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="22925" end="22936" title="human skull" label="human skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q156104" start="22959" end="22971" title="nasal cavity" label="nasal cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="23103" end="23113" title="Mineralogy" label="Mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="23115" end="23127" title="Paleontology" label="Paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q102904" start="23132" end="23143" title="Vulcanology" label="Vulcanology"/>
<link wikidata="Q727788" start="23199" end="23216" title="Elephas falconeri" label="Elephas falconeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="23448" end="23464" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="23515" end="23520" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395377" start="23588" end="23604" title="ancient monument" label="ancient monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q600690" start="23863" end="23893" title="Greek-Roman Theatre of Catania" label="Greek-Roman Theatre of Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844406" start="23929" end="23952" title="Amphitheatre of Catania" label="Amphitheatre of Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q17992964" start="23954" end="23985" title="Piazza Dante, Catania" label="Greek Acropolis of Montevergine"/>
<link wikidata="Q163687" start="24010" end="24018" title="basilica" label="basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q665247" start="24021" end="24028" title="Hypogeum" label="hypogea"/>
<link wikidata="Q172896" start="24052" end="24061" title="catacombs" label="catacombs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24073" end="24088" title="Achillean Baths (Catania)" label="Achillean Baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q107920006" start="24097" end="24122" title="Santa Maria dell&amp;#x27;Indirizzo, Catania" label="Terme dell&amp;#x27;Indirizzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984392" start="24182" end="24201" title="Terme della Rotonda (Catania)" label="Terme della Rotonda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24210" end="24234" title="Baths of the Four Quoins (Catania)" label="Baths of the Four Quoins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24451" end="24477" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Europe#Italy" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499188" start="24481" end="24498" title="Catania Cathedral" label="Catania Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067599" start="24583" end="24608" title="Badia di Sant&amp;#x27;Agata" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Agata, Badia di"/>
<link wikidata="Q3584887" start="24639" end="24664" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Agata la Vetere, Catania" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Agata la Vetere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3672252" start="24679" end="24703" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Agata al Borgo, Catania" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Agata al Borgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3672253" start="24829" end="24855" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Agata al Carcere, Catania" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Agata al Carcere"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="25011" end="25028" title="Lava" label="the Lavic Runnels"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25030" end="25044" title="Sant&amp;#x27;Anna, Catania" label="Sant&amp;#x27;Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516573" start="25072" end="25085" title="San Benedetto, Catania" label="San Benedetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3584886" start="25193" end="25203" title="San Biagio, Catania" label="San Biagio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109136" start="25291" end="25316" title="Basilica della Collegiata" label="Basilica della Collegiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141784" start="25318" end="25334" title="Sicilian Baroque" label="Sicilian Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q736369" start="25345" end="25358" title="Stefano Ittar" label="Stefano Ittar"/>
<link wikidata="Q108112995" start="25360" end="25384" title="San Camillo ai Crociferi" label="San Camillo ai Crociferi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55120253" start="25428" end="25440" title="Santa Chiara, Catania" label="Santa Chiara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3669864" start="25491" end="25503" title="San Domenico, Catania" label="San Domenico"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25592" end="25608" title="San Filippo Neri, Catania" label="San Filippo Neri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3584868" start="25610" end="25657" title="San Francesco d&amp;#x27;Assisi all&amp;#x27;Immacolata, Catania" label="San Francesco d&amp;#x27;Assisi all&amp;#x27;Immacolata"/>
<link wikidata="Q241635" start="25724" end="25741" title="Eleanor of Sicily" label="Eleanor of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q3670105" start="25743" end="25763" title="San Francesco Borgia, Catania" label="San Francesco Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25807" end="25829" title="San Francesco di Paola, Catania" label="San Francesco di Paola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3670193" start="25831" end="25854" title="San Gaetano alle Grotte, Catania" label="San Gaetano alle Grotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q55120260" start="25869" end="25892" title="San Gaetano alla Marina, Catania" label="San Gaetano alla Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3582178" start="25959" end="25971" title="San Giuliano, Catania" label="San Giuliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3949703" start="26055" end="26074" title="Santuario della Madonna del Carmine, Catania" label="Madonna del Carmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3674043" start="26113" end="26132" title="Santa Maria di Gesu, Catania" label="Santa Maria di Gesu"/>
<link wikidata="Q107920006" start="26200" end="26231" title="Santa Maria dell&amp;#x27;Indirizzo, Catania" label="Santa Maria dell&amp;#x27;Indirizzo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26281" end="26306" title="Santa Maria della Salute, Catania" label="Santa Maria della Mercede"/>
<link wikidata="Q107969497" start="26341" end="26365" title="Santa Maria della Purità, Catania" label="Santa Maria della Purità"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984392" start="26479" end="26504" title="Santa Maria della Rotonda, Catania" label="Santa Maria della Rotonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17652142" start="26566" end="26593" title="Santa Maria dell&amp;#x27;Aiuto, Catania" label="Santa Maria dell&amp;#x27;Aiuto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26697" end="26708" title="Santa Marta, Catania" label="Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q107919913" start="26710" end="26733" title="San Martino dei Bianchi, Catania" label="San Martino dei Bianchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585918" start="26766" end="26799" title="San Michele Arcangelo ai Minoriti, Catania" label="San Michele Arcangelo ai Minoriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3585918" start="26830" end="26848" title="Immacolata Concezione dei Minoritelli, Catania" label="Minoritelli church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3671516" start="26860" end="26883" title="San Nicolò l&amp;#x27;Arena, Catania" label="San Nicolò l&amp;#x27;Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q488863" start="26945" end="26981" title="Monastery of San Nicolò l&amp;#x27;Arena" label="Monastery of San Nicolò l&amp;#x27;Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3584206" start="27013" end="27024" title="San Placido, Catania" label="San Placido"/>
<link wikidata="Q107750374" start="27069" end="27101" title="Santa Rita in Sant&amp;#x27;Agostino, Catania" label="Santa Rita in Sant&amp;#x27;Agostino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27110" end="27124" title="San Sebastiano, Catania" label="San Sebastiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q108083557" start="27133" end="27145" title="Santa Teresa, Catania" label="Santa Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q28669464" start="27178" end="27196" title="Santissima Trinità, Catania" label="Santissima Trinità"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27206" end="27218" title="Santa Ursula, Catania" label="Santa Ursula"/>
<link wikidata="Q17626148" start="27220" end="27262" title="Conservatorio delle Verginelle di Sant&amp;#x27;Agata" label="Chiesa delle Verginelle di Sant&amp;#x27;Agata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27264" end="27291" title="San Vincenzo de&amp;#x27; Paoli, Catania" label="San Vincenzo de&amp;#x27; Paoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q942467" start="27487" end="27497" title="Child Jesus" label="Holy Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q866338" start="27511" end="27521" title="Divine Providence" label="Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="27618" end="27627" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="27628" end="27634" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="27715" end="27723" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Our Lady"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27768" end="27784" title="maritime quarter" label="maritime quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="28178" end="28184" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="28296" end="28303" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="28315" end="28321" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q301779" start="28516" end="28538" title="Virgin of Montserrat" label="Our Lady of Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074596" start="28547" end="28571" title="Our Lady of La Salette" label="Saint Mary of La Salette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895556" start="28807" end="28823" title="Mary Help of Christians" label="Mary Auxiliatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q48438" start="28926" end="28932" title="Saint George" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q244380" start="28937" end="28942" title="Saint Denis of Paris" label="Denis"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="28971" end="28980" title="Order of Friars Minor Capuchin" label="Capuchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048850" start="29136" end="29149" title="Castello Ursino" label="Ursino Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="29168" end="29180" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458838" start="29203" end="29225" title="Palazzo degli Elefanti" label="Elephants&amp;#x27; Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891414" start="29325" end="29350" title="Palazzo dell&amp;#x27;Università, Catania" label="University Central Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248821" start="29429" end="29447" title="University of Catania" label="Catania University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459750" start="29450" end="29464" title="Palazzo Biscari" label="Biscari Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q633353" start="29466" end="29480" title="Palazzo Tezzano" label="Tezzano Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624890" start="29602" end="29617" title="Porta Garibaldi, Catania" label="Porta Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q143912" start="29619" end="29633" title="triumphal arch" label="triumphal arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q312325" start="29725" end="29736" title="Ferdinand I of Two Sicilies" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q158229" start="29741" end="29766" title="Marie Caroline of Austria" label="Marie Caroline of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429352" start="29815" end="29830" title="Teatro Massimo Bellini" label="Bellini Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982134" start="29832" end="29849" title="Teatro Sangiorgi, Catania" label="Sangiorgi Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17438453" start="29851" end="29863" title="Palazzo Rosa, Catania" label="Palazzo Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q17443512" start="29995" end="30024" title="Palazzo dell&amp;#x27;Esposizione" label="Palazzo dell&amp;#x27;Esposizione"/>
<link wikidata="Q600320" start="30099" end="30125" title="Fascist architecture" label="Fascist-style architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="30152" end="30164" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891516" start="30227" end="30246" title="Palazzo delle Poste, Catania" label="Palazzo delle Poste"/>
<link wikidata="Q96234091" start="30281" end="30300" title="Palazzo della Borsa, Catania" label="Palazzo della Borsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3763848" start="30340" end="30372" title="Giardino Bellini" label="Bellini Garden, or Villa Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3886275" start="30374" end="30398" title="Orto Botanico dell&amp;#x27;Università di Catania" label="Catania Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3763864" start="30400" end="30413" title="Giardino Pacini" label="Pacini Garden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30432" end="30443" title="Parco Gioeni" label="Gioeni Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q17462191" start="30445" end="30462" title="Clementi Clinic building, Catania" label="Clementi Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q108501526" start="30464" end="30479" title="Garage Musumeci, Catania" label="Garage Musumeci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3902428" start="30541" end="30561" title="Piazza Universitaria, Catania" label="Piazza Universitaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829831" start="30638" end="30650" title="Peix Nicolau" label="Peix Nicolau"/>
<link wikidata="Q122818613" start="30652" end="30674" title="Amphinomus" label="Amphinomus and Anapias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30676" end="30685" title="Gammazita" label="Gammazita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772945" start="30695" end="30707" title="Opera dei Pupi" label="young knight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30708" end="30713" title="Uzeta" label="Uzeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16070574" start="30823" end="30845" title="petrochemical industry" label="petrochemical industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="30869" end="30876" title="sulphur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="31412" end="31423" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31703" end="31715" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q661845" start="32531" end="32549" title="STMicroelectronics" label="STMicroelectronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="32581" end="32595" title="pharmaceutical" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="32746" end="32759" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q969726" start="32772" end="32791" title="Massimiliano Fuksas" label="Massimiliano Fuksas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524205" start="32829" end="32840" title="FieraMilano" label="FieraMilano"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="32933" end="32940" title="Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495452" start="33066" end="33086" title="hospitality industry" label="hospitality industry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33159" end="33167" title="Etnaland" label="Etnaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="33177" end="33186" title="amusement park" label="amusement"/>
<link wikidata="Q740326" start="33191" end="33201" title="water park" label="water park"/>
<link wikidata="Q478226" start="33213" end="33221" title="Belpasso" label="Belpasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="33383" end="33389" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="33417" end="33422" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770710" start="33437" end="33448" title="Tripadvisor" label="Tripadvisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="33494" end="33500" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="33573" end="33580" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q30675338" start="33600" end="33620" title="Mercitalia Logistics" label="Mercitalia Logistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248821" start="33784" end="33805" title="University of Catania" label="University of Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953374" start="34070" end="34097" title="Scuola superiore di Catania" label="Scuola superiore di Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170209" start="34585" end="34601" title="Vincenzo Bellini" label="Vincenzo Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890256" start="34614" end="34638" title="Palazzo Gravina-Cruyllas" label="Palazzo Gravina-Cruyllas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429352" start="34705" end="34736" title="Teatro Massimo Bellini" label="Teatro Massimo Vincenzo Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q271814" start="34876" end="34890" title="Giovanni Verga" label="Giovanni Verga"/>
<link wikidata="Q215198" start="34959" end="34966" title="Verismo (literature)" label="Verismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083584" start="34985" end="35002" title="List of literary movements" label="literary movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q55996" start="35011" end="35021" title="Naturalism (literature)" label="Naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479416" start="35205" end="35228" title="Francesco Longo Mancini" label="Francesco Longo Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="35327" end="35339" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q200895" start="35343" end="35355" title="Agatha of Sicily" label="Saint Agatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743957" start="35405" end="35429" title="Festival of Saint Agatha (Catania)" label="Festival of Saint Agatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082015" start="35502" end="35512" title="La Sicilia" label="La Sicilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618426" start="35541" end="35556" title="Antenna Sicilia" label="Antenna Sicilia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35576" end="35591" title="Sicilia Channel" label="Sicilia Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001305" start="35607" end="35623" title="Television channel" label="local television"/>
<link wikidata="Q19899721" start="35709" end="35720" title="Etna Comics" label="Etna Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070220" start="35735" end="35756" title="comic book convention" label="comic book convention"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35790" end="35812" title="Catania Tango Festival" label="Catania Tango Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q338450" start="35831" end="35836" title="Tango" label="Tango"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590888" start="36030" end="36051" title="Catania Jazz Festival" label="Catania Jazz Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="36213" end="36226" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q842324" start="36234" end="36243" title="Indie pop" label="Indie pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="36248" end="36258" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="36300" end="36317" title="independent music" label="independent music"/>
<link wikidata="Q447139" start="36459" end="36473" title="Carmen Consoli" label="Carmen Consoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849218" start="36478" end="36490" title="Mario Venuti" label="Mario Venuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310687" start="36540" end="36545" title="Uzeda" label="Uzeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="36628" end="36639" title="sports club" label="sports club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018" start="36707" end="36717" title="Catania FC" label="Catania FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q28083137" start="36718" end="36731" title="football team" label="football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054695" start="36829" end="36849" title="AS Orizzonte Catania" label="AS Orizzonte Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="36885" end="36895" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="37229" end="37235" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="37243" end="37247" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="37394" end="37407" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="37425" end="37432" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698605" start="37678" end="37690" title="Catania-Etna (Hill Climb)" label="Catania-Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630538" start="37725" end="37754" title="Automobile Club d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Automobile Club d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934817" start="38063" end="38075" title="road running" label="road running"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743957" start="38178" end="38202" title="Festival of Saint Agatha (Catania)" label="Festival of Saint Agatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q25315569" start="38278" end="38316" title="1993 Rugby World Cup Sevens qualifying" label="1993 Rugby World Cup Sevens qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38337" end="38345" title="Etna Cup" label="Etna Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q933373" start="38389" end="38422" title="1994 UCI Road World Championships" label="1994 UCI Road World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q974634" start="38465" end="38488" title="1997 Summer Universiade" label="1997 Summer Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576769" start="38529" end="38554" title="2003 Military World Games" label="2003 Military World Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q15875050" start="38558" end="38601" title="2011 Men&amp;#x27;s EuroHockey Championship III" label="2011 Men&amp;#x27;s EuroHockey Championship III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399810" start="38606" end="38638" title="2011 World Fencing Championships" label="2011 World Fencing Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393186" start="38745" end="38756" title="Paolo Pizzo" label="Paolo Pizzo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38762" end="38793" title="2024 World Company Sports Games" label="2024 World Company Sports Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859351" start="38929" end="38945" title="Sicilian cuisine" label="Sicilian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316209" start="38993" end="39004" title="Street food" label="Street food"/>
<link wikidata="Q268857" start="39063" end="39071" title="Arancini" label="Arancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="39232" end="39242" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q216781" start="39513" end="39520" title="ricotta" label="ricotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124327" start="39803" end="39813" title="Horse meat" label="Horse meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q548521" start="40014" end="40030" title="pasta alla Norma" label="pasta alla Norma"/>
<link wikidata="Q320353" start="40123" end="40137" title="Norma (opera)" label="namesake opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q170209" start="40141" end="40157" title="Vincenzo Bellini" label="Vincenzo Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="40370" end="40379" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743957" start="40532" end="40556" title="Festival of Saint Agatha (Catania)" label="Festival of Saint Agatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048282" start="40612" end="40619" title="cassata" label="cassata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631692" start="40647" end="40659" title="almond paste" label="almond paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="40665" end="40671" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313" start="40727" end="40733" title="summer" label="summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q70612" start="40743" end="40750" title="granita" label="granita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033140" start="40820" end="40839" title="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day" label="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q693369" start="40901" end="40907" title="kiosks" label="kiosks"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="40941" end="40951" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="41015" end="41019" title="carbonated water" label="soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q548940" start="41046" end="41054" title="anisette" label="anisette"/>
<link wikidata="Q303669" start="41080" end="41092" title="blood orange" label="blood orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q36071" start="41095" end="41104" title="pistachio" label="pistachio"/>
<link wikidata="Q478240" start="41111" end="41117" title="Bronte, Sicily" label="Bronte"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="41132" end="41141" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="41143" end="41155" title="opuntia" label="cactus fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="41157" end="41165" title="cherry" label="cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="41167" end="41172" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q478388" start="41179" end="41189" title="Mazzarrone" label="Mazzarrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="41191" end="41203" title="strawberry" label="strawberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q478357" start="41209" end="41216" title="Maletto" label="Maletto"/>
<link wikidata="Q654236" start="41218" end="41227" title="Edible mushroom" label="mushrooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q10987" start="41229" end="41234" title="honey" label="honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="41239" end="41243" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41295" end="41310" title="Catania seaport" label="Catania seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q644371" start="41316" end="41337" title="international airport" label="international airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q540273" start="41339" end="41359" title="Catania Fontanarossa" label="Catania Fontanarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="41370" end="41385" title="railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093710" start="41388" end="41404" title="Catania Centrale railway station" label="Catania Centrale"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="41522" end="41529" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="41550" end="41557" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="41620" end="41628" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q39971" start="41636" end="41640" title="Gela" label="Gela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408003" start="41647" end="41658" title="Ferrovia Circumetnea" label="Circumetnea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="41664" end="41676" title="narrow-gauge" label="narrow-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="41731" end="41741" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="41770" end="41785" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q478322" start="41827" end="41833" title="Giarre" label="Giarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q478782" start="41834" end="41841" title="Riposto" label="Riposto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="41897" end="41916" title="Rapid transit" label="underground railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q239927" start="41924" end="41948" title="Metropolitana di Catania" label="Metropolitana di Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q691960" start="42365" end="42379" title="satellite city" label="satellite city"/>
<link wikidata="Q478741" start="42383" end="42390" title="Paternò" label="Paternò"/>
<link wikidata="Q540273" start="42394" end="42414" title="Catania Fontanarossa" label="Fontanarossa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623673" start="42942" end="42971" title="Aaron ben Gershon abu al-Rabi" label="Aaron ben Gershon abu al-Rabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29349920" start="42993" end="43008" title="Oriana Bandiera" label="Oriana Bandiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q50896" start="43046" end="43057" title="Pippo Baudo" label="Pippo Baudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25147" start="43085" end="43100" title="Franco Battiato" label="Franco Battiato"/>
<link wikidata="Q564878" start="43157" end="43169" title="Gianni Bella" label="Gianni Bella"/>
<link wikidata="Q446767" start="43202" end="43216" title="Marcella Bella" label="Marcella Bella"/>
<link wikidata="Q170209" start="43238" end="43254" title="Vincenzo Bellini" label="Vincenzo Bellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q15297050" start="43278" end="43296" title="Ornella Bertorotta" label="Ornella Bertorotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q439074" start="43322" end="43337" title="Alfredo Bonanno" label="Alfredo Bonanno"/>
<link wikidata="Q559565" start="43362" end="43380" title="Vitaliano Brancati" label="Vitaliano Brancati"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560592" start="43402" end="43429" title="Giuseppa Bolognara Calcagno" label="Giuseppa Bolognara Calcagno"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="43466" end="43478" title="Risorgimento" label="Risorgimento"/>
<link wikidata="Q468662" start="43480" end="43493" title="Luigi Capuana" label="Luigi Capuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q256819" start="43515" end="43524" title="Charondas" label="Charondas"/>
<link wikidata="Q447139" start="43546" end="43560" title="Carmen Consoli" label="Carmen Consoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q536847" start="43593" end="43613" title="Angelo d&amp;#x27;Arrigo" label="Angelo d&amp;#x27;Arrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641199" start="43636" end="43655" title="Federico De Roberto" label="Federico De Roberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13459567" start="43677" end="43686" title="Tea Falco" label="Tea Falco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396100" start="43709" end="43722" title="Giuseppe Fava" label="Giuseppe Fava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045047" start="43771" end="43781" title="Turi Ferro" label="Turi Ferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q982694" start="43802" end="43818" title="Rosario Fiorello" label="Rosario Fiorello"/>
<link wikidata="Q371570" start="43869" end="43882" title="Libero Grassi" label="Libero Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q684794" start="43909" end="43921" title="Leo Gullotta" label="Leo Gullotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282348" start="43942" end="43958" title="Andrea Lo Cicero" label="Andrea Lo Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q676749" start="43990" end="44002" title="Miriam Leone" label="Miriam Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189350" start="44016" end="44027" title="Miss Italia" label="Miss Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q367196" start="44034" end="44049" title="Ettore Majorana" label="Ettore Majorana"/>
<link wikidata="Q518152" start="44071" end="44085" title="Nino Martoglio" label="Nino Martoglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784740" start="44107" end="44122" title="Massimo Maugeri" label="Massimo Maugeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q588055" start="44159" end="44171" title="Angelo Musco (actor)" label="Angelo Musco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4000160" start="44192" end="44207" title="Tuccio Musumeci" label="Tuccio Musumeci"/>
<link wikidata="Q357022" start="44228" end="44243" title="Giovanni Pacini" label="Giovanni Pacini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394857" start="44267" end="44281" title="Luca Parmitano" label="Luca Parmitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3731207" start="44306" end="44318" title="Ercole Patti" label="Ercole Patti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587727" start="44355" end="44372" title="Goliarda Sapienza" label="Goliarda Sapienza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108143" start="44394" end="44409" title="Giuseppe Sciuti" label="Giuseppe Sciuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3903142" start="44432" end="44451" title="Piermaria Siciliano" label="Piermaria Siciliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q51140763" start="44474" end="44493" title="Stefania Spampinato" label="Stefania Spampinato"/>
<link wikidata="Q332797" start="44516" end="44527" title="Stesichorus" label="Stesichorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q271814" start="44547" end="44561" title="Giovanni Verga" label="Giovanni Verga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16216154" start="44583" end="44601" title="Manlio Vinciguerra" label="Manlio Vinciguerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843791" start="44702" end="44711" title="consulate" label="consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="44724" end="44734" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="44736" end="44746" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="44748" end="44755" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="44757" end="44764" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="44766" end="44772" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="44774" end="44788" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="44790" end="44796" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="44798" end="44803" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="44809" end="44820" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="44822" end="44829" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="44831" end="44838" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="44840" end="44845" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="44847" end="44856" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="44858" end="44870" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="44872" end="44883" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="44889" end="44896" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="44943" end="44950" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="44960" end="44968" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="44991" end="44998" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="45028" end="45034" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147618" start="45057" end="45072" title="Oświęcim County" label="Oświęcim County"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="45095" end="45101" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q201368" start="45129" end="45143" title="Borgo Maggiore" label="Borgo Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829" start="45171" end="45182" title="Kaliningrad" label="Kaliningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="45205" end="45215" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="45331" end="45340" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112" start="45350" end="45358" title="Adelaide" label="Adelaide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44777" wikidata="Q2362924" url="?curid=44777" title="Complete lattice">
<text>In mathematics, a complete lattice is a partially ordered set in which all subsets have both a supremum (join) and an infimum (meet). A conditionally complete lattice satisfies at least one of these properties for bounded subsets. For comparison, in a general lattice, only &quot;pairs&quot; of elements need to have a supremum and an infimum. Every non-empty finite lattice is complete, but infinite lattices may be incomplete.

Complete lattices appear in many applications in mathematics and computer science. Both order theory and universal algebra study them as a special class of lattices.

Complete lattices must not be confused with complete partial orders (CPOs), a more general class of partially ordered sets. More specific complete lattices are complete Boolean algebras and complete Heyting algebras (locales).

== Formal definition ==
A &quot;complete lattice&quot; is a partially ordered set (&quot;L&quot;, ≤) such that every subset &quot;A&quot; of &quot;L&quot; has both a greatest lower bound (the infimum, or &quot;meet&quot;) and a least upper bound (the supremum, or &quot;join&quot;) in (&quot;L&quot;, ≤).

The &quot;meet&quot; is denoted by formula_1, and the &quot;join&quot; by formula_2.

In the special case where &quot;A&quot; is the empty set, the meet of &quot;A&quot; is the greatest element of &quot;L&quot;. Likewise, the join of the empty set is the least element of &quot;L&quot;. Then, complete lattices form a special class of bounded lattices.

=== Complete sublattices ===
A sublattice &quot;M&quot; of a complete lattice &quot;L&quot; is called a &quot;complete sublattice&quot; of &quot;L&quot; if for every subset &quot;A&quot; of &quot;M&quot; the elements formula_1 and formula_2, as defined in &quot;L&quot;, are actually in &quot;M&quot;.

If the above requirement is lessened to require only non-empty meet and joins to be in &quot;M&quot;, the sublattice &quot;M&quot; is called a &quot;closed sublattice&quot; of &quot;L&quot;.

=== Complete semilattices ===
The terms &quot;complete meet-semilattice&quot; or &quot;complete join-semilattice&quot; is another way to refer to complete lattices since arbitrary meets can be expressed in terms of arbitrary joins and vice versa (for details, see completeness). 

Another usage of &quot;complete meet-semilattice&quot; refers to a meet-semilattice that is bounded complete and a complete partial order. This concept is arguably the &quot;most complete&quot; notion of a meet-semilattice that is not yet a lattice (in fact, only the top element may be missing).

See semilattices for further discussion between both definitions. 

===Conditionally Complete Lattices===
A lattice is said to be &quot;conditionally complete&quot; if it satisfies either or both of the following properties:

* Any subset bounded above has the least upper bound.
* Any subset bounded below has the greatest lower bound.

== Examples ==
* Any non-empty finite lattice is trivially complete.
* The power set of a given set when ordered by inclusion. The supremum is given by the union and the infimum by the intersection of subsets.
* The non-negative integers ordered by divisibility. The least element of this lattice is the number 1 since it divides any other number. Perhaps surprisingly, the greatest element is 0, because it can be divided by any other number. The supremum of finite sets is given by the least common multiple and the infimum by the greatest common divisor. For infinite sets, the supremum will always be 0 while the infimum can well be greater than 1. For example, the set of all even numbers has 2 as the greatest common divisor. If 0 is removed from this structure it remains a lattice but ceases to be complete.
* The subgroups of any given group under inclusion. (While the infimum here is the usual set-theoretic intersection, the supremum of a set of subgroups is the subgroup &quot;generated by&quot; the set-theoretic union of the subgroups, not the set-theoretic union itself.) If &quot;e&quot; is the identity of &quot;G&quot;, then the trivial group {&quot;e&quot;} is the minimum subgroup of &quot;G&quot;, while the maximum subgroup is the group &quot;G&quot; itself.
* The ideals of a ring, when ordered by inclusion. The supremum is given by the sum of ideals and the infimum by the intersection.
* The open sets of a topological space, when ordered by inclusion. The supremum is given by the union of open sets and the infimum by the interior of the intersection.

=== Non-examples ===
* The empty set is not a complete lattice. If it were a complete lattice, then in particular the empty set would have an infimum and supremum in the empty set, a contradiction.
* The rational numbers formula_5 with the usual order ≤ is not a complete lattice. It is a lattice with formula_6 and formula_7. However, formula_5 itself has no infimum or supremum, nor does formula_9.

==Locally finite complete lattices==
A complete lattice &quot;L&quot; is said to be locally finite if the supremum of any infinite subset is equal to the supremal element. Denoting this supremal element &quot;1&quot;, the condition is equivalently that the set formula_10 is finite for any formula_11. This notation may clash with other notation, as in the case of the lattice (N, |), i.e., the non-negative integers ordered by divisibility. In this locally finite lattice, the infimal element denoted &quot;0&quot; for the lattice theory is the number 1 in the set N and the supremal element denoted &quot;1&quot; for the lattice theory is the number 0 in the set N.

== Morphisms of complete lattices ==
The traditional morphisms between complete lattices, taking the complete lattices as the objects of a category, are the &quot;complete homomorphisms&quot; (or &quot;complete lattice homomorphisms&quot;). These are characterized as functions that preserve all joins and all meets. Explicitly, this means that a function &quot;f: L→M&quot; between two complete lattices &quot;L&quot; and &quot;M&quot; is a complete homomorphism if

* formula_12 and
* formula_13,

for all subsets &quot;A&quot; of &quot;L&quot;. Such functions are automatically monotonic, but the condition of being a complete homomorphism is in fact much more specific. For this reason, it can be useful to consider weaker notions of morphisms, such as those that are only required to preserve all joins (giving a category Sup) or all meets (giving a category Inf), which are indeed inequivalent conditions. These notions may also be considered as homomorphisms of complete meet-semilattices or complete join-semilattices, respectively.

=== Galois connections and adjoints ===

Furthermore, morphisms that preserve all joins are equivalently characterized as the &quot;lower adjoint&quot; part of a unique Galois connection. For any pair of preorders &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot;, a Galois connection is given by a pair of monotone functions &quot;f&quot; and &quot;g&quot; from &quot;X&quot; to &quot;Y&quot; such that for each pair of elements &quot;x&quot; of &quot;X&quot; and &quot;y&quot; of &quot;Y&quot;

:formula_14

where &quot;f&quot; is called the &quot;lower adjoint&quot; and &quot;g&quot; is called the &quot;upper adjoint&quot;. By the adjoint functor theorem, a monotone map between any pair of preorders preserves all joins if and only if it is a lower adjoint and preserves all meets if and only if it is an upper adjoint.

As such, each join-preserving morphism determines a unique &quot;upper adjoint&quot; in the inverse direction that preserves all meets. Hence, considering complete lattices with complete semilattice morphisms (of either type, join-preserving or meet-preserving) boils down to considering Galois connections as one&#x27;s lattice morphisms. This also yields the insight that three classes of morphisms discussed above basically describe just two different categories of complete lattices: one with complete homomorphisms and one with Galois connections that captures both the meet-preserving functions (upper adjoints) and their dual join-preserving mappings (lower adjoints).

A particularly important class of special cases arises between lattices of subsets of &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot;, i.e., the power sets and , given a function from &quot;X&quot; to &quot;Y&quot;. In these cases, the direct image and inverse image maps induced by between the power sets are upper and lower adjoints to each other, respectively.

== Free construction and completion ==

=== Free &quot;complete semilattices&quot; ===
The construction of free objects depends on the chosen class of morphisms. Functions that preserve all joins (i.e. lower adjoints of Galois connections) are called &quot;free complete join-semilattices&quot;.

The standard definition from universal algebra states that a free complete lattice over a generating set formula_15 is a complete lattice formula_16 together with a function formula_17, such that any function formula_18 from formula_15 to the underlying set of some complete lattice formula_20 can be &quot;factored uniquely&quot; through a morphism formula_21 from formula_16 to formula_20. This means that formula_24 for every element formula_25 of formula_15, and that formula_27 is the only morphism with this property. Hence, there is a functor from the category of sets and functions to the category of complete lattices and join-preserving functions which is left adjoint to the forgetful functor from complete lattices to their underlying sets.

Free complete lattices can thus be constructed such that the complete lattice generated by some set &quot;formula_15&quot; is just the powerset formula_29, the set of all subsets of &quot;formula_15&quot; ordered by subset inclusion. The required unit formula_31 maps any element formula_25 of formula_15 to the singleton set formula_34. Given a mapping formula_18 as above, the function formula_36 is defined by
:formula_37.

Then formula_27 transforms unions into suprema and thus preserves joins.

These considerations also yield a free construction for morphisms that preserve meets instead of joins (i.e. upper adjoints of Galois connections). The above can be dualized: free objects are given as powersets ordered by reverse inclusion, such that set union provides the meet operation, and the function formula_27 is defined in terms of meets instead of joins. The result of this construction is known as a &quot;free complete meet-semilattice&quot;. It can be noted that these free constructions extend those that are used to obtain free semilattices, where finite sets need to be considered.

=== Free complete lattices ===
The situation for complete lattices with complete homomorphisms is more intricate. In fact, free complete lattices generally do not exist. Of course, one can formulate a word problem similar to the one for the case of lattices, but the collection of all possible words (or &quot;terms&quot;) in this case would be a proper class, because arbitrary meets and joins comprise operations for argument sets of every cardinality.

This property in itself is not a problem: as the case of free complete semilattices above shows, it can well be that the solution of the word problem leaves only a set of equivalence classes. In other words, it is possible that the proper classes of all terms have the same meaning and are thus identified in the free construction. However, the equivalence classes for the word problem of complete lattices are &quot;too small,&quot; such that the free complete lattice would still be a proper class, which is not allowed.

Now, one might still hope that there are some useful cases where the set of generators is sufficiently small for a free, complete lattice to exist. Unfortunately, the size limit is very low, and we have the following theorem:

: The free complete lattice on three generators does not exist; it is a proper class.

A proof of this statement is given by Johnstone. The original argument is attributed to Alfred W. Hales; see also the article on free lattices.

=== Completion ===
If a complete lattice is freely generated from a given &quot;poset&quot; used in place of the set of generators considered above, then one speaks of a &quot;completion&quot; of the poset. The definition of the result of this operation is similar to the above definition of free objects, where &quot;sets&quot; and &quot;functions&quot; are replaced by &quot;posets&quot; and &quot;monotone mappings&quot;. Likewise, one can describe the completion process as a functor from the category of posets with monotone functions to some category of complete lattices with appropriate morphisms that are left adjoint to the forgetful functor in the converse direction.

As long as one considers meet- or join-preserving functions as morphisms, this can easily be achieved through the so-called Dedekind–MacNeille completion. For this process, elements of the poset are mapped to (Dedekind-) &quot;cuts&quot;, which can then be mapped to the underlying posets of arbitrary complete lattices in much the same way as done for sets and free complete (semi-) lattices above.

The aforementioned result that free complete lattices do not exist entails that an according free construction from a poset is not possible either. This is easily seen by considering posets with a discrete order, where every element only relates to itself. These are exactly the free posets on an underlying set. Would there be a free construction of complete lattices from posets, then both constructions could be composed, which contradicts the negative result above.

== Representation ==
G. Birkhoff&#x27;s book &quot;Lattice Theory&quot; contains a very useful representation method. It associates a complete lattice to any binary relation between two sets by constructing a Galois connection from the relation, which then leads to two dually isomorphic closure systems. Closure systems are intersection-closed families of sets. When ordered by the subset relation ⊆, they are complete lattices.

A special instance of Birkhoff&#x27;s construction starts from an arbitrary poset &quot;(P,≤)&quot; and constructs the Galois connection from the order relation ≤ between &quot;P&quot; and itself. The resulting complete lattice is the Dedekind-MacNeille completion. When this completion is applied to a poset that already is a complete lattice, then the result is isomorphic to the original one. Thus, we immediately find that every complete lattice is represented by Birkhoff&#x27;s method, up to isomorphism.

The construction is utilized in formal concept analysis, where one represents real-word data by binary relations (called &quot;formal contexts&quot;) and uses the associated complete lattices (called &quot;concept lattices&quot;) for data analysis. The mathematics behind formal concept analysis therefore is the theory of complete lattices.

Another representation is obtained as follows: A subset of a complete lattice is itself a complete lattice (when ordered with the induced order) if and only if it is the image of an increasing and idempotent (but not necessarily extensive) self-map. 
The identity mapping has these two properties. Thus all complete lattices occur.

== Further results ==
Besides the previous representation results, there are some other statements that can be made about complete lattices, or that take a particularly simple form in this case. An example is the Knaster–Tarski theorem, which states that the set of fixed points of a monotone function on a complete lattice is again a complete lattice. This is easily seen to be a generalization of the above observation about the images of increasing and idempotent functions.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362924" start="18" end="34" title="Complete lattice" label="complete lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="40" end="61" title="partially ordered set" label="partially ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="95" end="103" title="supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269005" start="105" end="109" title="Join (mathematics)" label="join"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="118" end="125" title="infimum" label="infimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269005" start="127" end="131" title="Meet (Mathematics)" label="meet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362924" start="136" end="166" title="Complete lattice" label="conditionally complete lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q595364" start="260" end="267" title="Lattice (order)" label="lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="495" end="511" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175351" start="518" end="530" title="order theory" label="order theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636734" start="535" end="552" title="universal algebra" label="universal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082805" start="641" end="663" title="complete partial order" label="complete partial order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156447" start="757" end="781" title="complete Boolean algebra" label="complete Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156470" start="787" end="811" title="complete Heyting algebra" label="complete Heyting algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="885" end="906" title="partially ordered set" label="partially ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="942" end="948" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="991" end="1011" title="greatest lower bound" label="greatest lower bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="1017" end="1024" title="infimum" label="infimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="1053" end="1070" title="least upper bound" label="least upper bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="1076" end="1084" title="supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="1264" end="1273" title="empty set" label="empty set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196892" start="1308" end="1324" title="greatest element" label="greatest element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196892" start="1386" end="1399" title="least element" label="least element"/>
<link wikidata="Q595364" start="1466" end="1481" title="bounded lattice" label="bounded lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q834585" start="2035" end="2051" title="meet-semilattice" label="meet-semilattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q834585" start="2076" end="2092" title="join-semilattice" label="join-semilattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156540" start="2244" end="2256" title="completeness (order theory)" label="completeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949980" start="2353" end="2369" title="bounded complete" label="bounded complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082805" start="2376" end="2398" title="complete partial order" label="complete partial order"/>
<link wikidata="Q834585" start="2563" end="2574" title="semilattice" label="semilattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="2740" end="2754" title="Logical disjunction" label="either or both"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="2820" end="2837" title="least upper bound" label="least upper bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="2874" end="2894" title="greatest lower bound" label="greatest lower bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="2972" end="2981" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="3013" end="3022" title="subset" label="inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q185359" start="3053" end="3058" title="union (set theory)" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185837" start="3082" end="3094" title="intersection (set theory)" label="intersection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="3126" end="3133" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="3146" end="3158" title="divisibility" label="divisibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q102761" start="3385" end="3406" title="least common multiple" label="least common multiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="3430" end="3453" title="greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="3776" end="3783" title="infimum" label="infimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502105" start="3834" end="3842" title="supremum" label="supremum"/>
<link wikidata="Q568687" start="4045" end="4058" title="trivial group" label="trivial group"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="4082" end="4089" title="partial order" label="minimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="4127" end="4134" title="partial order" label="maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44649" start="4185" end="4191" title="ideal (ring theory)" label="ideals"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="4197" end="4201" title="ring (mathematics)" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="4331" end="4348" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q862761" start="4448" end="4456" title="interior (topology)" label="interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="4506" end="4515" title="empty set" label="empty set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="4683" end="4699" title="rational numbers" label="rational numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="5289" end="5296" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="5309" end="5321" title="divisibility" label="divisibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948412" start="5603" end="5612" title="Morphism" label="morphisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="5676" end="5683" title="Object (category theory)" label="objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="5689" end="5697" title="Category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q194404" start="6131" end="6140" title="monotonic" label="monotonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="6368" end="6376" title="Category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491747" start="6761" end="6778" title="Galois connection" label="Galois connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q357858" start="7210" end="7233" title="adjoint functor theorem" label="adjoint functor theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361385" start="8029" end="8033" title="duality (category theory)" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500272" start="8534" end="8545" title="free object" label="free object"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636734" start="8753" end="8770" title="universal algebra" label="universal algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q357858" start="9390" end="9402" title="adjoint functors" label="left adjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646117" start="9410" end="9427" title="forgetful functor" label="forgetful functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="9613" end="9621" title="powerset" label="powerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="9694" end="9710" title="subset" label="subset inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q554403" start="10144" end="10152" title="duality (order theory)" label="dualized"/>
<link wikidata="Q834585" start="10517" end="10534" title="semilattice" label="free semilattices"/>
<link wikidata="Q595364" start="10827" end="10835" title="lattice (order)" label="lattices"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406273" start="10872" end="10877" title="word problem (mathematics)" label="words"/>
<link wikidata="Q217594" start="10925" end="10937" title="proper class" label="proper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="11020" end="11031" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q217594" start="11857" end="11869" title="proper class" label="proper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723572" start="11960" end="11975" title="Alfred W. Hales" label="Alfred W. Hales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500254" start="12001" end="12013" title="free lattice" label="free lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249756" start="12821" end="12850" title="Dedekind–MacNeille completion" label="Dedekind–MacNeille completion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491747" start="13778" end="13795" title="Galois connection" label="Galois connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564851" start="13857" end="13872" title="closure operator" label="closure systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249756" start="14235" end="14264" title="Dedekind-MacNeille completion" label="Dedekind-MacNeille completion"/>
<link wikidata="Q997521" start="14364" end="14374" title="order-isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437394" start="14544" end="14567" title="formal concept analysis" label="formal concept analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564851" start="15037" end="15062" title="closure operator" label="increasing and idempotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q609612" start="15401" end="15423" title="Knaster–Tarski theorem" label="Knaster–Tarski theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q217608" start="15454" end="15465" title="Fixed point (mathematics)" label="fixed point"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44778" wikidata="Q13664" url="?curid=44778" title="Trapani">
<text>Trapani ( ; ; ) is a city and municipality (&quot;comune&quot;) on the west coast of Sicily, in Italy. It is the capital of the Province of Trapani. Founded by Elymians, the city is still an important fishing port and the main gateway to the nearby Egadi Islands.

==History==

Drepana was founded by the Elymians to serve as the port of the nearby city of Eryx (present-day Erice), which overlooks it from Monte Erice. The city sits on a low-lying promontory jutting out into the Mediterranean Sea.

It was originally named &quot;Drépanon&quot; from the Greek word for &quot;sickle&quot;, because of the curving shape of its harbour. Carthage seized control of the city in 260BC, subsequently making it an important naval base, but ceded it to Rome in 241BC following the Battle of the Aegates in the First Punic War.

Two ancient legends relate supposed mythical origins for the city. In the first legend, Trapani stemmed from the sickle which fell from the hands of the goddess Demeter while she was seeking for her daughter Persephone, who had been kidnapped by Hades. The second myth features Kronos, who eviscerated his father Ouranos, god of the sky, with a sickle which, falling into the sea, created the city. In ancient times, Saturn (i.e., the Punic god Baal Hammon) was the patron god of Trapani. Today, Saturn&#x27;s statue stands in a piazza in the centre of the city.
After its Roman, Vandal, Ostrogoth, Byzantine and (from 827) Arab conquests, Trapani was taken by the Normans of Roger I in 1077, flourishing under their dominations and having also a role in the Crusades as one of the most important ports in the Mediterranean Sea. During the first half of the 15th century, there was a community of Maltese people living in Trapani.

In the 17th century, the city decayed due to revolts, plagues, and famines, but in the following century, it grew from 16,000 to 30,000 inhabitants; commerce remained of local importance, while its military position in the Kingdom of Naples remained notable.

The city was badly damaged during World War II, when it was subjected to intense Allied bombardments. It has grown greatly since the end of the war, sprawling out virtually to the foot of Monte San Giuliano. Tourism has grown in recent years due to the city&#x27;s proximity to popular destinations such as Erice, Segesta, and the Egadi Islands.

==Geography==

The &quot;comune&quot; of Trapani consists of two discontiguous parts separated by the &quot;comune&quot; of Paceco. The northern part includes much of the city and some rural area; the much larger southern part includes the area of Marausa, half of Trapani-Birgi Airport and a large rural area. The &quot;comune&quot; does not include the north-eastern suburbs of the urban area, such as Casa Santa, which are part of the &quot;comune&quot; of Erice. The &quot;comune&quot; of Trapani has a population of 70,000 but the entire urban, including those parts in the &quot;comune&quot; of Erice, has over 90,000 residents.

==Economy==
Much of Trapani&#x27;s economy still depends on the sea and fishing and canning are the main local industries. Coral is also an important export, along with salt, marble, and marsala wine. The nearby coast is lined with numerous saltworks formed by the evaporation of seawater situated majestically along the coast road between Trapani and Marsala.

The city is also an important ferry port, with links to the Egadi Islands, Pantelleria, Sardinia, France and Tunisia. It also has its own airport, the Trapani-Birgi Airport.

=== Fishing ===
Trapani is one of the traditional locations of the &quot;mattanza&quot; tuna fishing technique, alongside: (San Giuliano, San Cusumano, Isola di Formica, Favignana, Bonagia, San Vito Lo Capo, Scopello, Capo Granitola). Today, this technique is forbidden but the fishing port is very active and hosts 142 small and medium fishing boats, for a total of 2805 GRT (gross tonnage).

The old fish market, renovated in 1998, is now used for cultural events and a new one, large and modern, more functional to fishing activities has been located near the port. It represents the only market in the Province and its recent restructuring, with European funds, places it at the forefront in the national level both in terms of marketing and product traceability.

=== Coral processing ===
Between the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries Trapani fishermen began to practice coral fishing, and coral craftmen started to develop its processing succeeding throughout the Mediterranean. A network of prestigious commissions was consolidated throughout Europe and it was thus possible to produce ever richer and more elaborate works. Today, however, fishing has almost completely disappeared, while coral processing is limited to few craftsmen.

=== Saltworks ===
Windmills and saltworks are evidence of industrial archeology. Saltworks are located in the area of Natural Reserve of Saline di Trapani and Paceco managed by the WWF and characterized by a remarkable flora and fauna. Thanks to the protection guaranteed by the Reserve, the activity of the saltworkers and the production of salt have increased, favoring the return and reproduction of dozens of species of migratory birds, including the pink flamingo.
==Culture==
The old city of Trapani dates from the later medieval or early modern periods; there are no more remains of the ancient city and many of the city&#x27;s historic buildings are designed in the Baroque style. 
* The Church of &quot;Sant&#x27;Agostino&quot; (14th century)
* The Church of &quot;Santa Maria di Gesù &quot;(15th–16th centuries)
* Basilica-Sanctuary of Maria Santissima Annunziata (also called &quot;Madonna di Trapani&quot;) originally built in 1315–1332 and rebuilt in 1760. It houses Museo regionale Agostino Pepoli and a marble statue of the Madonna of Trapani, which might be attributed to the work of Nino Pisano.
* &quot;Fontana di Tritone&quot; (&quot;Triton&#x27;s Fountain&quot;)
* The Baroque &quot;Palazzo della Giudecca &quot; or &quot;Casa Ciambra&quot;.
* The cathedral (built in 1421, but restored in the 18th century by Giovanni Biagio Amico). It includes a painting of &quot;Annunciation&quot; attributed to Anthony van Dyck.
* Church of &quot;Maria SS. dell&#x27;Intria&quot;, an example of Sicilian Baroque.
* Church of &quot;Badia Nuova&quot;, a small Baroque church.
* Castello di Terra, a ruined 12th-century castle, today police office.
* Ligny Tower, a 17th-century watchtower housing Phreistory museum.
*Regional Museum Agostino Pepoli - Located in the 14th-century Carmelite convent, adjacent to the Sanctuary of Basilica-Sanctuary of Maria Santissima Annunziata, it is one of the most important Sicilian museums. It houses acollection of decorative arts, sculptures (including works by the Gagini), cribs and coral jewelry, and an art gallery that includes, among others, paintings by Titian and Giacomo Balla.
*Museum of Prehistory - It is housed inside the seventeenth-century Torre di Ligny, on the extreme western point of the city, and preserves important prehistoric evidence of human presence in the area, as well as finds (artifacts, amphorae, anchors, a Punic helmet) from the sea of Trapani.
*Museum of Contemporary Art San Rocco - Housed inside Palazzo San Rocco, in the historic center.
*DiArt, diocesan collection of permanent religious art, housed in the episcopal seminary of Raganzìli in Casa Santa locality.
*Diocesan Museum, in the Church of Sant&#x27;Agostino
*Optical Illusions Museum
*&quot;Specus Corallii&quot; designed by architect Antonino Cardillo

==Folklore==
The city is renowned for its Easter related Holy Week activities and traditions, culminating between Good Friday and Holy Saturday in the Processione dei Misteri di Trapani, colloquially simply the &quot;Misteri di Trapani&quot; (in English the Procession of the Mysteries of Trapani or the Mysteries of Trapani), a day-long passion procession organized and sponsored by the city&#x27;s guilds, featuring twenty floats of wood, canvas and glue sculptures, mostly from the 17th and 18th centuries, of individual scenes of the events of the Passion.

The &quot;Misteri&quot; are among the oldest continuously running religious events in Europe, having been played every Good Friday since before the Easter of 1612. Running for at least 16 continuous hours, but occasionally well beyond the 24 hours, they are the longest religious festival in Sicily and in Italy. Important also to the cult of the Madonna of Trapani.

The city gives its name to a variety of pesto – &quot;pesto alla trapanese&quot; – made using almonds instead of the traditional pine nuts in Ligurian pesto.

==Transport==

Trapani-Birgi Airport is a military-civil joint use airport (third for traffic on the island). Recently the airport has seen an increase of traffic thanks to low-cost carriers from all parts of Europe (i.e. London-Stansted and London-Luton, Paris Beauvais, Dublin, Bruxelles, Munich, Frankfurt, Eindhoven, Stockholm, Malta, Bratislava).

==Sport==
From September 28 to October 9, 2005, Trapani was the location of Acts 8 and 9 of the Louis Vuitton Cup. This sailing race featured, among other entrants, all the boats that took part in the 2007 America&#x27;s Cup.

The town is also the base for the local football team Trapani Calcio. Founded in 1905, they are nicknamed the Granata (the Maroons) after their kit colour. In 2010, Trapani Calcio was admitted into the 2010–11 Lega Pro Seconda Divisione (formerly Serie C2), ending the club&#x27;s 13-year absence from the professional ranks. Subsequently, it made debut in Serie B in the 2013–14 season. It currently plays in Serie B with the coach Fabrizio Castori.

==Climate==
Trapani has a hot-summer mediterranean climate with hot and dry summers coupled with moderately wet and mild winters. Summer lows are cooler than in other places of Sicily and Calabria, while at the same time remaining significantly warm for several months.

==International relations==
===Twin towns and Sister cities===
Trapani is twinned with:
* Constanța, Romania
* Les Sables-d&#x27;Olonne, France
* Roquefort-les-Pins, France
* Würselen, Germany

==Identification as Ithaca==
Samuel Butler claimed, following visits in Trapani, that the city and its neighboring islands is the inspiration for both Odysseus&#x27;s home of Ithaca as described in Homer&#x27;s Oddysey, and Scheria, where Odysseus met Nausicaa.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* Battle of Drepana
* Drepana

==References==
==Bibliography==
==External links==
* Museum Agostino Pepoli 
* Tuna fisheries 
*Salt route </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13664" start="0" end="7" title="Trapani" label="Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="50" end="56" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="85" end="91" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="96" end="101" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16288" start="128" end="147" title="Province of Trapani" label="Province of Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q931423" start="160" end="168" title="Elymians" label="Elymians"/>
<link wikidata="Q109576" start="249" end="262" title="Egadi Islands" label="Egadi Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040241" start="278" end="285" title="Drepana" label="Drepana"/>
<link wikidata="Q931423" start="305" end="313" title="Elymians" label="Elymians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275983" start="357" end="361" title="Eryx (Sicily)" label="Eryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q192917" start="375" end="380" title="Erice" label="Erice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861524" start="407" end="418" title="Monte Erice" label="Monte Erice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="481" end="498" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="555" end="560" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q42233" start="576" end="582" title="sickle" label="sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="635" end="643" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="745" end="749" title="Roman Republic" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134649" start="773" end="794" title="Battle of the Aegates Islands" label="Battle of the Aegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="802" end="817" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="981" end="988" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45967" start="1028" end="1038" title="Persephone" label="Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="1066" end="1071" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q44204" start="1098" end="1104" title="Kronos (mythology)" label="Kronos"/>
<link wikidata="Q79999" start="1133" end="1140" title="Ouranos (mythology)" label="Ouranos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914567" start="1255" end="1264" title="Canaanite religion" label="Punic god"/>
<link wikidata="Q83879" start="1265" end="1276" title="Baal Hammon" label="Baal Hammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="1400" end="1406" title="Vandals" label="Vandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="1408" end="1417" title="Ostrogoth" label="Ostrogoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1419" end="1428" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="1444" end="1448" title="Emirate of Sicily" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884809" start="1485" end="1492" title="Italo-Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q315297" start="1496" end="1503" title="Roger I of Sicily" label="Roger I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="1579" end="1587" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1630" end="1647" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286876" start="1717" end="1731" title="Maltese people" label="Maltese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="1975" end="1992" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2046" end="2058" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q192917" start="2200" end="2218" title="Monte San Giuliano" label="Monte San Giuliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q192917" start="2319" end="2324" title="Erice" label="Erice"/>
<link wikidata="Q692847" start="2326" end="2333" title="Segesta" label="Segesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q109576" start="2343" end="2356" title="Egadi Islands" label="Egadi Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q481744" start="2483" end="2489" title="Paceco" label="Paceco"/>
<link wikidata="Q658537" start="2624" end="2645" title="Vincenzo Florio Airport Trapani-Birgi" label="Trapani-Birgi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q192917" start="2819" end="2824" title="Erice" label="Erice"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="3170" end="3176" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q842052" start="3182" end="3194" title="marsala wine" label="marsala wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q481758" start="3432" end="3443" title="Pantelleria" label="Pantelleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="3466" end="3473" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q658537" start="3508" end="3529" title="Trapani-Birgi Airport" label="Trapani-Birgi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909305" start="3605" end="3613" title="mattanza" label="mattanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="3620" end="3624" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q216799" start="3702" end="3711" title="Favignana" label="Favignana"/>
<link wikidata="Q481890" start="3722" end="3738" title="San Vito Lo Capo" label="San Vito Lo Capo"/>
<link wikidata="Q490208" start="4893" end="4940" title="Riserva naturale integrale Saline di Trapani e Paceco" label="Natural Reserve of Saline di Trapani and Paceco"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="4956" end="4959" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901583" start="5230" end="5243" title="Flamingo" label="pink flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="5449" end="5456" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q429832" start="5599" end="5648" title="Basilica-Sanctuary of Maria Santissima Annunziata" label="Basilica-Sanctuary of Maria Santissima Annunziata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802376" start="5755" end="5786" title="Museo regionale Agostino Pepoli" label="Museo regionale Agostino Pepoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273927" start="5875" end="5886" title="Nino Pisano" label="Nino Pisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q148030" start="5928" end="5941" title="Triton (mythology)" label="Triton&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q22054963" start="5992" end="6000" title="Giudecca or Judeca (Medieval Italy&amp;#x27;s Jewish quarters)" label="Giudecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q150679" start="6194" end="6210" title="Anthony van Dyck" label="Anthony van Dyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538178" start="6359" end="6376" title="Castello di Terra" label="Castello di Terra"/>
<link wikidata="Q972079" start="6431" end="6442" title="Ligny Tower" label="Ligny Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802376" start="6498" end="6529" title="Museo regionale Agostino Pepoli" label="Regional Museum Agostino Pepoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q578295" start="6786" end="6792" title="Antonello Gagini" label="Gagini"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="6881" end="6887" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q368254" start="6892" end="6905" title="Giacomo Balla" label="Giacomo Balla"/>
<link wikidata="Q972079" start="6975" end="6989" title="Ligny Tower" label="Torre di Ligny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7552" end="7569" title="Antonino Cardillo" label="Antonino Cardillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="7628" end="7637" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="7685" end="7696" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q186206" start="7701" end="7714" title="Holy Saturday" label="Holy Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922371" start="7722" end="7756" title="Processione dei Misteri di Trapani" label="Processione dei Misteri di Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q429832" start="8480" end="8498" title="Madonna of Trapani" label="Madonna of Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9896" start="8541" end="8546" title="pesto" label="pesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900766" start="8555" end="8575" title="pesto alla trapanese" label="pesto alla trapanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="8595" end="8601" title="almond" label="almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q212933" start="8630" end="8638" title="pine nut" label="pine nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q658537" start="8675" end="8696" title="Vincenzo Florio Airport Trapani-Birgi" label="Trapani-Birgi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1593647" start="9109" end="9126" title="Louis Vuitton Cup" label="Louis Vuitton Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q467557" start="9219" end="9237" title="America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114224" start="9294" end="9308" title="Trapani Calcio" label="Trapani Calcio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114224" start="9405" end="9419" title="Trapani Calcio" label="Trapani Calcio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829521" start="9442" end="9476" title="2010–11 Lega Pro Seconda Divisione" label="2010–11 Lega Pro Seconda Divisione"/>
<link wikidata="Q194052" start="9597" end="9604" title="Serie B" label="Serie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q194052" start="9650" end="9657" title="Serie B" label="Serie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737975" start="9673" end="9689" title="Fabrizio Castori" label="Fabrizio Castori"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9718" end="9750" title="Mediterranean climate#Hot-summer mediterranean climate" label="hot-summer mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="10037" end="10044" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="10053" end="10062" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q50810269" start="10074" end="10098" title="Les Sables-d&amp;#x27;Olonne" label="Les Sables-d&amp;#x27;Olonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q381338" start="10109" end="10127" title="Roquefort-les-Pins" label="Roquefort-les-Pins"/>
<link wikidata="Q14901" start="10138" end="10146" title="Würselen" label="Würselen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312829" start="10186" end="10199" title="Samuel Butler (novelist)" label="Samuel Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="10308" end="10316" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060492" start="10332" end="10338" title="Homer&amp;#x27;s Ithaca" label="Ithaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="10355" end="10360" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="10368" end="10375" title="Oddysey" label="Oddysey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944882" start="10381" end="10388" title="Scheria" label="Scheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q135224" start="10409" end="10417" title="Nausicaa" label="Nausicaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q590014" start="10448" end="10465" title="Battle of Drepana" label="Battle of Drepana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040241" start="10468" end="10475" title="Drepana" label="Drepana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44779" wikidata="Q526206" url="?curid=44779" title="Wilfred Bion">
<text>Wilfred Ruprecht Bion DSO (; 8 September 1897 – 8 November 1979) was an influential English psychoanalyst, who became president of the British Psychoanalytical Society from 1962 to 1965.

==Early life and military service==
Bion was born in Mathura, North-Western Provinces, India, and educated at Bishop&#x27;s Stortford College in England. After the outbreak of the First World War, he served in the Tank Corps as a tank commander in France, and was awarded both the Distinguished Service Order (DSO) (on 18 February 1918, for his actions at the Battle of Cambrai), and the Croix de Chevalier of the Légion d&#x27;honneur. He first entered the war zone on 26 June 1917, and was promoted to temporary lieutenant on 10 June 1918, and to acting captain on 22 March 1918, when he took command of a tank section, he retained the rank when he became second-in-command of a tank company on 19 October 1918, and relinquished it on 7 January 1919. He was demobilised on 1 September 1921, and was granted the rank of captain. The full citation for his DSO reads:

&quot;Bion&#x27;s daughter, Parthenope...raises the question of just how (and how far) her father was shaped as an analyst by his wartime experiences...under[p]inning Bion&#x27;s later concern with the coexistence of regressed or primitive proto-mental states alongside more sophisticated one&quot;.

==Education and early career==

After World War I, Bion studied history at The Queen&#x27;s College, Oxford, earning a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1922, before studying medicine at University College London.

Initially attracted to London by the &quot;strange new subject called psychoanalysis&quot;, he met and was impressed by Wilfred Trotter, an outstanding brain surgeon who published the famous &quot;Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War&quot; in 1916, based on the horrors of the First World War. This was to prove an important influence on Bion&#x27;s interest in group behavior. Having qualified in medicine by means of the Conjoint Diploma (MRCS England, LRCP London) in 1930 Bion spent seven years in psychotherapeutic training at the Tavistock Clinic, an experience he regarded, in retrospect, as having had some limitations. It did, however, bring him into fruitful contact with Samuel Beckett. He wanted to train in Psychoanalysis and in 1938 he began a training analysis with John Rickman, but this was brought to an end by the advent of the Second World War.

Bion was recommissioned in the Royal Army Medical Corps as a lieutenant on 1 April 1940, and worked in a number of military hospitals including Northfield Military Hospital (Hollymoor Hospital, Birmingham) where he initiated the first Northfield Experiment. These ideas on the psychoanalysis of groups were then taken up and developed by others such as S. H. Foulkes, Rickman, Bridger, Main and Patrick De Mare. The entire group at Tavistock had in fact been taken into the army, and were working on new methods of treatment for psychiatric casualties (those suffering post-traumatic stress, or &quot;shell shock&quot; as it was then known.) Out of this his pioneering work in group dynamics, associated with the &quot;Tavistock group&quot;, Bion&#x27;s papers describing his work of the 1940s were compiled much later and appeared together in 1961 in his influential book, &quot;Experiences in Groups and other papers.&quot; It was less a guide for the therapy of individuals within or by the group, than an exploration of the processes set off by the complex experience of being in a group. The book quickly became a touchstone work for applications of group theory in a wide variety of fields.

In 1945, during the Second World War, Bion&#x27;s wife Betty Jardine gave birth to a daughter, but Betty died a few days afterwards. His daughter, Parthenope, became a psychoanalyst in Italy, and often lectured and wrote about her father&#x27;s work. Parthenope died, together with her 18-year-old daughter Patrizia, in a car crash in Italy in July 1998.

==Later career==
Returning to the Tavistock Clinic Bion chaired the Planning Committee that reorganized the Tavistock into the new Tavistock Institute of Human Relations, alongside a new Tavistock Clinic which was part of the newly launched National Health Service. As his interest in psychoanalysis increased, he underwent training analysis, between 1946 and 1952, with Melanie Klein. He met his second wife, Francesca, at the Tavistock in 1951. He joined a research group of Klein&#x27;s students (including Hanna Segal and Herbert Rosenfeld), who were developing Klein&#x27;s theory of the paranoid-schizoid and the depressive positions, for use in the analysis of patients with psychotic disorders. He produced a series of highly original and influential papers (collected as &quot;Second Thoughts&quot;, 1967) on the analysis of schizophrenia, and the specifically cognitive, perceptual, and identity problems of such patients. To this he added a valuable final section called Commentary, showing how some of his views on clinical and theoretical matters had changed.

Bion&#x27;s theories, which were always based in the phenomena of the analytic encounter, revealed both correspondences and expansions of core ideas from both Sigmund Freud and Melanie Klein. At one point, he attempted to understand thoughts and thinking from an &#x27;algebraic&#x27;, &#x27;geometric&#x27; and &#x27;mathematised&#x27; point of view, believing there to be too little precision in the existing vocabulary, a process culminating in &quot;The Grid&quot;. Later he abandoned the complex, abstract applications of mathematics, and the Grid, and developed a more intuitive approach, epitomised in &quot;Attention and Interpretation&quot; (1970).

In 1968, Bion moved to Los Angeles, California, where he remained until 1977. During those years he mentored a number of psychoanalysts interested in Kleinian approaches, including James Gooch (psychoanalyst) and other founding members of the Psychoanalytic Center of California. Shortly before his death, he returned to Oxfordshire.

==Reception and stature==
Bion left a reputation which has grown steadily both in Britain and internationally. Some commentators consider that his writings are often gnomic and irritating, but never fail to stimulate. He defies categorisation as a follower of Klein or of Freud. While Bion is most well known outside of the psychoanalytic community for his work on group dynamics, the psychoanalytic conversation that explores his work is mainly concerned with his theory of thinking, and his model of the development of a capacity for thought.

Wilfred Bion was a potent and original contributor to psychoanalysis. He was one of the first to analyse patients in psychotic states using an unmodified analytic technique; he extended existing theories of projective processes and developed new conceptual tools. The degree of collaboration between Hanna Segal, Wilfred Bion and Herbert Rosenfeld in their work with psychotic patients during the late 1950s, and their discussions with Melanie Klein at the time, means that it is not always possible to distinguish their exact individual contributions to the developing theory of splitting, projective identification, unconscious phantasy and the use of countertransference. As Donald Meltzer (1979, 1981), Denis Carpy (1989, p. 287), and Michael Feldman (2009, pp. 33, 42) have pointed out, these three pioneering analysts not only sustained Klein&#x27;s clinical and theoretical approach, but through an extension of the concept of projective identification and countertransference they deepened and expanded it. In Bion&#x27;s clinical work and supervision the goal remains insightful understanding of psychic reality through a disciplined experiencing of the transference–countertransference, in a way that promotes the growth of the whole personality.

&#x27;Bion&#x27;s ideas are highly unique&#x27;, so that he &#x27;remained larger than life to almost all who encountered him&#x27;. He has been considered by Neville Symington as possibly &quot;the greatest psychoanalytic thinker...after Freud&quot;.

Bion&#x27;s work has left a strong impression on a number of contemporary psychoanalytic thinkers, including Antonino Ferro, Thomas Ogden, or Elias Mallet da Rocha Barros.

There is some historical evidence to suggest that the idea of containment may have been suggested to Bion in the mid-1930s, by an encounter with C.G.Jung: Bion attended Jung&#x27;s 1935 lectures at the Tavistock Clinic, in which Bion was an active participant (asking three questions of Jung about a range of aspects of Jung&#x27;s thinking). The experience was described by James Grotstein, Bion&#x27;s biographer and &quot;one of Bion&#x27;s most influential pupils&quot;, as having had a &quot;dramatic impact&quot; on Bion.

==Group experiments==
Bion performed a lot of group experiments when he was put in charge of the training wing of a military hospital. Besides observing the basic assumptions recurring in these groups, he also has observed some very interesting phenomena which he believed may well apply to society.

About his experiences in groups, Bion wrote: &quot;Judged by ordinary standards of social intercourse, the performance of the group is almost devoid of intellectual content. Furthermore, if we note how assumptions pass unchallenged as statements of fact, and are accepted as such, it seems clear that critical judgment is almost entirely absent.&quot; He explained this observation by calling attention to the presence of unconscious motivations underlying group behavior. This observation agrees with Gustave Le Bon&#x27;s findings about groups to which he mentioned in his book &quot;The Crowd&quot;.

Bion also claimed that &quot;...what the individual says or does in a group illumines both his own personality and his view of the group; sometimes his contribution illumines one more than the other.&quot; This observation is related to the psychological phenomenon of projection.

Bion posited the presence of &quot;anonymous&quot; contributions to a group as the foundations for &quot;a successful system of evasion and denial&quot;. A related phenomenon is that of &quot;deindividuation&quot;.

In &quot;Experiences in Groups&quot;, Bion asserted that whenever a group is formed, it seeks a leader to follow. Moreover, he claimed that in the absence of a formal leader who satisfies the group, the most mentally ill member of the group will be treated as an informal leader: &quot;In its search for a leader the group finds a paranoid schizophrenic or malignant hysteric if possible; failing either of these, a psychopathic personality with delinquent trends will do; failing a psychopathic personality it will pick on the verbally facile high-grade defective.&quot;

==Group dynamics—the &quot;basic assumptions&quot;==
Wilfred Bion&#x27;s observations about the role of group processes in group dynamics are set out in &quot;Experiences in Groups and Other Papers,&quot; written in the 1940s but compiled and published in 1961, where he refers to recurrent emotional states of groups as &#x27;basic assumptions&#x27;. Bion argues that in every group, two groups are actually present: the work group, and the basic assumption group. The work group is that aspect of group functioning which has to do with the primary task of the group—what the group has formed to accomplish; will &quot;keep the group anchored to a sophisticated and rational level of behaviour&quot;. The basic assumption group describes the tacit underlying assumptions on which the behaviour of the group is based. Bion specifically identified three basic assumptions: dependency, fight-flight, and pairing. When a group adopts any one of these basic assumptions, it interferes with the task the group is attempting to accomplish. Bion believed that interpretation by the therapist of this aspect of group dynamics would, whilst being resisted, also result in potential insight regarding effective, co-operative group work.

In dependency, the essential aim of the group is to attain security through, and have its members protected by, one individual. The basic assumption in this group culture seems to be that an external object exists whose function it is to provide security for the immature individual. The group members behave passively, and act as though the leader, by contrast, is omnipotent and omniscient. For example, the leader may pose a question only to be greeted with docile silence, as though he or she had not spoken at all. The leader may be idealized into a kind of god who can take care of his or her children, and some especially ambitious leaders may be susceptible to this role. Resentment at being dependent may eventually lead the group members to &quot;take down&quot; the leader, and then search for a new leader to repeat the process.

In the basic assumption of fight-flight, the group behaves as though it has met to preserve itself at all costs, and that this can only be done by running away from someone or fighting someone or something. In fight, the group may be characterized by aggressiveness and hostility; in flight, the group may chit-chat, tell stories, arrive late or any other activities that serve to avoid addressing the task at hand. The leader for this sort of group is one who can mobilize the group for attack, or lead it in flight.

The final basic assumption group, pairing, exists on the assumption that the group has met for the purpose of reproduction—the basic assumption that two people can be met together for only one purpose, and that a sexual one&#x27;. Two people, regardless the sex of either, carry out the work of the group through their continued interaction. The remaining group members listen eagerly and attentively with a sense of relief and hopeful anticipation.

Bion considered that &quot;the three basic-assumption groups seem each in turn to be aggregates of individuals sharing out between them the characteristics of one character in the Oedipal situation&quot;. Behind the Oedipal level, however, Bion postulated the existence of still more primitive, part-object phantasies; and &quot;the more disturbed the group, the more easily discernible are these primitive phantasies and mechanisms&quot;. Such phantasies would prove the main focus of Bion&#x27;s interest after his second analysis.

==Bion on thinking==
&quot;During the 1950s and 1960s, Bion transformed Melanie Klein&#x27;s theories of infantile phantasy...into an epistemological &quot;theory of thinking&quot; of his own.&quot; Bion used as his starting point the phenomenology of the analytic hour, highlighting the two principles of &quot;the emergence of truth and mental growth. The mind grows through exposure to truth.&quot; The foundation for both mental development and truth are, for Bion, emotional experience.

The evolution of emotional experience into the capacity for thought, and the potential derailment of this process, are the primary phenomena described in Bion&#x27;s model. Through his hypothesized alpha and beta elements, Bion provides a language to help one think about what is occurring during the analytic hour. These tools are intended for use outside the hour in the clinician&#x27;s reflective process. To attempt to apply his models during the analytic session violates the basic principle whereby &quot;Bion had advocated starting every session &#x27;without memory, desire or understanding&#x27;—his antidote to those intrusive influences that otherwise threaten to distort the analytic process.&quot;

===Alpha elements, beta elements, and alpha function===
Bion created a theory of thinking based on changing beta elements (unmetabolized psyche/soma/affective experience) into alpha elements (thoughts that can be thought by the thinker). Beta elements were seen as cognate to the underpinnings of the &quot;basic assumptions&quot; identified in his work with groups: &quot;the fundamental anxieties that underlie the basic assumption group resistances were originally thought of as &quot;proto-mental phenomena&quot;...forerunners of Bion&#x27;s later concept of beta-elements.&quot; They were equally conceptual developments from his work on projective identification—from the &quot;minutely split &#x27;particles&#x27;&quot; Bion saw as expelled in pathological projective identification by the psychotic, who would then go on to &quot;lodge them in the angry, so-called bizarre objects by which he feels persecuted and controlled&quot;. For &quot;these raw bits of experience he called beta-elements...to be actively handled and made use of by the mind they must, through what Bion calls alpha-functions, become alpha-elements&quot;.

β elements, α elements and α function are elements that Bion (1963) hypothesizes. He does not consider β-elements, α- elements, nor α function to actually exist. The terms are instead tools for thinking about what is being observed. They are elements whose qualities remain unsaturated, meaning we cannot know the full extent or scope of their meaning, so they are intended as tools for thought rather than real things to be accepted at face value (1962, p. 3).

Bion took for granted that the infant requires a mind to help it tolerate and organize experience. For Bion, thoughts exist prior to the development of an apparatus for thinking. The apparatus for thinking, the capacity to have thoughts &quot;has to be called into existence to cope with thoughts&quot; (1967, p. 111). Thoughts exist prior to their realization. Thinking, the capacity to think the thoughts which already exist, develops through another mind providing α-function (1962, p. 83)—through the &quot;container&quot; role of maternal reverie.

To learn from experience alpha-function must operate on the awareness of the emotional experience; alpha–elements are produced from the impressions of the experience; these are thus made storable and available for dream thoughts and for unconscious waking thinking... If there are only beta-elements, which cannot be made unconscious, there can be no repression, suppression, or learning. (Bion, 1962, p. 8)

α-function works upon undigested facts, impressions, and sensations, that cannot be mentalized—beta-elements. α-function digests β-elements, making them available for thought (1962, pp. 6–7).

Beta-elements are not amenable to use in dream thoughts but are suited for use in projective identification. They are influential in producing acting out. These are objects that can be evacuated or used for a kind of thinking that depends on manipulation of what are felt to be things in themselves as if to substitute such manipulations for words or ideas... Alpha-function transforms sense impressions into alpha-elements which resemble, and may in fact be identical with, the visual images with which we are familiar in dreams, namely, the elements that Freud regards as yielding their latent content when the analyst has interpreted them. Failure of alpha-function means the patient cannot dream and therefore cannot sleep. As alpha-function makes the sense impressions of the emotional experience available for conscious and dream—thought the patient who cannot dream cannot go to sleep and cannot wake up. (1962, pp. 6–7)
===Bizarre object===
Bizarre objects, according to Bion, are impressions of external objects which, by way of projective identification, form a &quot;screen&quot; that&#x27;s imbued with characteristics of the subject&#x27;s own personality; they form part of his interpretation of object relations theory. Bion saw psychotic attacks on the normal linking between objects as producing a fractured world, where the patient felt themselves surrounded by hostile bizarre objects—the by-products of the broken linkages. Such objects, with their superego components, blur the boundary of internal and external, and impose a kind of externalised moralism on their victims. They can also contain ego-functions that have been evacuated from the self as part of the defence against thinking, sensing, and coming to terms with reality: thus a man may feel watched by his telephone, or that the music player being listened to is in fact listening to him in turn.

====Later developments====
Hanna Segal considered bizarre objects more difficult to re-internalise than either good or bad objects due to their splintered state: grouped together in a mass or psychic gang, their threatening properties may contribute to agoraphobia.

===Knowledge, love and hate===
Successful application of alpha-function leads to &quot;the capacity to tolerate the actual frustration involved in learning (&quot;K&quot;) that [Bion] calls &#x27;learning from experience. The opposite of knowledge &quot;K&quot; was what Bion termed &quot;−K&quot;: &quot;the process that strips, denudes, and devalues persons, experiences, and ideas.&quot;

Both K and −K interact for Bion with Love and Hate, as links within the analytic relationship. &quot;The complexities of the emotional link, whether Love or Hate or Knowledge [L, H, and K – the Bionic relational triad]&quot; produce ever-changing &quot;atmospheric&quot; effects in the analytic situation. The patient&#x27;s focus may wish to be &quot;on Love and Hate (L and H) rather than the knowledge (K) that is properly at stake in psychoanalytic inquiry.&quot;

For Bion, &quot;knowledge is not a thing we have, but a link between ourselves and what we know ... K is being willing to know but not insisting on knowledge.&quot; By contrast, -K is &quot;not just ignorance but the active avoidance of knowledge, or even the wish to destroy the capacity for it&quot; – and &quot;enacts what &#x27;Attacks on Linking&#x27; identifies as hatred of emotion, hatred of reality, hatred of life itself.&quot;

Looking for the source of such hate (H), Bion notes in &quot;Learning from Experience&quot; that, &quot;Inevitably one wonders at various points in the investigation why such a phenomenon as that represented by −K should exist. ... I shall consider one factor only – Envy. By this term I mean the phenomenon described by Melanie Klein in &quot;Envy and Gratitude&quot;&quot; (1962, p. 96).

===Reversible perspective and −K===
&quot;Reversible Perspective&quot; was a term coined by Bion to illuminate &quot;a peculiar and deadly form of analytic &quot;impasse&quot; which defends against psychic pain&quot;. It represents the clash of &quot;two independently experienced views or phenomena whose meanings are incompatible&quot;. In Bion&#x27;s own words, &quot;Reversible perspective is evidence of pain; the patient reverses perspective so as to make a dynamic situation static.&quot;

As summarised by Etchegoyen, &quot;Reversible perspective is an extreme case of rigidity of thought. ... As Bion says, what is most characteristic in such cases is the manifest accord and the latent discord.&quot; In clinical contexts, what may happen is that the analyst&#x27;s &quot;interpretation is accepted, but the &quot;premises have been rejected&quot; ... the actual specificity, the substance of the interpretation&quot;. Reversible perspective is an aspect of &quot;the potential destruction and deformation of knowledge&quot; – one of the attacks on linking of −K.

===O: The ineffable===
As his thought continued to develop, Bion came to use &quot;Negative Capability&quot; and the suspension of Memory and Desire in his work as an analyst, in order to investigate psychic reality - which he regarded as essentially &#x27;non-sensuous&#x27; (1970). Following his 1965 book Transformations he had an increasing interest in what he termed the domain of &quot;O&quot; – the unknowable, or ultimate Truth. &quot;In aesthetics, Bion has been described as a neo-Kantian for whom reality, or the thing-in-itself (O), cannot be known, only be &quot;be-ed&quot; (1965). What can be known is said by Bion to be in the realm of K, impinging through its sensory channels. If the observer can desist from &quot;irritably reaching for fact and reason&quot;, and suspend the normal operation of the faculties of memory and apperception, what Bion called transformations in knowledge can permit an &#x27;evolution&#x27; where transformations in K touch on transformations in Being (O). Bion believed such moments to feel both ominous and turbulent, threatening a loss of anchorage in everyday &#x27;narrative&#x27; security.

Bion would speak of &quot;an intense catastrophic emotional explosion O,&quot; which could only be known through its aftereffects. Where before he had privileged the domain of knowledge (K), now he would speak as well of &quot;resistance to the shift from transformations involving K (knowledge) to transformations involving O ... resistance to the unknowable&quot;. Hence his injunctions to the analyst to eschew memory and desire, to &quot;bring to bear a diminution of the &#x27;light&#x27; – a penetrating beam of darkness; a reciprocal of the searchlight. If any object existed, however faint, it would show up very clearly&quot;. In stating this he was making connections to Freud, who in a letter to Lou Andreas Salome had referred to a mental counterpart of scotopic, &quot;mole like vision&quot;, used to gain impressions of the Unconscious. He was also making links with the &quot;apophatic&quot; method used by contemplative thinkers such as St John of the Cross, a writer quoted many times by Bion. Bion was well aware that our perception and our attention often blind us to what genuinely and strikingly is new in every moment.

== Containment theory ==
Bion&#x27;s concept of containment, first developed in his 1962 work &quot;Learning from Experience,&quot; represents one of his most significant contributions to psychoanalytic theory. The theory describes a psychological process whereby one person (the container) receives and processes the unbearable feelings and experiences of another (the contained).

=== Origins and development ===
The containment model emerged from Bion&#x27;s observations of the mother-infant relationship and his clinical work with psychotic patients. Drawing on Melanie Klein&#x27;s concept of projective identification, Bion expanded it from a defensive mechanism to a communicative process essential for psychological development. He proposed that the mother serves as a psychological &quot;container&quot; for the infant&#x27;s primitive anxieties and unprocessed emotional experiences (which he termed &quot;beta elements&quot;). 
Bion used the notation &quot;♀︎♂︎&quot; to represent the container-contained relationship, describing the dynamic interplay between:

* The container (♀︎) which receives, holds, and processes
* The contained (♂︎) which is projected, held, and transformed

=== Maternal reverie and alpha function ===
Central to containment theory is Bion&#x27;s concept of &quot;maternal reverie,&quot; which describes the mother&#x27;s receptive state of mind that allows her to receive the infant&#x27;s projections. Through what Bion termed &quot;alpha function,&quot; the mother processes the infant&#x27;s raw sensory data and emotional experiences (beta elements) into manageable, thinkable forms (alpha elements) that can be re-introjected by the infant. Failure of adequate containment may lead to what Bion described as &quot;nameless dread&quot; – primitive anxieties that cannot be processed or thought about.

==== Application to psychoanalysis ====
In clinical practice, the analyst functions as a container for the patient&#x27;s unbearable emotions and experiences. Bion emphasized that this process requires the analyst to maintain a state of mind free from &quot;memory and desire&quot; to fully receive the patient&#x27;s projections. Through containment, patients gradually develop their own capacity to contain and process difficult emotional experiences.

==Late Bion==

&quot;For the later Bion, the psychoanalytic encounter was itself a site of turbulence, &#x27;a mental space for further ideas which may yet be developed&#x27;.&quot; In his unorthodox quest to maintain such &quot;mental space&quot;, Bion &quot;spent the final years of his long and distinguished professional life [writing] a futuristic trilogy in which he is answerable to no one but himself, &quot;A Memoir of the Future&quot;.&quot;

If we accept that &quot;Bion introduced a new form of pedagogy in his writings...[via] the density and non-linearity of his prose&quot;, it comes perhaps to a peak here in what he himself termed &quot;a fictitious account of psychoanalysis including an artificially constructed dream ... science fiction&quot;. We may conclude at least that he achieved his stated goal therein: &quot;To prevent someone who KNOWS from filling the empty space&quot;.

==Bibliography==

* Bion, W.R. (1940). The war of nerves. In Miller and Crichton-Miller (Eds.), The Neuroses in War (pp. 180 – 200). London: Macmillan, 1940.
* Bion, W.R. (1943). Intra-group tensions in therapy, Lancet 2: 678/781 - 27 Nov. 1943, in &quot;Experiences in Groups&quot; (1961).
* Bion, W. R.(1946). Leaderless group project, &quot;Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic&quot;, 10: 77–81.
* Bion, W. R. (1948a). Psychiatry in a time of crisis, &quot;British Journal of Medical Psychology&quot;, vol.XXI.
* Bion, W. R. (1948b). Experiences in groups, &quot;Human Relations&quot;, vols. I-IV, 1948–1951, Reprinted in &quot;Experiences in Groups&quot; (1961).
* Bion, W. R. (1950). The imaginary twin, read to the British Psychoanalytical Society, 1 Nov. 1950. In &quot;Second Thoughts&quot; (1967).
* Bion, W. R. (1952). Group dynamics: a review. &quot;International Journal of Psycho-Analysis&quot;, vol. 33:, Reprinted in M. Klein, P. Heimann &amp; R. Money-Kyrle (editors). New Directions in Psychoanalysis (pp. 440–477). Tavistock Publications, London, 1955. Reprinted in &quot;Experiences in Groups&quot; (1961).
* Bion, W. R. (1954). Notes on the theory of schizophrenia. Read in the Symposium &quot;The Psychology of Schizophrenia&quot; at the 18th International psycho-analytical congress, London, 1953 International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, vol. 35: Reprinted in &quot;Second Thoughts&quot; (1967).
* Bion, W. R. (1955a). The Development of Schizophrenic Thought, &quot;International Journal of Psycho-Analysis&quot;, vol. 37: Reprinted in &quot;Second Thoughts&quot; (1967).
* Bion, W. R. (1955b). Language and the schizophrenic, in M. Klein, P. Heimann and R. Money-Kyrle (editors). &quot;New Directions in Psychoanalysis&quot; (pp. 220 – 239).Tavistock Publications, London, 1955.
* Bion, W. R. (1957a). The differentiation of the psychotic from the non-psychotic personalities, &quot;International Journal of Psycho Analysis&quot;, vol. 38: Reprinted in &quot;Second Thoughts&quot; (1967).
* Bion, W. R. (1957b). On Arrogance, 20th International Congress of Psycho-Analysis, Paris, in &quot;Second Thoughts&quot; (1967).
* Bion, W. R. (1958). On Hallucination, International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, vol. 39, part 5: Reprinted in &quot;Second Thoughts&quot; (1967).
* Bion, W. R. (1959). Attacks on linking, International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, vol. 40: Reprinted in &quot;Second Thoughts&quot; (1967).
* Bion, W. R. (1961). Experiences in Groups, London: Tavistock.
* Bion, W. R. (1962a). A theory of thinking, &quot;International Journal of Psycho-Analysis&quot;, vol. 43: Reprinted in &quot;Second Thoughts&quot; (1967).
* Bion, W. R. (1962b). Learning from Experience, London: William Heinemann. [Reprinted London: Karnac Books,]. Reprinted in &quot;Seven Servants&quot; (1977e).
* Bion, W. R. (1963). Elements of Psycho-Analysis, London: William Heinemann. [Reprinted London: Karnac Books]. Reprinted in &quot;Seven Servants&quot; (1977e).
* Bion, W. R. (1965). Transformations. London: William Heinemann [Reprinted London: Karnac Books 1984]. Reprinted in &quot;Seven Servants&quot; (1977e).
* Bion, W. R. (1966). Catastrophic change, &quot;Bulletin of the British Psychoanalytical Society&quot;, 1966, N°5.
* Bion, W. R. (1967a). &quot;Second Thoughts&quot;, London: William Heinemann. [Reprinted London: Karnac Books 1984].
* Bion, W. R. (1967b). Notes on memory and desire, &quot;Psycho-analytic Forum&quot;, vol. II n° 3 (pp. 271 – 280). [reprinted in E. Bott Spillius (Ed.). Melanie Klein Today Vol. 2 Mainly Practice (pp. 17–21) London: Routledge 1988].
* Bion, W. R. (1970). Attention and Interpretation. London: Tavistock Publications. [Reprinted London: Karnac Books 1984]. Reprinted in &quot;Seven Servants&quot; (1977e).
* Bion, W.R. (1973). Bion&#x27;s Brazilian Lectures 1. Rio de Janeiro: Imago Editora. [Reprinted in one volume London: Karnac Books 1990].
* Bion, W. R. (1974). Bion&#x27;s Brazilian Lectures 2. Rio de Janeiro: Imago Editora. [Reprinted in one volume London: Karnac Books 1990].
* Bion, W.R. (1975). A Memoir of the Future, Book 1 The Dream. Rio de Janeiro: Imago Editora. [Reprinted in one volume with Books 2 and 3 and &#x27;The Key&#x27; London: Karnac Books 1991].
* Bion, W. R. (1976a). Evidence. Bulletin British Psycho-Analytical Society N° 8, 1976. Reprinted in &quot;Clinical Seminars and Four Papers&quot; (1987).
* Bion, W.R. (1976b). Interview, with A.G.Banet jr., Group and Organisation Studies, vol. 1 No. 3 (pp. 268 – 285). September 1976.
* Bion, W.R. (1977a). A Memoir of the Future, Book 2 The Past Presented. Rio de Janeiro: Imago Editora. [Reprinted in one volume with Books 1 and 3 and &#x27;The Key&#x27; London: Karnac Books 1991].
* Bion, W.R. (1977b). Two Papers: The Grid and Caesura. Rio de Janeiro: Imago Editora. [Reprinted London: Karnac Books 1989].
* Bion, W. R. (1977c). On a Quotation from Freud, in Borderline Personality Disorders, New York: International University Press. Reprinted in Clinical Seminars and Four Papers(1987). [Reprinted in Clinical Seminars and Other Works. London: Karnac Books, 1994].
* Bion, W. R. (1977d). Emotional Turbulence, in Borderline Personality Disorders, New York: International University Press. Reprinted in Clinical Seminars and Four Papers(1987). [Reprinted in &quot;Clinical Seminars and Other Works&quot;. London: Karnac Books, 1994].
* Bion, W. R. (1977e). Seven Servants. New York: Jason Aronson inc. (includes Elements of Psychoanalysis, Learning from Experience, Transformations, Attention and Interpretation).
* Bion, W.R. (1978). Four Discussions with W.R. Bion. Perthshire: Clunie Press. [Reprinted in &quot;Clinical Seminars and Other Works&quot;. London: Karnac Books, 1994].
* Bion, W.R. (1979a). Making the best of a Bad Job. Bulletin British Psycho-Analytical Society, February 1979. Reprinted in &quot;Clinical Seminars and Four Papers&quot; (1987). [Reprinted in Clinical Seminars and Other Works. London: Karnac Books, 1994].
* Bion, W.R. (1979b). A Memoir of the Future, Book 3 The Dawn of Oblivion. Perthshire: Clunie Press. [Reprinted in one volume with Books 1 and 2 and &#x27;The Key&#x27; London: Karnac Books 1991].
* Bion, W.R. (1980). Bion in New York and São Paulo. (Edited by F.Bion). Perthshire: Clunie Press.
* Bion, W.R. (1981). A Key to A Memoir of the Future. (Edited by F.Bion). Perthshire: Clunie Press. [Reprinted in one volume London: Karnac Books 1991].
* Bion, W.R. (1982). The Long Weekend: 1897-1919 (Part of a Life). (Edited by F.Bion). Abingdon: The Fleetwood Press.
* Bion, W.R. (1985). All My Sins Remembered (Another part of a Life) and The Other Side of Genius: Family Letters. (Edited by F.Bion). Abingdon: The Fleetwood Press.
* Bion, W.R. (1985). Seminari Italiani. (Edited by F.Bion). Roma: Borla.
* Bion, W.R. (1987). Clinical Seminars and Four Papers, (Edited by F.Bion). Abingdon: Fleetwood Press. [Reprinted in Clinical Seminars and Other Works. London: Karnac Books, 1994].
* Bion, W.R. (1992). Cogitations. (Edited by F.Bion). London: Karnac Books.
* Bion, W.R. (1997a). Taming Wild Thoughts. (Edited by F.Bion). London: Karnac Books.
* Bion, W.R. (1997b). War Memoirs 1917 - 1919. (Edited by F.Bion). London: Karnac Books.
* Bion, Wilfred R (1999). Seminar held in Paris, 10 July 1978. Transcribed by Francesca Bion Sept
* Bion, Wilfred R (2014). The Complete Works of W. R. Bion. Edited by Mawson, C. (2014). Karnac Books, London. 16 Volumes
==See also==
==References==
==External links==
*&quot;A Seminar Held in Paris&quot; by Bion, online in full
*Useful summary of Bion - Robert Young book
*Bion: Basic Assumptions &amp; The Grid
*Bion talks (video clip, 07:11) Excerpt from a seminar at the Tavistock Clinic Monday July 4, 1977.
* Robin Pape: Biography of Wilfred Ruprecht Bion in: Biographical Archive of Psychiatry (BIAPSY), 2015.
*Bizarre object at encyclopedia.com

==Further reading==
* Angeloch, Dominic: &quot;The Experience of the First World War in Wilfred Bion’s Autobiographical Writings.&quot; In: The Psychoanalytic Quarterly 90/2021: 7–48 (10.1080/00332828.2021.1847599). https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00332828.2021.1847599?journalCode=upaq20
* Bleandonu, Gerard, &quot;Wilfred Bion: His Life and Works&quot;. Free Association Books, London, 1994
* Grinberg, Leon. &quot;New Introduction to the Work of Bion&quot;. Karnac Books, London, 1977
* Symington, Neville and Joan. &quot;The Clinical Thinking of Wilfred Bion&quot;. Routledge, London, 1996
* Michael Eigen, &quot;The Electrified Tightrope&quot; (London 2004)
* Michael Eigen, &quot;Contact With the Depths&quot;, London, 2011.
* Kelli Fuery, &quot;Wilfred Bion, Thinking and Emotional Experience with Moving Images: Being Embedded&quot;. Routledge, London and New York, 2019
* López-Corvo, Rafael, &quot;The Dictionary of the Work of W.R. Bion&quot;, Karnac Books, London, 2003
* Donald Meltzer, &quot;Dream-Life: A Re-Examination of the Psycho-Analytical Theory and Technique&quot; Publisher: Karnac Books, 1983, 
* Donald Meltzer, &quot;Studies in Extended Metapsychology: Clinical Applications of Bion&#x27;s Ideas&quot;. Perthshire: Clunie Press, 1986
* Joseph Mintz, &quot;Professional Uncertainty, Knowledge and Relationship in the Classroom: A Psycho-social Perspective&quot; London Routledge 2014
* Paulo Cesar Sandler, &quot;The Language of Bion: A Dictionary of Concepts&quot; (London 2005)
* Meg Harris Williams,&quot;Bion&#x27;s Dream: A Reading of the Autobiographies&quot; London: Karnac, 2010
* López-Corvo, Rafaël E., &quot;Wild Thoughts Searching for a Thinker, A Clinical Application of W.R. Bion&#x27;s Theories&quot;. Karanac Books, London, 2006.
* López-Corvo, Rafaël E., &quot;Traumatised and Non-Traumatised States of the Personality: A Clinical Understanding Using Bion&#x27;s Approach. Karnac Books, London, 2014.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q526206" start="0" end="21" title="Wilfred Bion" label="Wilfred Ruprecht Bion"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="22" end="25" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="DSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="92" end="105" title="Psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925747" start="135" end="167" title="British Psychoanalytical Society" label="British Psychoanalytical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q200311" start="241" end="248" title="Mathura, Uttar Pradesh" label="Mathura"/>
<link wikidata="Q138521" start="250" end="273" title="North-Western Provinces" label="North-Western Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="275" end="280" title="British India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917440" start="298" end="329" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Stortford College" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Stortford College"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="368" end="383" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421600" start="402" end="412" title="Royal Tank Regiment" label="Tank Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q615838" start="469" end="496" title="Distinguished Service Order" label="Distinguished Service Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q654374" start="548" end="565" title="Battle of Cambrai (1917)" label="Battle of Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="602" end="623" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715023" start="702" end="712" title="first lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="744" end="751" title="captain (land)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q73094" start="1432" end="1464" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="The Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="1537" end="1562" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571058" start="1685" end="1700" title="Wilfred Trotter" label="Wilfred Trotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038935" start="1762" end="1800" title="Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War" label="Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161134" start="1990" end="2006" title="Conjoint" label="Conjoint Diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="2249" end="2263" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427083" start="2325" end="2342" title="training analysis (psychotherapy)" label="training analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254864" start="2348" end="2360" title="John Rickman (psychoanalyst)" label="John Rickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q516446" start="2464" end="2488" title="Royal Army Medical Corps" label="Royal Army Medical Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059372" start="2577" end="2605" title="Northfield Hospital" label="Northfield Military Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q95187" start="2786" end="2799" title="S. H. Foulkes" label="S. H. Foulkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247029" start="2828" end="2843" title="Patrick De Mare" label="Patrick De Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q839578" start="3110" end="3124" title="group dynamics" label="group dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3313" end="3351" title="Experiences in Groups and other papers" label="Experiences in Groups and other papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q86618817" start="3686" end="3699" title="Betty Jardine" label="Betty Jardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164568" start="4118" end="4137" title="Tavistock Institute" label="Tavistock Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="4228" end="4251" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q82999" start="4358" end="4371" title="Melanie Klein" label="Melanie Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q446582" start="4497" end="4508" title="Hanna Segal" label="Hanna Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="5743" end="5754" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5756" end="5766" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q68065832" start="5901" end="5928" title="James Gooch (psychoanalyst)" label="James Gooch (psychoanalyst)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846995" start="5963" end="5998" title="Psychoanalytic Center of California" label="Psychoanalytic Center of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="6327" end="6332" title="Freud" label="Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q446582" start="6901" end="6912" title="Hanna Segal" label="Hanna Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q67454" start="6931" end="6948" title="Herbert Rosenfeld" label="Herbert Rosenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q82999" start="7037" end="7050" title="Melanie Klein" label="Melanie Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102003" start="8018" end="8035" title="Neville Symington" label="Neville Symington"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="8098" end="8103" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q21481783" start="8221" end="8235" title="Antonino Ferro" label="Antonino Ferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q21481833" start="8237" end="8249" title="Thomas Ogden" label="Thomas Ogden"/>
<link wikidata="Q120693714" start="8254" end="8282" title="Elias Mallet da Rocha Barros" label="Elias Mallet da Rocha Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="8430" end="8438" title="Carl Jung" label="C.G.Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q104990060" start="8487" end="8503" title="Tavistock and Portman NHS Foundation Trust" label="Tavistock Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q68268070" start="8660" end="8675" title="James Grotstein" label="James Grotstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q608353" start="9988" end="9998" title="Psychological projection" label="projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183262" start="10193" end="10208" title="deindividuation" label="deindividuation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10894" end="10909" title="Group dynamics#Dimensions of group process" label="group processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q839578" start="10913" end="10927" title="group dynamics" label="group dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131246" start="14010" end="14017" title="Oedipus complex" label="Oedipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542143" start="16214" end="16239" title="projective identification" label="projective identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q526206" start="16444" end="16458" title="bizarre object" label="bizarre object"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17683" end="17692" title="Containment (psychoanalysis)" label="container"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18410" end="18435" title="Object relations theory#Projective identification" label="projective identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542143" start="19366" end="19391" title="projective identification" label="projective identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399895" start="19538" end="19561" title="object relations theory" label="object relations theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q486893" start="19797" end="19805" title="Id, ego and super-ego" label="superego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755706" start="19896" end="19904" title="moralism" label="moralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q446582" start="20236" end="20247" title="Hanna Segal" label="Hanna Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q174589" start="20462" end="20473" title="agoraphobia" label="agoraphobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140490" start="22681" end="22691" title="Horacio Etchegoyen" label="Etchegoyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q906597" start="23325" end="23344" title="Negative capability" label="Negative Capability"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="23729" end="23740" title="Immanuel Kant" label="neo-Kantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161945" start="34157" end="34170" title="Jason Aronson" label="Jason Aronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499747" start="36973" end="36995" title="Free Association Books" label="Free Association Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102003" start="37107" end="37125" title="Neville Symington" label="Symington, Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="37187" end="37196" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20986586" start="37213" end="37226" title="Michael Eigen" label="Michael Eigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="37459" end="37468" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282116" start="37498" end="37517" title="Rafael E. López-Corvo" label="López-Corvo, Rafael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250356" start="37601" end="37615" title="Donald Meltzer" label="Donald Meltzer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44780" wikidata="Q481720" url="?curid=44780" title="Gibellina">
<text>Gibellina (Sicilian: &quot;Jibbiddina&quot;, Arabic: &quot;little mount&quot; - جبل صغير) is a small city and &quot;comune&quot; in the Province of Trapani, the mountains of western Sicily, Italy. It was destroyed by the 1968 Belice earthquake.

The new city, Gibellina Nuova, was rebuilt some from the old one and it was designed by some of the most prominent artists and architects in Italy. They were summoned by Ludovico Corrao to provide works of art to the city in order to help build it up as an eccentric museum &quot;en plein air&quot;. One of them, the Italian sculptor Pietro Consagra, created a sculpture called &quot;Porta del Belice&quot;, or &quot;Door to Belice&quot;, at the entrance. Consagra expressed on his deathbed a wish to be buried at Gibellina in July 2005.

The old town, now known as the &quot;Ruderi di Gibellina&quot; (as the ruins of the city are referred to), remained just as it was after the earthquake, like a ghost town until 1985. That year the Italian artist Alberto Burri began a project to cover the ruins in concrete, while preserving the streetscape. Known as &quot;Cretto di Burri&quot;, work on the project ceased in 1989, but was finally completed in 2015.

In 2024 it was proclaimed the Italian capital of contemporary art, the first Italian city with this title.
==References==
==External links==

* Gibellina in Visit Sicily, Regione Siciliana
* Gibellina, Nuova Gibellina and its Art, produced by art critic and curator dr Alain Chivilò
* Video documentary dedicated to the Grande Cretto in the old city of Gibellina, produced by art critic and curator dr Alain Chivilò</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q481720" start="0" end="9" title="Gibellina" label="Gibellina"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="11" end="19" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="116" end="122" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q16288" start="136" end="155" title="Province of Trapani" label="Province of Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="182" end="188" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="190" end="195" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062315" start="221" end="243" title="1968 Belice earthquake" label="1968 Belice earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3839098" start="416" end="431" title="Ludovico Corrao" label="Ludovico Corrao"/>
<link wikidata="Q829298" start="526" end="538" title="en plein air" label="en plein air"/>
<link wikidata="Q461240" start="580" end="595" title="Pietro Consagra" label="Pietro Consagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="945" end="955" title="ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q461740" start="997" end="1010" title="Alberto Burri" label="Alberto Burri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697109" start="1108" end="1123" title="Cretto di Burri" label="Cretto di Burri"/>
<link wikidata="Q20638095" start="1472" end="1485" title="Alain Chivilò" label="Alain Chivilò"/>
<link wikidata="Q20638095" start="1605" end="1618" title="Alain Chivilò" label="Alain Chivilò"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44781" wikidata="Q192917" url="?curid=44781" title="Erice">
<text>Erice (; [ˈɛːɾɪʃɪ]) is a historic town and &quot;comune&quot; in the province of Trapani, Sicily, southern Italy. It is a member of the (&quot;The most beautiful villages of Italy&quot;) association.

==Geography==
The main town of Erice is located on top of Mount Erice, at around above sea level, overlooking the city of Trapani, the low western coast towards Marsala, the dramatic Punta del Saraceno and Capo San Vito to the north-east, and the Aegadian Islands on Sicily&#x27;s north-western coast. Casa Santa forms part of Erice at the base of Mount Erice, immediately adjacent to Trapani. A cable car joins the upper and lower parts of Erice.

The bordering municipalities are Buseto Palizzolo, Paceco, Trapani, Valderice and Custonaci. The hamlets (&quot;frazioni&quot;) are Ballata, Casa Santa, Crocefissello, Napola, Pizzolungo, Rigaletta, San Cusumano and Torretta.

==History==

The ancient Greek name of Erice was Eryx ( in Greek), and its foundation was associated with the eponymous Greek hero Eryx. It was not a Greek colony, as the Phoenicians founded it, but was largely Hellenized. It was destroyed in the First Punic War by the Carthaginians, and from then on declined in importance.

Eryx was conquered by the Aghlabids in 831 and was renamed as Cebel Hamid (in Western sources Gebel Hamed, meaning Mountain of Hamid). It was ruled by the Arabs until the Norman conquest. In 1167 the Normans renamed it Monte San Giuliano, a name maintained until the 20th century.

===20th Century===
In 1934 the town changed its name from &quot;Monte San Giuliano&quot; to Erice.
During the Second World War a Luftwaffe Operations Centre (associated with &quot;Zerstörergeschwader 26&quot; and &quot;Jagdgeschwader 27&quot; which operated out of the nearby Trapani–Milo Airport) was located on the slopes of Monte Erice from early 1943 until they were forced by Allied air raids to relocate. Following the Allied invasion of Sicily in 1943 troops of the 2nd Battalion of the 505th Infantry Regiment Seventh Army under the command of Major Mark Alexander began on 22 July 1943 to climb up the side of Monte Erice in order to secure the town and its commanding position overlooking the surrounding countryside. As they did so they came under artillery fire from Italian forces stationed on the ramparts with one soldier being killed and another wounded. Realizing that the safest position was directly under the walls of town the lead troops took shelter there. Rather than waiting on artillery support to arrive the decision was then made for F Company to attack. However before the troops had come close enough to engage them the Italian forces signaled their surrender.

==Main sights==

In the northeastern portion of the city there are the remains of ancient Elymian and Phoenician walls (Cyclopean masonry) indicating different stages of settlement and occupation in antiquity.

There are two castles that remain in the city: Pepoli Castle, which dates from Saracen times, and the Castello di Venere (&quot;Venus Castle&quot;), dating from the Norman period, built on top of the ancient Temple of Venus, where Venus Ericina was worshipped. According to legend, the temple was founded by Aeneas. It was well known throughout the Mediterranean area in the ancient age, and an important cult was celebrated in it. In his book &quot;On the Nature of Animals&quot;, Aelian writes that animals chosen for sacrifice would voluntarily walk up to the altar to be killed.

A cable car (funivia) ran from 2005 to 2017, when it was closed due to a forest fire, from the outskirts of Trapani to the town of Erice. The cable car was rebuilt and reopened in June 2018.

==Culture==
Erice hosts scientific meetings at the Ettore Majorana center, organised by the astrophysicist Antonino Zichichi.
There is also an annual workshop on Molecular Gastronomy.

== Gallery ==
==References==
==External links==
* Panoramic view from Erice castle 
* Erice Photo Essay</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192917" start="0" end="5" title="Erice" label="Erice"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="9" end="17" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="[ˈɛːɾɪʃɪ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="34" end="38" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="49" end="55" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q16288" start="69" end="88" title="province of Trapani" label="province of Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="90" end="96" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="107" end="112" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861524" start="259" end="270" title="Mount Erice" label="Mount Erice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13664" start="323" end="330" title="Trapani" label="Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q481514" start="362" end="369" title="Marsala" label="Marsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q109576" start="448" end="464" title="Aegadian Islands" label="Aegadian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q481567" start="683" end="699" title="Buseto Palizzolo" label="Buseto Palizzolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q481744" start="701" end="707" title="Paceco" label="Paceco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13664" start="709" end="716" title="Trapani" label="Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q481906" start="718" end="727" title="Valderice" label="Valderice"/>
<link wikidata="Q481691" start="732" end="741" title="Custonaci" label="Custonaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134686" start="762" end="770" title="Frazione" label="frazioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q192917" start="818" end="824" title="Napola (Erice)" label="Napola"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="936" end="941" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q430157" start="1008" end="1012" title="Eryx (mythology)" label="Eryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1048" end="1057" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="1088" end="1098" title="Hellenization" label="Hellenized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="1124" end="1139" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="1147" end="1160" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="1230" end="1239" title="Aghlabids" label="Aghlabids"/>
<link wikidata="Q74011" start="1375" end="1390" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q196739" start="1666" end="1688" title="Zerstörergeschwader 26" label="Zerstörergeschwader 26"/>
<link wikidata="Q667731" start="1705" end="1722" title="Jagdgeschwader 27" label="Jagdgeschwader 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606102" start="1762" end="1782" title="Trapani–Milo Airport" label="Trapani–Milo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960603" start="1980" end="2003" title="505th Infantry Regiment (United States)" label="505th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457752" start="2004" end="2016" title="Seventh United States Army" label="Seventh Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q931423" start="2767" end="2774" title="Elymian" label="Elymian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="2779" end="2788" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q245580" start="2797" end="2814" title="Cyclopean masonry" label="Cyclopean masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="2967" end="2974" title="Saracen" label="Saracen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="3053" end="3059" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="3106" end="3111" title="Venus (goddess)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="3196" end="3202" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="3237" end="3250" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038979" start="3293" end="3297" title="cult" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="3370" end="3376" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Aelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="3688" end="3698" title="scientific" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664811" start="3715" end="3730" title="Ettore Majorana Foundation and Centre for Scientific Culture" label="Ettore Majorana"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="3756" end="3770" title="Astrophysics" label="astrophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q574317" start="3771" end="3788" title="Antonino Zichichi" label="Antonino Zichichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q733573" start="3826" end="3846" title="Molecular Gastronomy" label="Molecular Gastronomy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44782" wikidata="Q499626" url="?curid=44782" title="Battle of Stirling Bridge">
<text>The Battle of Stirling Bridge () was fought during the First War of Scottish Independence. On 11 September 1297, the forces of Andrew Moray and William Wallace defeated the combined English forces of John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey, and Hugh de Cressingham near Stirling, on the River Forth.

==Background==
In 1296, John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey, defeated John Comyn, Earl of Buchan in the Battle of Dunbar. King John Balliol surrendered to King Edward I of England at Brechin on 10 July, and the Scottish landholders were made to acknowledge Edward&#x27;s overlordship. In 1297, Moray initiated a revolt in northern Scotland and by the late summer, controlled Urquhart, Inverness, Elgin, Banff and Aberdeen. Wallace joined Moray in September near Dundee, and they marched to Stirling. Stirling, in the words of Stuart Reid, was &quot;traditionally regarded as the key to Scotland.&quot; Meanwhile, Surrey had joined Cressingham in July and both had arrived at Stirling by 9 September 1297. By then, Moray and Wallace had already occupied Abbey Craig.

==Battle==
Surrey was concerned with the number of Scots he faced, separated by a long causeway and narrow, wooden bridge, over the River Forth near Stirling Castle. Determining that he would be at a tactical disadvantage if he attempted to take his main force across there, he delayed crossing for several days to allow for negotiations and to reconnoiter the area. On 11 September, Surrey had sent James Stewart, and then two Dominican friars as emissaries to the Scots. According to Walter of Guisborough, Wallace reputedly responded with, &quot;We are not here to make peace but to do battle to defend ourselves and liberate our kingdom. Let them come on and we shall prove this to their very beards.&quot;

Camped on Abbey Craig, the Scots dominated the soft flat ground north of the river. The English force of English, Welsh and Scots knights, bowmen and foot soldiers camped south of the river. Sir Richard Lundie, a Scots knight who joined the English after the Capitulation of Irvine, offered to outflank the enemy by leading a cavalry force over a ford upstream, where sixty horsemen could cross at the same time. Hugh de Cressingham, King Edward&#x27;s treasurer in Scotland, persuaded the Earl to reject that advice and order a direct attack across the bridge.

The small bridge was broad enough to let only two horsemen cross abreast but offered the safest river crossing, as the Forth widened to the east and the marshland of Flanders Moss lay to the west. The Scots waited as the English knights and infantry, led by Cressingham, with Sir Marmaduke Thweng and Sir Richard Waldegrave, began to make their slow progress across the bridge on the morning of 11 September. It would have taken several hours for the entire English army to cross.

Wallace and Moray waited, according to the Chronicle of Hemingburgh, until &quot;as many of the enemy had come over as they believed they could overcome&quot;. When a substantial number of the troops had crossed (possibly about 2,000) the attack was ordered. The Scots spearmen came down from the high ground in rapid advance and fended off a charge by the English heavy cavalry and then counterattacked the English infantry. They gained control of the east side of the bridge and cut off the chance of English reinforcements to cross. Caught on the low ground in the loop of the river with no chance of relief or of retreat, most of the outnumbered English on the east side were probably killed. A few hundred may have escaped by swimming across the river. Marmaduke Thweng managed to fight his way back across the bridge with some of his men.

Surrey, who was left with a small contingent of archers, had stayed south of the river and was still in a strong position. The bulk of his army remained intact and he could have held the line of the Forth, denying the Scots a passage to the south, but his confidence was gone. After the escape of Sir Marmaduke Thweng, Surrey ordered the bridge to be destroyed, retreated towards Berwick, leaving the garrison at Stirling Castle isolated and abandoning the Lowlands to the rebels. James Stewart, the High Steward of Scotland, and Malcolm, Earl of Lennox, whose forces had been part of Surrey&#x27;s army, observing the carnage to the north of the bridge, withdrew. Then the English supply train was attacked at &quot;The Pows&quot;, a wooded marshy area, by James Stewart and the other Scots lords, and many of the fleeing soldiers were killed.

The Stirling Bridge of that time is believed to have been about upstream from the 15th-century stone bridge that now crosses the river. Four stone piers have been found underwater just north () and at an angle to the extant 15th-century bridge, along with man-made stonework on one bank in line with the piers. The site of the fighting was along either side of an earthen causeway leading from the Abbey Craig, atop which the Wallace Monument is now, to the north end of the bridge. The battlefield has been inventoried and protected by Historic Scotland under the Scottish Historical Environment Policy of 2009.

==Aftermath==
Surrey left William de Warine and Sir Marmaduke Thweng in charge of Stirling Castle, as Surrey abandoned his army, and fled towards Berwick.

The contemporary English chronicler Walter of Guisborough recorded the English losses in the battle as 100 cavalry and 5,000 infantry killed. Scottish casualties in the battle are unrecorded, with the exception of Andrew Moray, who was mortally wounded during the battle, and was dead by November.

The &quot;Lanercost Chronicle&quot; records that Wallace had a broad strip of Cressingham&#x27;s skin, &quot;...taken from the head to the heel, to make therewith a baldrick for his sword.&quot;

The Scots proceeded to raid the south as far as Durham, England. Wallace was appointed &quot;Guardian of the kingdom of Scotland and commander of its army.&quot; Yet, Edward was already planning another invasion of Scotland, which would lead to the Battle of Falkirk.

==Popular culture==
The exploits of Wallace were passed on to posterity mainly in the form of tales collected and recounted by the poet Blind Harry, the Minstrel (d. 1492), whose original, probably oral sources were never specified. Blind Harry was active some 200 years after the events described in his &quot;The Acts and Deeds of the Illustrious and Valiant Champion Sir William Wallace&quot;, c. 1470. The tales were designed to entertain the court of James IV (r. 1488–1513) and are undoubtedly a blend of fact and fiction. Like most of his other episodes, Blind Harry&#x27;s account of the battle of Stirling Bridge is highly improbable, such as his use of figures of biblical magnitude for the size of the participating armies. Nevertheless, his highly dramatised and graphic account of the battle fed the imaginations of subsequent generations of Scottish schoolchildren. Here is his description:

On Saturday they [Moray and Wallace] rode on to the bridge, which was of good plain board, well made and jointed, having placed watches to see that none passed from the army. Taking a wright, the most able workman there, he [Wallace] ordered him to saw the plank in two at the mid streit [middle stretch], so that no-one might walk over it. He then nailed it up quickly with hinges, and dirtied it with clay, to cause it to appear that nothing had been done. The other end he so arranged that it should lie on three wooden rollers, which were so placed, that when one was out the rest would fall down. The wright, himself, he ordered to sit there underneath, in a cradle, bound on a beam, to loose the pin when Wallace let him know by blowing a horn when the time was come. No one in all the army should be allowed to blow but he himself.

Hugh Cressingham leads on the vanguard with twenty thousand likely men to see. Thirty thousand the Earl of Warren had, but he did then as wisdom did direct, all the first army being sent over before him. Some Scottish men, who well knew this manner of attack, bade Wallace sound, saying there were now enough. He hastened not, however, but steadily observed the advance until he saw Warren&#x27;s force thickly crowd the bridge. Then from Jop he took the horn and blew loudly, and warned John the Wright, who thereupon struck out the roller with skill; when the pin was out, the rest of it fell down. Now arose an hideous outcry among the people, both horses and men, falling into the water. (...)

On foot and bearing a great sharp spear, Wallace went amongst the thickest of the press and aimed a stroke at Cressingham in his corslet, which was brightly polished. The sharp head of the spear pierced right through the plates and through his body, stabbing him beyond rescue; thus was that chieftain struck down to death. With the stroke Wallace bore down both man and horse.

The English army although ready for battle, lost heart when their chieftain was slain and many openly began to flee. Yet, worthy men abode in the place until ten thousand were slain. Then the remainder fled, not able to abide longer, seeking succour in many directions, some east, some west and some fled to the north. Seven thousand full at once floated in the Forth, plunged into the deep and drowned without mercy; none were left alive of all that fell army.

As well as the bridge ploy, Wallace&#x27;s use of a spear appears to be a fictional element. A two-handed sword [claidheamh dà-làimh, in Gaelic, more commonly claidheamh-mòr or claymore meaning great sword], purporting to be Wallace&#x27;s, which may contain original metal from his sword blade, was kept by the Scottish kings and is displayed as a relic in the Wallace Monument.

The potency of these tales can be gauged from the following statement by the poet Robert Burns, writing some three centuries after they were first related.

The two first books I ever read in private, and which gave me more pleasure than any two books I ever read again, were &quot;The Life of Hannibal&quot; and &quot;The History of Sir William Wallace&quot; [a modernised version of Blind Harry by William Hamilton of Gilbertfield]. Hannibal gave my young ideas such a turn that I used to strut in raptures up and down after the recruiting drum and bagpipe, and wish myself tall enough that I could be a soldier; while the story of Wallace poured a Scottish prejudice into my veins which will boil along there till the flood-gates of life shut in eternal rest.

The Battle of Stirling Bridge is depicted in the 1995 film &quot;Braveheart&quot;, but it bears little resemblance to the real battle. Significantly, there is no bridge in the movie (due mainly to the difficulty of filming around the bridge itself), and it replaced the tactics of the battle with ones resembling the Battle of Bannockburn.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Armstrong, Peter. &quot;Stirling Bridge and Falkirk 1297–98: William Wallace&#x27;s rebellion&quot; (Bloomsbury Publishing, 2012).
* Barrow, G. W. S., &quot;Robert Bruce and the Community of the Realm of Scotland,&quot; 1976.
* Brown, C., &quot;William Wallace&quot; 2005.
* Cowan, Edward J., &quot;The Wallace Book&quot;, 2007, John Donald, 
* Ferguson, J., &quot;William Wallace: Guardian of Scotland&quot;. 1948.
* Nicholson, R., &quot;Scotland-the Later Middle Ages&quot;, 1974.
* Prestwich, M., &quot;The Three Edwards: War and State in England, 1272–1277&quot;, 1980.
* Spiers, Edward N. et al. &quot;Military History of Scotland&quot; (2012) 912pp.
* Traquair, P., &quot;Freedom&#x27;s Sword&quot;

==External links==
* Historic Scotland site report and area map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q499626" start="4" end="29" title="Battle of Stirling Bridge" label="Battle of Stirling Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242848" start="55" end="89" title="First War of Scottish Independence" label="First War of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q472725" start="127" end="139" title="Andrew Moray" label="Andrew Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q82457" start="144" end="159" title="William Wallace" label="William Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q976367" start="200" end="235" title="John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey" label="John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634621" start="241" end="260" title="Hugh de Cressingham" label="Hugh de Cressingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="266" end="274" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="283" end="294" title="River Forth" label="River Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q976367" start="321" end="356" title="John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey" label="John de Warenne, 6th Earl of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809163" start="367" end="393" title="John Comyn, Earl of Buchan" label="John Comyn, Earl of Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509663" start="401" end="417" title="Battle of Dunbar (1296)" label="Battle of Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q310065" start="424" end="436" title="John Balliol" label="John Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="457" end="476" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q45848" start="480" end="487" title="Brechin" label="Brechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="517" end="527" title="landholder" label="landholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q419722" start="568" end="580" title="overlordship" label="overlordship"/>
<link wikidata="Q913981" start="672" end="680" title="Urquhart Castle" label="Urquhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="759" end="765" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186441" start="823" end="834" title="Stuart Reid (Scottish historical writer)" label="Stuart Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663992" start="1050" end="1061" title="Abbey Craig" label="Abbey Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q756268" start="1213" end="1228" title="Stirling Castle" label="Stirling Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q361611" start="1464" end="1477" title="James Stewart, 5th High Steward of Scotland" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476149" start="1550" end="1571" title="Walter of Guisborough" label="Walter of Guisborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663992" start="1786" end="1797" title="Abbey Craig" label="Abbey Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035986" start="2035" end="2057" title="Capitulation of Irvine" label="Capitulation of Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743" start="2123" end="2127" title="ford (crossing)" label="ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="2210" end="2221" title="Edward I of England" label="King Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427065" start="2505" end="2518" title="Flanders Moss" label="Flanders Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772062" start="2619" end="2635" title="Marmaduke Thweng, 1st Baron Thweng" label="Marmaduke Thweng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476149" start="2864" end="2888" title="Chronicle of Hemingburgh" label="Chronicle of Hemingburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q361611" start="4148" end="4161" title="James Stewart, 5th High Steward of Scotland" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753628" start="4197" end="4220" title="Maol Choluim I, Earl of Lennox" label="Malcolm, Earl of Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455138" start="4595" end="4620" title="Stirling Old Bridge" label="15th-century stone bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="4885" end="4893" title="causeway" label="causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663992" start="4911" end="4922" title="Abbey Craig" label="Abbey Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q931796" start="4939" end="4955" title="Wallace Monument" label="Wallace Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059933" start="5021" end="5032" title="Inventory of Historic Battlefields in Scotland" label="inventoried"/>
<link wikidata="Q111854" start="5050" end="5067" title="Historic Scotland" label="Historic Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476149" start="5319" end="5340" title="Walter of Guisborough" label="Walter of Guisborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966757" start="5592" end="5611" title="Lanercost Chronicle" label="Lanercost Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225698" start="5747" end="5754" title="baldric" label="baldric"/>
<link wikidata="Q179815" start="5826" end="5841" title="Durham, England" label="Durham, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552880" start="5871" end="5906" title="Guardian of Scotland" label="Guardian of the kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q589318" start="6027" end="6044" title="Battle of Falkirk" label="Battle of Falkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984048" start="6183" end="6194" title="Blind Harry" label="Blind Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="6503" end="6511" title="James IV of Scotland" label="James IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q931796" start="9696" end="9712" title="Wallace Monument" label="Wallace Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="9797" end="9809" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010760" start="10115" end="10147" title="William Hamilton of Gilbertfield" label="William Hamilton of Gilbertfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q162729" start="10544" end="10554" title="Braveheart" label="Braveheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q222520" start="10796" end="10817" title="Battle of Bannockburn" label="Battle of Bannockburn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44783" wikidata="Q1447" url="?curid=44783" title="Apulia">
<text>Apulia ( ), also known by its Italian name Puglia (), is a region of Italy, located in the southern peninsular section of the country, bordering the Adriatic Sea to the east, the Strait of Otranto and Ionian Sea to the southeast and the Gulf of Taranto to the south. The region comprises , and its population is about four million people. It is bordered by the other Italian regions of Molise to the north, Campania to the west, and Basilicata to the southwest. The regional capital is Bari.

In ancient times, more precisely at the beginning of the first millennium BC, the region of Apulia was inhabited by the Iapygians, while during the 8th century BC its coastal areas were populated by ancient Greeks. Later, the region was conquered by the ancient Romans. It was then conquered by the Byzantines, followed by the Normans, the Aragonese and the Spanish. Subsequently, it became part of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, to then be annexed to the unified Kingdom of Italy after the Expedition of the Thousand.

==Geography==
Apulia&#x27;s coastline is longer than that of any other mainland Italian region. In the north, the Gargano promontory extends out into the Adriatic sea like a &quot;sperone&quot; (&quot;spur&quot;), while in the south, the Salento peninsula forms the &quot;tacco&quot; (&quot;heel&quot;) of Italy&#x27;s boot. The highest peak in the region is Monte Cornacchia above sea level) within the Daunian Mountains, in the north along the Apennines.

It is home to two national parks, the Alta Murgia National Park and Gargano National Park.

Outside national parks in the North and West, most of Apulia particularly the Salento peninsula is geographically flat with only moderate hills.

The climate is typically Mediterranean with hot, dry and sunny summers and mild and rainy winters. Snowfall, especially on the coast is rare but has occurred as recently as January 2019 (following on from snow in March 2018 and January 2017). Apulia is among the hottest and driest regions of Italy in summer, with temperatures sometimes reaching and exceeding in Lecce and Foggia.

The coastal areas, particularly on the Adriatic Sea and in the southern Salento peninsula, are frequently exposed to winds of varying strengths and directions, strongly affecting local temperatures and conditions, sometimes within the same day. The Northerly Bora wind from the Adriatic Sea can lower temperatures, humidity and moderate summer heat while the Southerly Sirocco wind from North Africa can raise temperatures, and humidity and occasionally drop red dust from the Sahara Desert. On some days in spring and autumn/fall, it can be warm enough to swim in Gallipoli and Porto Cesareo on the Ionian coast while at the same time, cool winds warrant jackets and jumpers/sweaters in Monopoli and Otranto on the Adriatic coast.

The area between Otranto and Santa Maria di Leuca is part of the Regional Natural Coastal Park of &quot;Costa Otranto — Santa Maria di Leuca e Bosco di Tricase&quot; wanted by the Apulia Region in 2008. This territory has numerous natural and historical attractions such as Ciolo, which is a rocky cove.
In 2010 the Ministry of Health declared 98.6% of the Apulian coasts suitable for bathing.
==History==


=== Antiquity ===
Human settlement in Apulia dates back to at least 250,000 years ago, as evidenced by the fossil remains of the Altamura Man, an archaic form of Neanderthal. There are numerous finds from the prehistoric era, including several menhir and dolmen.

Around the 1st millennium BC, the Iapygians settled in the territory with the tribes of the Daunians, the Peucetians and the Messapians, as well as the populations of the Calabri and the Sallentini (both settled in Salento); later, in the Hellenic era, the Magna Graecia colonies were quite numerous, especially in the southern part of the region, including the city of Taras, now Taranto.

During the second Samnite war (326–304 BC), the Roman army, in an attempt to provide relief to Lucera, besieged by the Samnites, suffered a serious defeat in the Battle of the Caudine Forks, in 321 BC. Rome soon understood the strategic importance of &quot;Apulia&quot; (corresponding only to the central-northern part of present-day Apulia, while the Salento Peninsula was known as &quot;Calabria&quot; in that period), but the occupation of the region, in the third century BC, was not easy, especially for the resistance of Tarentum and Brundisium. In 216 BC in Cannae the Roman army suffered its worst defeat against Hannibal&#x27;s Carthage.

The Roman Province of Apulia and Calabria was then established, which also included Irpinia. With the construction of the Appian Way and, in the imperial era, of the Via Traiana along which cities such as Troia, Ordona, Gravina, Canosa, Ruvo and Bitonto prospered. The region occupied leading positions in the production of grain and oil, becoming the largest exporter of olive oil in the East.

=== Middle Ages and Renaissance period ===
At the Fall of the Western Roman Empire, Apulia also went through a long period of suffering. Heruli and Ostrogoths invaded the territory, but in the end it became the dominion of the Eastern Roman Empire, from the 6th to the 11th century except for a brief partial occupation of the region by the Emirate of Bari. Bari became the capital of a territory extending up to present-day Basilicata and subjected to the authority of a Catepanate. With the advent of the Normans in the 11th century, Taranto became the capital of the Principality of Taranto, which extended across the entire Terra di Otranto.

In 1043 the Normans founded the county of Apulia which in 1059 merged into the vast County of Apulia and Calabria, whose borders progressively extended up to in Principality of Salerno. From 1130 it became part of the Kingdom of Sicily. In the 13th century the name Apulia was used by some authors to indicate the southern part of the Italian peninsula. During the Sicilian domination Apulia achieved great material and civil progress, which reached its peak with Frederick II, who was responsible for the construction of a series of secular and religious buildings, some of high artistic value, including Castel del Monte, near Andria. During this period Foggia became one of his residences. From 1282, following the separation of the island of Sicily from the rest of the south of the peninsula, Apulia was under the rule of the Kingdom of Naples, from that moment the power of the landowners began to take root in the territory.

=== Early modern period ===
From the middle of the 18th century the region of Apulia experienced a period of strong economic prosperity and excellent development of trade and agriculture. Between 1806 and 1815, during the Napoleonic era, provided the modernization of Apulia with the abolition of feudalism and judicial reforms until the return of the Bourbons and the birth of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Liberal movements were formed throughout the region in 1820 with the spread of Freemasonry and Carbonari.

With the Kingdom of Italy established in 1861, Apulia was administratively divided into the provinces of Foggia, Bari and Lecce; to these were added in the twentieth century the provinces of Brindisi and Taranto. In the period following the unification of Italy, various brigand gangs arose, especially in Capitanata and Terra di Bari; among the major exponents are Michele Caruso, Antonio Angelo Del Sambro and Giuseppe Schiavone, the latter a faithful lieutenant of the Lucanian brigand leader Carmine Crocco.

=== Modern period ===
With the progressive decline of the latifundium, the ancient Apulian farms, properties of medium agricultural size, also decayed. During fascism, Apulia was affected by numerous land reclamations in vast areas and, following the post-war agrarian reform, the region enjoyed strong agricultural development. In the 1970s and 1980s the economy of the region moved from the primary sector to the tertiary one, with notable development coming from the tourism sector.

==Economy==
The region&#x27;s contribution to Italy&#x27;s gross value added was around 4.6% in 2000, while its population was 7% of the total. The per capita GDP is low compared to the national average and represents about 68.1% of the EU average.

The share of gross value added by the agricultural and services sectors was above the national average in 2000. The region has industries specialising in particular areas, including food processing and vehicles in Foggia; footwear and textiles in the Barletta province, and wood and furniture in the Murge area to the west.

Between 2007 and 2013 the economy of Apulia expanded more than that of the rest of southern Italy. Such growth, over several decades, is a severe challenge to the hydrogeological system.

Apulia&#x27;s thriving economy is articulated into numerous sectors boasting several leading companies, but most of them produce materials or components, not finished goods: 
* Aerospace (Leonardo, Avio Aero, Sitael, Blackshape) 
* Automotive (Bosch, Magneti Marelli, Magna Gertrag, Bridgestone)
* Mechanics (New Holland Construction, IVECO Motori, Isotta Fraschini Motori, MERMEC) 
* Furniture (Natuzzi)
* Food and Beverage (De Carlo, Divella, Quarta Caffé)
* Agriculture (Casillo Group, G.C. Partecipazioni) 
* Publishing (Laterza, Edizioni Dedalo)
* Tourism (Nicolaus tour)
* Logistics (GTS Rail)
* I.C.T. (Exprivia)

In Taranto, there is the largest metallurgical work ILVA Acciaierie di Taranto (8,200 empl.) in Europe with a full iron and steel production cycle. It will be sold to Arcelor Mittal.

In Brindisi, there is a chemical industrial park with an ENI power station, ENI oil refinery, Syndial chemical factory, and Versalis chemical factory (basic chemistry, intermediates, polyethene, styrenics and elastomers). LyondellBasell polypropylene plant, Sanofi plant (antibiotics). Another ENI oil refinery is located in Taranto.

=== Unemployment ===
The unemployment rate stood at 14.1% in 2020.
===Fishing and aquaculture===
The port of Taranto hosts numerous fishing boats. The fleet is mainly made up of about 80 fishing boats, which do not exceed 10 gross tonnage and which practice trawling, while the remaining small-scale fishing boats operate with gillnets. The sea, rich and generous, is populated by dentex, sea bream, glit-head bream, grouper, redfish, mullet, mussels, sea urchin, anchovies, shrimp and squid. Other significant fishing ports are Manfredonia, Trani, Molfetta, Mola di Bari, Monopoli, Castro, and Gallipoli.

Today Taranto is the world&#x27;s largest producer of farmed mussels: with 1,300 employees, around 30,000 tons of mussels are processed per year. Mussel farming has characterized the city&#x27;s economy for centuries, making the mussel the gastronomic symbol of Taranto. It is said that the first mussel gardens in La Spezia, Pula, Olbia and Chioggia were established by mussel farmers who emigrated from this city. The workplace of the Taranto mussel farmers is the boat; every detail of the working method has improved over time.

10 m long structures made of wood or metal, called &quot;pali&quot; (piles), are attached to the seabed, to which ropes and nets are then attached, on which the mussels are grown. The mussels farmed here are particularly tasty and valued because they grow in a special environment, a mixture of salt seawater and karst freshwater. These special environmental conditions of the seas of Taranto are ideal not only for the mussels but also for the fish and crustaceans that find food and shelter between the piles. While there are around 18 submarine freshwater springs, called &quot;Citri&quot;, in the Mar Piccolo, there is only one large one in the Mar Grande, which is called &quot;Anello di San Cataldo&quot; in honour of the patron saint of the city.
===Agriculture===
Agriculture plays a prominent economic role in Apulia. It is mainly intensive and modern agriculture that allows the region to be among the first in Italy for the production of many products:
* durum wheat which is used to produce pasta
* tomatoes
* grape
* almonds
* olive oil

Vegetable growing (lettuce, artichoke, fennel, cabbage, celery, barattiere, borage, sweet potato, caper, portulaca, broccoli rabe) and horticulture (peach, orange, clementine, lemon, kumquat, fig, pomegranate, persimmon, prickly pear) are also developed.

===Viticulture===

Vineyards cover in Apulia, which is 1st place among Italian grape-growing regions. But in the production of quality DOC and DOCG wines, Apulia has only ranked 12th of 20 with 297.667 hl. There are four DOCG wines:
* Castel del Monte Bombino Nero 
* Castel del Monte Nero di Troia Riserva
* Castel del Monte Rosso Riserva 
* Primitivo di Manduria Dolce Naturale

===Oliviculture===
There are an estimated 50 to 60 million olive trees in Apulia, and the region accounts for 40% of Italy&#x27;s olive oil production. There are four specific Protected designations of Origin (PDO) covering the whole region. Olive varieties include: &quot;Baresane&quot;, &quot;Biancolilla&quot;, &quot;Brandofino&quot; (Castiglione), &quot;Buscionetto&quot; (Biancolilla), &quot;Carolea&quot;, &quot;Cellina di Nardò&quot;, &quot;Cerasuola&quot; (Ogliara), &quot;Cerignola&quot; (Bella di Cerignola), &quot;Cima di Bitonto&quot;, &quot;Cima di Mola&quot;, &quot;Coratina&quot;, also grown in Corning, California, a 2018 Gold Medal New York International Olive Oil Competition (NYIOOC) winner, &quot;Frantoio&quot;, &quot;Garganica&quot;, &quot;La Minuta&quot;, &quot;Leccino&quot;, &quot;Moresca&quot;, &quot;Nocellara Etnea&quot;, &quot;Nocellara Messinese&quot;, &quot;Ogliarola&quot;, &quot;Ogliarola Barese&quot;, &quot;Ogliara Messinese&quot;, &quot;Ottobratica&quot;, &quot;Peranzana&quot;, &quot;Rotondella&quot;, &quot;Santagatese&quot;, &quot;Saracena&quot;, &quot;Tonda Iblea&quot;, and &quot;Verdello&quot; (subspecies of San Benedetto).

====&quot;Xylella fastidiosa&quot; disease====
Since 2008–2010, the olive oil industry in Apulia has been under threat from the pathogen &quot;Xylella fastidiosa&quot;, a disease that inhibits the trees&#x27; uptake of water and nutrients. The epicentre of the epidemic is the southeastern part of the region.

=== Tourism ===
Apulia has many small and picturesque villages, 14 of them have been selected by (), a non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest, that was founded on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities.

==Transport==
The region has a good network of roads, but the railway network is less comprehensive, particularly in the south. There are no high-speed lines, but a high-speed line between Naples and Bari is under construction, which should be completed in 2027. The region is crossed northwest to southeast by the A14 highway (Bologna–Taranto), which connects the region&#x27;s capital, Bari, to Taranto, the second most populous city in the region. The A14 also connects Foggia and points further north along the Adriatic coast to Pescara, Ancona, Rimini and eventually Bologna. The only other highway in the region is the A16 (Naples–Canosa), which crosses the Italian peninsula east–west and links the region with Naples.

There are two international airports, Karol Wojtyła Airport in Bari (IATA: BRI) and Brindisi Airport (IATA: BDS), which serve as the principal logistical hub for the United Nations Global Service Center headquartered in Brindisi. With the approval of a redevelopment project in 2018, the Grottaglie Airfield (IATA: TAR) will host a spaceport for the Italian Space Agency and Virgin Galactic.

==Demographics==
Emigration from the region&#x27;s depressed areas to northern Italy and the rest of Europe was very intense in the years between 1956 and 1971. Subsequently, the trend declined, as economic conditions improved, to the point where there was net immigration in the years between 1982 and 1985. Since 1986, the stagnation in employment has led to a new inversion of the trend caused by a decrease in immigration.

==Government and politics==
Since 1 June 2015, former judge and mayor of Bari Michele Emiliano of the Democratic Party has served as President of the Apulian region.

===Administrative divisions===
Apulia is divided into six provinces:

==Culture==

===Cuisine===

Important locally produced ingredients include olive oil, artichokes, tomatoes, eggplant, asparagus, and various kinds of seafood. Local specialties include the carosello, a variety of muskmelon which is often consumed when unripe. Apulian Protected designation of origin (PDO) and Protected Geographical indication (PGI) products included cheeses, olive oils, fruits and vegetables, and a type of bread.

Typically Apulian pasta shapes are orecchiette, cavatelli, and troccoli. Popular street foods include panzerotti, sgagliozze (fried polenta), popizze (small fried balls of pizza dough that are sometimes also called pettule), rustici (puff pastries stuffed with tomatoes, béchamel sauce, mozzarella, and black pepper), the famous pasticiotto (a flaky shortbread dough filled with custard), and focaccia barese. A popular snack in Apulia is Taralli.

===Language===
As with the other regions of Italy, the national language (since 1861) is Italian. However, because of its long and varied history, other historical languages have been used in this region for centuries. The local languages of northern and central Apulia (roughly the provinces of Bari, Barletta-Andria-Trani, and Foggia as well as the northwestern parts of the Province of Taranto) are the Apulian Southern Italo-Romance dialects, including Bari dialect and Tarantino dialect. In the southern region of Salento, an extreme Southern Italo-Romance language, the Salentino dialect is widely spoken. There is also an Italiot Greek language found in Salento called Griko, which is still spoken by a few thousand Griko people in some areas. In addition, a rare daughter language of the Franco-Provençal language called Faetar is spoken in the mountain villages of Faeto and Celle di San Vito, in the Province of Foggia. It is sometimes classified as a pair of dialects of Franco-Provençal, Faetar and Cellese. The Arbëreshë dialect of the Albanian language has been spoken by a small community since refugees settled there in the 16th century.

===Sports===
Apulia is home to several national football, water polo, volleyball, basketball and tennis clubs.

Across the top three levels of Italian football, the clubs in Apulia include:
* U.S. Lecce playing in Serie A
* S.S.C. Bari playing in Serie B
* Calcio Foggia 1920 playing in Serie C
* S.S. Audace Cerignola playing in Serie C
* Fidelis Andria 2018 playing in Serie C
* S.S. Monopoli 1966 playing in Serie C
* Virtus Francavilla Calcio playing in Serie C
* Taranto F.C. 1927 playing in Serie C

==See also==
* Catepanate of Italy
* Gravina in Puglia
* Daunian Mountains
* Gargano
* Grecia Salentina
* Iapygians
* Magna Graecia
* Messapians
* Sacra Corona Unita
* Salento
* Tavoliere delle Puglie
* Terra d&#x27;Otranto
* Trullo

== Explanatory notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

*Desmond Seward, &quot;An Armchair Traveller&#x27;s History of Apulia&quot; (Haus Publishing, 2013)
*Stefania Mola, &quot;Apulia: the Cathedrals&quot; (Adda, 2008)
*Francesco Carofiglio, &quot;Apulia, a Tourist&#x27;s Guide to the Culture of Apulia&quot; (1988)
*Susanna Gelmetti, &quot;Italian Country Cooking: Recipes from Umbria &amp; Apulia&quot; (1996), 
*&quot;Apulia: A Film Tourism Guide&quot; (Laterza, 2009, 246 pp)
*Tessa Garton, &quot;Early Romanesque Sculpture in Apulia&quot; (Courtauld Institute, 1984)
* 

==External links==
* Official website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="0" end="6" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="30" end="37" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="43" end="49" title="Apulia" label="Puglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="59" end="74" title="Regions of Italy" label="region of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="91" end="118" title="Southern Italy" label="southern peninsular section"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="149" end="161" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q164070" start="179" end="196" title="Strait of Otranto" label="Strait of Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="201" end="211" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192738" start="237" end="252" title="Gulf of Taranto" label="Gulf of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443" start="386" end="392" title="Molise" label="Molise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="407" end="415" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="433" end="443" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="486" end="490" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q841576" start="613" end="622" title="Iapygians" label="Iapygians"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="692" end="706" title="Magna Graecia" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="747" end="761" title="ancient Romans" label="ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="792" end="802" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="820" end="827" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="833" end="842" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="851" end="858" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="896" end="923" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="959" end="975" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="986" end="1012" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q763332" start="1129" end="1136" title="Gargano" label="Gargano"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="1253" end="1260" title="Salento" label="Salento"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1321" end="1326" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16579599" start="1374" end="1390" title="Monte Cornacchia (Daunian Mountains)" label="Monte Cornacchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q681035" start="1419" end="1436" title="Daunian Mountains" label="Daunian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="1461" end="1470" title="Apennine Mountains" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q680313" start="1511" end="1536" title="Alta Murgia National Park" label="Alta Murgia National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q382227" start="1541" end="1562" title="Gargano National Park" label="Gargano National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q13386" start="2075" end="2080" title="Lecce" label="Lecce"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="2085" end="2091" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190825" start="2353" end="2357" title="Bora (wind)" label="Bora"/>
<link wikidata="Q180372" start="2463" end="2470" title="Sirocco" label="Sirocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="2481" end="2493" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="2571" end="2584" title="Sahara" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q52143" start="2659" end="2668" title="Gallipoli, Apulia" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q52179" start="2673" end="2686" title="Porto Cesareo" label="Porto Cesareo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51835" start="2782" end="2790" title="Monopoli" label="Monopoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q52174" start="2795" end="2802" title="Otranto" label="Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q649217" start="2856" end="2876" title="Santa Maria di Leuca" label="Santa Maria di Leuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q649217" start="2947" end="2967" title="Santa Maria di Leuca" label="Santa Maria di Leuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q52214" start="2979" end="2986" title="Tricase" label="Tricase"/>
<link wikidata="Q434336" start="3364" end="3376" title="Altamura Man" label="Altamura Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="3397" end="3408" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="3479" end="3485" title="menhir" label="menhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="3490" end="3496" title="dolmen" label="dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q841576" start="3533" end="3542" title="Iapygians" label="Iapygians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172997" start="3591" end="3599" title="Daunians" label="Daunians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267337" start="3605" end="3615" title="Peucetians" label="Peucetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q737684" start="3624" end="3634" title="Messapians" label="Messapians"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="3714" end="3721" title="Salento" label="Salento"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="3756" end="3769" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="3869" end="3874" title="Taras, Taranto" label="Taras"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="3880" end="3887" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q500272" start="3908" end="3915" title="Samnites" label="Samnite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="3938" end="3948" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q51933" start="3985" end="3991" title="Lucera" label="Lucera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357977" start="4052" end="4079" title="Battle of the Caudine Forks" label="Battle of the Caudine Forks"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="4242" end="4259" title="Salento Peninsula" label="Salento Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13470" start="4455" end="4461" title="Barletta" label="Cannae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="4511" end="4519" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="4527" end="4535" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901055" start="4548" end="4579" title="Province of Apulia and Calabria" label="Province of Apulia and Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q782189" start="4622" end="4629" title="Irpinia" label="Irpinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189417" start="4660" end="4670" title="Appian Way" label="Appian Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q432579" start="4704" end="4715" title="Via Traiana" label="Via Traiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q51965" start="4743" end="4748" title="Troia, Apulia" label="Troia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51938" start="4750" end="4756" title="Ordona" label="Ordona"/>
<link wikidata="Q51829" start="4758" end="4765" title="Gravina in Puglia" label="Gravina"/>
<link wikidata="Q23187" start="4767" end="4773" title="Canosa di Puglia" label="Canosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q51848" start="4775" end="4779" title="Ruvo di Puglia" label="Ruvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19278" start="4784" end="4791" title="Bitonto" label="Bitonto"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="4984" end="5016" title="Fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="Fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q220643" start="5071" end="5077" title="Heruli" label="Heruli"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="5082" end="5092" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="5161" end="5181" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878022" start="5275" end="5290" title="Emirate of Bari" label="Emirate of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="5359" end="5369" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814277" start="5406" end="5416" title="Catepanate of Italy" label="Catepanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q74011" start="5427" end="5448" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy" label="advent of the Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078062" start="5504" end="5527" title="Principality of Taranto" label="Principality of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q743941" start="5562" end="5578" title="Terra di Otranto" label="Terra di Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715874" start="5665" end="5694" title="County of Apulia and Calabria" label="County of Apulia and Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065299" start="5742" end="5765" title="Principality of Salerno" label="Principality of Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="5799" end="5816" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="6045" end="6057" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q215897" start="6187" end="6203" title="Castel del Monte, Apulia" label="Castel del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q13486" start="6210" end="6216" title="Andria" label="Andria"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="6237" end="6243" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="6412" end="6429" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Kingdom of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q122204616" start="6736" end="6750" title="Napoleonic era" label="Napoleonic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="6896" end="6923" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="7004" end="7015" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q749325" start="7020" end="7029" title="Carbonari" label="Carbonari"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="7041" end="7057" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45144" start="7528" end="7542" title="Carmine Crocco" label="Carmine Crocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q428382" start="7603" end="7614" title="latifundium" label="latifundium"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="7704" end="7711" title="Italian fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q994873" start="8091" end="8108" title="gross value added" label="gross value added"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="8496" end="8502" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13470" start="8533" end="8541" title="Barletta" label="Barletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q910379" start="8983" end="8991" title="Leonardo S.p.A." label="Leonardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q791069" start="8993" end="9002" title="Avio Aero" label="Avio Aero"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9004" end="9010" title=":it:Sitael (azienda)" label="Sitael"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9012" end="9022" title=":it:Blackshape" label="Blackshape"/>
<link wikidata="Q234021" start="9039" end="9044" title="Robert Bosch GmbH" label="Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884343" start="9046" end="9061" title="Magneti Marelli" label="Magneti Marelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q548212" start="9063" end="9076" title="Getrag" label="Magna Gertrag"/>
<link wikidata="Q179433" start="9078" end="9089" title="Bridgestone" label="Bridgestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008675" start="9104" end="9128" title="New Holland Construction" label="New Holland Construction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9130" end="9142" title="IVECO#Engines" label="IVECO Motori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674581" start="9144" end="9167" title="Isotta Fraschini Motori" label="Isotta Fraschini Motori"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344108" start="9169" end="9175" title="MERMEC" label="MERMEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873359" start="9191" end="9198" title="Natuzzi" label="Natuzzi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9231" end="9238" title=":it:Divella" label="Divella"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9320" end="9327" title=":it:Casa editrice Giuseppe Laterza &amp;amp; figli" label="Laterza"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9329" end="9344" title=":it:Edizioni Dedalo" label="Edizioni Dedalo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9405" end="9413" title=":it:Exprivia" label="Exprivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="9419" end="9426" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q27893" start="9583" end="9597" title="Arcelor Mittal" label="Arcelor Mittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="9603" end="9611" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q565594" start="9657" end="9660" title="Eni" label="ENI"/>
<link wikidata="Q565594" start="9676" end="9679" title="Eni" label="ENI"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9694" end="9701" title=":it:Syndial" label="Syndial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010228" start="9724" end="9732" title="Versalis" label="Versalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q899255" start="9822" end="9836" title="LyondellBasell" label="LyondellBasell"/>
<link wikidata="Q158205" start="9858" end="9864" title="Sanofi" label="Sanofi"/>
<link wikidata="Q565594" start="9894" end="9897" title="Eni" label="ENI"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="9925" end="9932" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="10044" end="10051" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q143503" start="10316" end="10322" title="Common dentex" label="dentex"/>
<link wikidata="Q237046" start="10324" end="10333" title="Gilt-head bream" label="sea bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q237046" start="10335" end="10350" title="Gilt-head bream" label="glit-head bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q192167" start="10352" end="10359" title="Epinephelus marginatus" label="grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q104869806" start="10361" end="10368" title="redfish" label="redfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q42237" start="10370" end="10376" title="Mullet (fish)" label="mullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="10378" end="10385" title="Mussel" label="mussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q83483" start="10387" end="10397" title="sea urchin" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188387" start="10399" end="10408" title="European anchovy" label="anchovies"/>
<link wikidata="Q80117" start="10410" end="10416" title="Caridea" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q81900" start="10421" end="10426" title="squid" label="squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19286" start="10464" end="10475" title="Manfredonia" label="Manfredonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13495" start="10477" end="10482" title="Trani" label="Trani"/>
<link wikidata="Q19300" start="10484" end="10492" title="Molfetta" label="Molfetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q51834" start="10494" end="10506" title="Mola di Bari" label="Mola di Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q51835" start="10508" end="10516" title="Monopoli" label="Monopoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q52129" start="10518" end="10524" title="Castro, Apulia" label="Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q52143" start="10530" end="10539" title="Gallipoli (Italy)" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="10548" end="10555" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="10603" end="10610" title="Mussel" label="mussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8611" start="10857" end="10866" title="La Spezia" label="La Spezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656" start="10868" end="10872" title="Pula" label="Pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630" start="10874" end="10879" title="Olbia" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55416" start="10884" end="10892" title="Chioggia" label="Chioggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050218" start="11768" end="11779" title="Catald" label="San Cataldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q618324" start="12041" end="12046" title="durum" label="durum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="12086" end="12094" title="tomatoes" label="tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="12097" end="12102" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="12105" end="12112" title="almonds" label="almonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="12115" end="12124" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q83193" start="12145" end="12152" title="lettuce" label="lettuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q23041430" start="12154" end="12163" title="artichoke" label="artichoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q43511" start="12165" end="12171" title="fennel" label="fennel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="12173" end="12180" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q23012379" start="12182" end="12188" title="celery" label="celery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660625" start="12190" end="12200" title="barattiere" label="barattiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q147075" start="12202" end="12208" title="borage" label="borage"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="12210" end="12222" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q156251" start="12224" end="12229" title="caper" label="caper"/>
<link wikidata="Q159554" start="12231" end="12240" title="portulaca" label="portulaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q702282" start="12242" end="12255" title="Rapini" label="broccoli rabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="12275" end="12280" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="12282" end="12288" title="Orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q460517" start="12290" end="12300" title="clementine" label="clementine"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="12302" end="12307" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122903" start="12309" end="12316" title="kumquat" label="kumquat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36146" start="12318" end="12321" title="fig" label="fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q13188" start="12323" end="12334" title="pomegranate" label="pomegranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29526" start="12336" end="12345" title="persimmon" label="persimmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="12347" end="12359" title="Opuntia" label="prickly pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="12939" end="12971" title="Protected designation of origin" label="Protected designations of Origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q855419" start="13140" end="13151" title="Biancolella" label="Biancolilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637726" start="13261" end="13279" title="Cerignola olive" label="Bella di Cerignola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019529" start="14074" end="14092" title="Xylella fastidiosa" label="Xylella fastidiosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q250033" start="14872" end="14883" title="Autostrada A14 (Italy)" label="A14 highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="14885" end="14892" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="14893" end="14900" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="14945" end="14949" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="14954" end="14961" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="15030" end="15036" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704" start="15090" end="15097" title="Pescara" label="Pescara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415" start="15099" end="15105" title="Ancona" label="Ancona"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="15107" end="15113" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="15129" end="15136" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q789051" start="15182" end="15185" title="Autostrada A16 (Italy)" label="A16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="15275" end="15281" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q779805" start="15322" end="15343" title="Bari Karol Wojtyła Airport" label="Karol Wojtyła Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19755" start="15353" end="15357" title="IATA" label="IATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q849715" start="15368" end="15384" title="Brindisi Airport" label="Brindisi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="15504" end="15512" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056589" start="15572" end="15591" title="Grottaglie Airfield" label="Grottaglie Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q194188" start="15616" end="15625" title="spaceport" label="spaceport"/>
<link wikidata="Q392953" start="15634" end="15654" title="Italian Space Agency" label="Italian Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q373225" start="15659" end="15674" title="Virgin Galactic" label="Virgin Galactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="16159" end="16164" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="16178" end="16182" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q576709" start="16183" end="16199" title="Michele Emiliano" label="Michele Emiliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q47729" start="16207" end="16223" title="Democratic Party (Italy)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q48783606" start="16531" end="16540" title="Carosello (melon)" label="carosello"/>
<link wikidata="Q81602" start="16555" end="16564" title="Cucumis melo" label="muskmelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13439060" start="16610" end="16641" title="Protected designation of origin" label="Protected designation of origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q363268" start="16652" end="16685" title="Geographical indications and traditional specialities in the European Union" label="Protected Geographical indication"/>
<link wikidata="Q19969" start="16811" end="16822" title="orecchiette" label="orecchiette"/>
<link wikidata="Q19959" start="16824" end="16833" title="cavatelli" label="cavatelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228815" start="16839" end="16847" title="troccoli" label="troccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132009" start="16878" end="16888" title="panzerotti" label="panzerotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q131607" start="16908" end="16915" title="polenta" label="polenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q832791" start="17169" end="17177" title="focaccia" label="focaccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150150" start="17215" end="17222" title="Taralli" label="Taralli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16123" start="17521" end="17525" title="Province of Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16124" start="17527" end="17548" title="Barletta-Andria-Trani" label="Barletta-Andria-Trani"/>
<link wikidata="Q15129" start="17554" end="17560" title="Province of Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16283" start="17602" end="17621" title="Province of Taranto" label="Province of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313381" start="17648" end="17661" title="Italo-Romance" label="Italo-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q72926" start="17682" end="17694" title="Bari dialect" label="Bari dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q695526" start="17699" end="17716" title="Tarantino dialect" label="Tarantino dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="17744" end="17751" title="Salento" label="Salento"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313381" start="17773" end="17786" title="Italo-Romance" label="Italo-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213" start="17801" end="17818" title="Salentino dialect" label="Salentino dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q19720507" start="17854" end="17867" title="Italiot Greek" label="Italiot Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35719" start="17901" end="17906" title="Griko" label="Griko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609155" start="17948" end="17960" title="Griko people" label="Griko people"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087" start="18021" end="18046" title="Franco-Provençal language" label="Franco-Provençal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064408" start="18054" end="18060" title="Faetar" label="Faetar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51926" start="18099" end="18104" title="Faeto" label="Faeto"/>
<link wikidata="Q51923" start="18109" end="18126" title="Celle di San Vito" label="Celle di San Vito"/>
<link wikidata="Q15129" start="18135" end="18153" title="Province of Foggia" label="Province of Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56975" start="18249" end="18258" title="Arbëreshë people" label="Arbëreshë"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="18274" end="18291" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="18438" end="18448" title="water polo" label="water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q953425" start="18523" end="18539" title="Italian football league system" label="Italian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q13391" start="18572" end="18582" title="U.S. Lecce" label="U.S. Lecce"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="18594" end="18601" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641" start="18604" end="18615" title="S.S.C. Bari" label="S.S.C. Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q194052" start="18627" end="18634" title="Serie B" label="Serie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q139399" start="18637" end="18655" title="Calcio Foggia 1920" label="Calcio Foggia 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q607965" start="18667" end="18674" title="Serie C" label="Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629463" start="18677" end="18698" title="S.S. Audace Cerignola" label="S.S. Audace Cerignola"/>
<link wikidata="Q607965" start="18710" end="18717" title="Serie C" label="Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q287695" start="18720" end="18739" title="Fidelis Andria 2018" label="Fidelis Andria 2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q607965" start="18751" end="18758" title="Serie C" label="Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865284" start="18761" end="18779" title="S.S. Monopoli 1966" label="S.S. Monopoli 1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q607965" start="18791" end="18798" title="Serie C" label="Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q24035133" start="18801" end="18826" title="Virtus Francavilla Calcio" label="Virtus Francavilla Calcio"/>
<link wikidata="Q607965" start="18838" end="18845" title="Serie C" label="Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q29400" start="18848" end="18865" title="Taranto F.C. 1927" label="Taranto F.C. 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q607965" start="18877" end="18884" title="Serie C" label="Serie C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814277" start="18901" end="18920" title="Catepanate of Italy" label="Catepanate of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51829" start="18923" end="18940" title="Gravina in Puglia" label="Gravina in Puglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q681035" start="18943" end="18960" title="Daunian Mountains" label="Daunian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q763332" start="18963" end="18970" title="Gargano" label="Gargano"/>
<link wikidata="Q898164" start="18973" end="18989" title="Grecia Salentina" label="Grecia Salentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q841576" start="18992" end="19001" title="Iapygians" label="Iapygians"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="19004" end="19017" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q737684" start="19020" end="19030" title="Messapians" label="Messapians"/>
<link wikidata="Q927629" start="19033" end="19051" title="Sacra Corona Unita" label="Sacra Corona Unita"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="19054" end="19061" title="Salento" label="Salento"/>
<link wikidata="Q302083" start="19064" end="19086" title="Tavoliere delle Puglie" label="Tavoliere delle Puglie"/>
<link wikidata="Q743941" start="19089" end="19109" title="Terra d&amp;#x27;Otranto" label="Terra d&amp;#x27;Otranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q323069" start="19112" end="19118" title="Trullo" label="Trullo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44784" wikidata="Q3519" url="?curid=44784" title="Bari">
<text>Bari ( ; ; ; ) is the capital city of the Metropolitan City of Bari and of the Apulia region, on the Adriatic Sea, southern Italy. It is the first most important economic centre of mainland Southern Italy. It is a port and university city as well as the city of Saint Nicholas. The city itself has a population of 315,284 inhabitants, and an area of over , while the urban area has 750,000 inhabitants. The metropolitan area has 1.3 million inhabitants.

Bari is made up of four different urban sections. To the north is the closely built old town on the peninsula between two modern harbours, with the Basilica of Saint Nicholas, the Cathedral of San Sabino (1035–1171) and the Norman-Swabian Castle, which is now also a major nightlife district. To the south is the Murat quarter (erected by Joachim Murat), the modern heart of the city, which is laid out on a rectangular grid-plan with a promenade on the sea and the major shopping district (the &quot;via Sparano&quot; and &quot;via Argiro&quot;).

Modern residential zones surrounding the centre of Bari were built during the 1960s and 1970s replacing the old suburbs that had developed along roads splaying outwards from gates in the city walls. In addition, the outer suburbs developed rapidly during the 1990s.

== History ==
=== Ancient ===
Bari itself known in antiquity as &quot;Barium&quot;, was a harbour of the Iapygian Peuceti. The authors of the Etymologicum Magnum have preserved an etymology by authors of antiquity about &quot;Barium&quot;, which they explain as the word &quot;house&quot; in Messapic. The city had strong Greek influences before the Roman era. In ancient Greek, it was known as &quot;Βάριον&quot;. In the 3rd century BC, it became part of the Roman Republic and was subsequently Romanized. The city developed strategic significance as the point of junction between the coast road and the Via Traiana and as a port for eastward trade; a branch road to Tarentum led from Barium. Its harbour, mentioned as early as 181 BC, was probably the principal one of the districts in ancient times, as it is at present, and was the centre of a fishery. The first historical bishop of Bari was Gervasius who was noted at the Council of Sardica in 347.

=== Middle Ages ===
With the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476, it was invaded by Barbarians and occupied by the Ostrogoths. It was taken from them by the Byzantine Empire during the Gothic wars and disputed for the following two centuries with the Lombards of the Duchy of Benevento, who made it a steward.

Throughout this period, and indeed throughout the Middle Ages, Bari served as one of the major slave depots of the Mediterranean, providing a central location for the trade in Slavic slaves. The slaves were mostly captured by Venice from Dalmatia, by the Holy Roman Empire from what is now Eastern Germany and Poland, and by the Byzantines from elsewhere in the Balkans, and were generally destined for other parts of the Byzantine Empire and (most frequently) the Muslim states surrounding the Mediterranean: the Abbasid Caliphate, the Umayyad Caliphate of Córdoba, the Emirate of Sicily, and the Fatimid Caliphate (which relied on Slavs purchased at the Bari market for its legions of Sakalaba Mamluks).

For 20 years, Bari was the centre of the Emirate of Bari; the city was captured by its first emirs Kalfun in 847, who had been part of the mercenary garrison installed there by Radelchis I of Benevento. The city was conquered and the emirate extinguished in 871 following five-year campaign by Frankish Emperor Louis II, assisted by a Byzantine fleet. Chris Wickham states Louis spent five years campaigning to reduce then occupy Bari, &quot;and then only to a Byzantine/Slav naval blockade&quot;; &quot;Louis took the credit&quot; for the success, adding &quot;at least in Frankish eyes&quot;, then concludes by noting that by remaining in southern Italy long after this success, he &quot;achieved the near-impossible: an alliance against him of the Beneventans, Salernitans, Neapolitans and Spoletans; later sources include Sawadān as well.&quot; In 885, Bari became the residence of the local Byzantine &quot;catapan&quot;, or governor. The failed revolt (1009–1011) of the Lombard nobles Melus of Bari and his brother-in-law Dattus, against the Byzantine governorate, though it was firmly repressed at the Battle of Cannae (1018), offered their Norman adventurer allies a first foothold in the region. In 1025, under the Archbishop Byzantius, Bari became attached to the see of Rome and was granted &quot;provincial&quot; status.

In 1071, Bari was captured by Robert Guiscard, following a three-year siege, ending what remained of the Byzantine power in the region.

In 1095, Peter the Hermit preached the First Crusade there. In October 1098, Urban II, who had consecrated the Basilica in 1089, convened the Council of Bari, one of a series of synods convoked with the intention of reconciling the Eastern and Western Church on the question of the filioque clause in the Creed, which Anselm ably defended, seated at the pope&#x27;s side.

=== Early modern period ===

A long period of decline characterized the city under the dominations of Aldoino Filangieri di Candida, and those of the Kings of Naples, which held the control of the entire mainland Southern Italy from 1282 to 1806. This decline was interrupted, however, by the splendor under the Sforzas, who ruled the city as Dukes of Bari, a title given by the Neapolitan crown, in particular under the rule of the dukes Ludovico and Beatrice d&#x27;Este, then of the duchesses Isabella of Aragon and Bona Sforza. Bari also underwent Venetian domination, which led to the expansion of the port and a very prosperous period, also favored by the trade of inland products, which were in great demand on foreign markets.

In 1556, Princess Bona Sforza of Aragon, second wife of the King of Poland Sigismund I, left Poland and settled in Bari, whose principality she had inherited from her parents. During her reign, she fortified the city&#x27;s castle, as evidenced by an inscription in bronze letters on the cornice around the courtyard, as well as building several churches, a monastery, two water cisterns and made many donations to the monks of the Basilica of San Nicola. Bona Sforza died in the city in 1557. Following her death, the city of Bari came under the direct rule of the kings of Naples.

In 1813, Joachim Murat, King of Naples in the Napoleonic era, began a new urbanization, changing the face of the city and setting a new &quot;chessboard&quot; growth model, which continued for many years to come. The village built at the time on the outskirts of the old city still retains its name.

Modern plumbing arrived in the city of Bari on 24 April 1915: it was the first completed leg of the nascent Apulian Aqueduct. During the 1930s, Araldo di Crollalanza, the mayor and minister of Bari, oversaw the development of its modern waterfront.

=== World War II ===
On 11 September 1943, in connection with the Armistice of Cassibile, Bari was taken without resistance by the British 1st Airborne Division, then during October and November 1943, New Zealand troops from the 2nd New Zealand Division assembled in Bari.

The Balkan Air Force supporting the Yugoslav partisans was based at Bari.

==== The 1943 chemical warfare disaster ====

Through a tragic coincidence intended by neither of the opposing sides in World War II, Bari gained the unwelcome distinction of being the only European city in the course of that war to experience effects like those of chemical warfare.

On the night of 2 December 1943, 105 German Junkers Ju 88 bombers attacked the port of Bari, which was a key supply centre for Allied forces fighting their way up the Italian Peninsula. Over 20 Allied ships were sunk in the overcrowded harbour, including the U.S. Liberty ship &quot;John Harvey&quot;, which was carrying mustard gas; mustard gas was also reported to have been stacked on the quayside awaiting transport (the chemical agent was intended for retaliation if German forces had initiated chemical warfare). The presence of the gas was highly classified and the U.S. had not informed the British military authorities in the city of its existence. This increased the number of fatalities, since British physicians—who had no idea that they were dealing with the effects of mustard gas—prescribed treatment proper for those suffering from exposure and immersion, which proved fatal in many cases. Because rescuers were unaware they were dealing with gas casualties, many additional casualties were caused among the rescuers, through contact with the contaminated skin and clothing of those more directly exposed to the gas.

A member of U.S. General Dwight D. Eisenhower&#x27;s medical staff, Stewart F. Alexander, was dispatched to Bari following the raid. Alexander had trained at the Army&#x27;s Edgewood Arsenal in Maryland, and was familiar with some of the effects of mustard gas. Although he was not informed of the cargo carried by the &quot;John Harvey&quot;, and most victims suffered atypical symptoms caused by exposure to mustard diluted in water and oil (as opposed to airborne), Alexander rapidly concluded that mustard gas was present. Although he could not get any acknowledgement of this from the chain of command, Alexander convinced medical staffs to treat patients for mustard exposure and saved many lives as a result. He also preserved many tissue samples from autopsied victims at Bari. After World War II, these samples would result in the development of an early form of chemotherapy based on mustard, Mustine.

On the orders of Allied leaders Franklin D. Roosevelt, Winston Churchill, and Eisenhower, records were destroyed and the whole affair was kept secret for many years after the war. The U.S. records of the attack were declassified in 1959, but the episode remained obscure until 1967, when writer Glenn B. Infield exposed the story in his book &quot;Disaster at Bari&quot;. Additionally, there is considerable dispute as to the exact number of fatalities. In one account: &quot;[S]ixty-nine deaths were attributed in whole or in part to the mustard gas, most of them American merchant seamen&quot;. Others put the count as high as &quot;more than one thousand Allied servicemen and more than one thousand Italian civilians&quot;.

The affair is the subject of two books: the aforementioned &quot;Disaster at Bari&quot;, by Glenn B. Infield, and &quot;Nightmare in Bari: The World War II Liberty Ship Poison Gas Disaster and Coverup&quot;, by Gerald Reminick.

In 1988, through the efforts of Nick T. Spark, U.S. Senators Dennis DeConcini and Bill Bradley, Stewart Alexander received recognition from the Surgeon General of the United States Army for his actions during the Bari disaster.

==== &quot;Charles Henderson&quot; explosion ====
The port of Bari was again struck by disaster on 9 April 1945 when the Liberty ship &quot;Charles Henderson&quot; exploded in the harbour while offloading 2,000 tons of aerial bombs (half of that amount had been offloaded when the explosion occurred). Three hundred and sixty people were killed and 1,730 were wounded. The harbour was again rendered non-operational, this time for a month.

== Geography ==
Bari is the largest urban and metro area on the Adriatic. It is located in Southern Italy, at a more northerly latitude than Naples, further south than Rome.

=== Climate ===
Bari has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Köppen: &quot;Csa&quot;) bordering on a humid subtropical climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfa&quot;) with mild winters and hot, dry summers.

=== Quarters ===
Bari is divided into five municipalities (&quot;Municipi&quot;), constituted in 2014. The municipality is also divided into 17 official neighbourhoods (&quot;quartieri&quot;).

== Architectural landmarks ==

* &quot;Teatro Margherita&quot;.
* &quot;Teatro Piccinni&quot;.
* &quot;Orto botanico di Bari&quot;, a botanical garden.
* &quot;Santa Chiara&quot;, once church of the Teutonic Knights (as &quot;Santa Maria degli Alemanni&quot;) and now houses a museum. It was restored in 1539.
* The &quot;Palazzo dell&#x27;Acquedotto Pugliese&quot;, historicist central administration palace of the Apulian Aqueduct
* The medieval church of &quot;San Marco dei Veneziani&quot;, with a rose window in the façade.
* &quot;Conservatory of Bari&quot;
* &quot;San Giorgio degli Armeni&quot;.
* &quot;Santa Teresa dei Maschi&quot;, the main Baroque church in the city (1690–1696).
* &quot;Pane e Pomodoro&quot; Beach is the main beach within reach of the city. Its reputation has for several years suffered from the apparent presence of asbestos from nearby industrial plants.
* Bari features two sea harbours: the Old Port and the New Port, constructed in 1850.

=== Basilica of Saint Nicholas ===

The &quot;Basilica di San Nicola&quot; (Saint Nicholas) was founded in 1087 to receive the relics of this saint, which were brought from Myra in Lycia, and now lie beneath the altar in the crypt. The church is one of the four Palatine churches of Apulia (the others being the cathedrals of Acquaviva delle Fonti and Altamura, and the church of Monte Sant&#x27;Angelo sul Gargano).

=== Bari Cathedral ===
Bari Cathedral, dedicated to Saint Sabinus of Canosa (&quot;San Sabino&quot;), was begun in Byzantine style in 1034, but was destroyed in the sack of the city of 1156. A new building was thus built between 1170 and 1178, partially inspired by that of San Nicola. Of the original edifice, only traces of the pavement are today visible in the transept.

=== Petruzzelli Theatre ===
The Petruzzelli Theatre, founded in 1903, hosted different forms of live entertainment, or nineteenth century &quot;Politeama&quot;. The theatre was all but destroyed in a fire on October 27, 1991. It was reopened in October 2009, after 18 years.

=== Swabian Castle ===

The Norman-Hohenstaufen Castle, widely known as the &quot;Castello Svevo&quot; (Swabian Castle), was built by Roger II of Sicily around 1131. Destroyed in 1156, it was rebuilt by Frederick II of Hohenstaufen. The castle now serves as a gallery for a variety of temporary exhibitions in the city.

=== Pinacoteca Provinciale di Bari ===
The Pinacoteca Provinciale di Bari (Provincial Picture Gallery of Bari) is the most important art gallery in Apulia. It was first established in 1928 and contains many paintings from the 15th century up to the days of contemporary art.

=== The Russian Church ===
The Russian Church of Saint Nicholas, in the Carrassi district of Bari, was built in the early 20th century to welcome Russian pilgrims who came to the city to visit the church of Saint Nicholas in the old city where the relics of the saint remain.

=== &quot;Barivecchia&quot; ===
&quot;Barivecchia&quot;, or Old Bari, is a sprawl of streets and passageways making up the section of the city to the north of the modern Murat area. A large-scale redevelopment plan began with a new sewerage system, followed by the development of the two main squares, Piazza Mercantile and Piazza Ferrarese.

== Demographics ==
, there were 316,491 people residing in Bari (about 1.6 million lived in the greater Bari area in 2015), located in the province of Bari, Apulia, of whom 47.9% were male and 52.1% were female. , minors (children ages 18 and younger) totaled 17.90 percent of the population compared to pensioners who number 19.08 percent. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06 percent (minors) and 19.94 percent (pensioners). The average age of Bari residents is 42 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Bari grew by 2.69 percent, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.56 percent. The current birth rate of Bari is 8.67 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.

, 3.8% of the population were foreign residents.
=== Migration ===
According to an urban migration study in Bari, return migration gain to urban areas is higher than migration loss from urban areas. People migrating from urban destinations tend to migrate to different places in comparison to people migrating from rural areas. These findings are based on the background and behavior of a sample of 211 return migrants to Bari, Italy. Bari is a port city, making it historically important because of its strong trade links with Greece, North Africa, and the eastern Mediterranean. Bari&#x27;s economic structure is based on industry, commerce, services, and administration. Around two-thirds of the city&#x27;s employment is in the tertiary sector with its port, commerce, and administrative functions. The highest percentage of Bari&#x27;s working population is employed in services, with 45.6%. From 1958 to 1982, around 20% of migrants left Bari for other Italian communes, while around 17% or migrants came to Bari from other Italian communes. Under 2% of migrants left Bari to go abroad and came to the city from abroad.

== Culture ==

=== Fiera del Levante ===
The Fiera del Levante, held in September in the Fiera site on the west side of Bari city center, focuses on agriculture and industry. There is also a &quot;Fair of Nations&quot; which displays handcrafted and locally produced goods from all over the world.

=== Cuisine and gastronomy ===
Bari&#x27;s cuisine is based on three typical agricultural products found within the surrounding region of Apulia, namely wheat, olive oil and wine. The local cuisine is also enriched by the wide variety of fruit and vegetables produced locally. Local flour is used in homemade bread and pasta production including, most notably, the famous &quot;orecchiette&quot; ear-shaped pasta, &quot;recchietelle&quot; or &quot;strascinate&quot;, &quot;chiancarelle&quot; (orecchiette of different sizes) and &quot;cavatelli&quot;.

Homemade dough is also used for baked &quot;calzoni&quot; stuffed with onions, anchovies, capers, olives, etc.; fried &quot;panzerotti&quot; with mozzarella and/or ricotta forte; &quot;focaccia alla barese&quot; with tomatoes, olives and oregano; little savoury &quot;taralli&quot;, and larger &quot;friselle&quot;; and &quot;sgagliozze&quot;, fried slices of polenta; all making up the Barese culinary repertoire.

Vegetable minestrone, chick peas, broad beans, chicory, celery and fennel are also often served as first courses or side dishes.

Meat dishes and the local Barese &quot;ragù&quot; often include lamb and pork.

Pasta al forno, a baked pasta dish, is very popular in Bari and was historically a Sunday dish, or a dish used at the start of Lent when all the rich ingredients such as eggs and pork had to be used for religious reasons. The recipe commonly consists of &quot;penne&quot; or similar tubular pasta shapes, a tomato sauce, small beef and pork meatballs and halved hard-boiled eggs. The pasta is then topped with &quot;mozzarella&quot; or similar cheese and then baked in the oven to make the dish have its trademark crispy texture.

Another popular pasta dish is the spaghetti all&#x27;assassina. It is a slightly crunchy spaghetti dish, cooked in an iron pan with garlic, olive oil, chili pepper, tomato sauce and tomato broth.

Fresh fish and seafood are often eaten raw. Octopus, sea urchins and mussels feature heavily. Perhaps Bari&#x27;s most famous dish is the oven-baked &quot;patate, riso e cozze&quot; (potatoes with rice and mussels).

Bari and the whole Apulian region have a range of wines, including Primitivo, Castel del Monte, and Muscat, notably Moscato di Trani.

=== Language ===
The dialect of Bari belongs to the upper-southern Italo-Romance family, and currently coexists with Italian; generally these are used in different contexts. 

== Sport ==

Local football club S.S.C. Bari, currently competing in Serie B (as of the 2024–2025 season), plays in the Stadio San Nicola, an architecturally innovative 58,000-seater stadium purpose-built for the 1990 FIFA World Cup. The stadium also hosted the 1991 European Cup final.

In 2007, Bari hosted the first and only world games for underwater sports.

== Education ==
* Accademy of Fine Arts of Bari 
* Conservatory of Bari
* Polytechnic University of Bari
* University of Bari

== Transport ==

Bari has its own airport, Bari Karol Wojtyła Airport, which is located northwest of the centre of Bari. It is connected to the centre by train services from Bari Aeroporto railway station.

Bari Central Station lies on the Adriatic railway and has connection to cities such as Rome, Milan, Bologna, Turin and Venice. Another mainline is connection southwards by the Bari-Taranto railway. The Bari metropolitan railway service operates local commuter services; while regional services also operate to Foggia, Barletta, Brindisi, Lecce, Taranto and other towns and villages in the Apulia region.

Bari has an old fishery port (&quot;Porto Vecchio&quot;) and a so-called new port in the north, as well as some marinas. The Port of Bari is an important cargo transport hub to Southeast Europe. Various passenger transport lines include some seasonal ferry lines to Albania, Montenegro or Dubrovnik. Bari – Igoumenitsa is a popular ferry route to Greece. Some cruise ships call at Bari.

== In popular culture ==
The Guido Guerrieri novels by Gianrico Carofiglio are set in Bari, where Guerrieri is a criminal lawyer, and include many descriptions of the town.

Bari is one of the primary settings of the 1954 detective novel &quot;The Black Mountain&quot; by Rex Stout. It is the characters&#x27; point of embarkation to Communist Yugoslavia.

In the 1995 film &quot;The Bridges of Madison County&quot;, Italian housewife Francesca Johnson (Meryl Streep), is mentioned as being from Bari and growing up in Naples.

The 2020 Edoardo Ponti film &quot;La vita davanti a sé&quot;, starring Sophia Loren, is set in Bari.

== Notable people ==

* Licia Albanese
* Giovanni Alemanno
* Emanuele Arciuli
* Argyrus (catepan of Italy)
* Francesco Attolico
* Lino Banfi
* Alessio Bax
* Pope Benedict XIII
* Gioia Bruno
* Gianrico Carofiglio
* Antonio Cassano
* Riccardo Cucciolla
* Niccolò dell&#x27;Arca
* Chiara Fumai
* Giovanni Pietro Gallo
* Franco Giordano
* Alfredo Giovine
* Ivan Iusco
* Gaetano Latilla
* Guido Marzulli
* Antonio Matarrese
* Ermal Meta
* Marco Misciagna
* Domenico Modugno
* Aldo Moro
* Pomponio Nenna
* Mario Nuzzolese
* Joe Orlando
* Anna Oxa
* Pino Pascali
* Nico Perrone
* Niccolò Piccinni
* Victor Posa
* Lazarus Racanelli
* Francesco Racanelli
* Francesco Riefolo
* Rocco Rodio
* Sergio Rubini
* Gaetano Salvemini
* Bona Sforza
* Cesare Stea
* Catia Summaria
* Gemma Taccogna
* Pope Urban VI
* Nichi Vendola
* Checco Zalone
* Dulcita Lieggi
* Fabio Delvino
==Twin towns — sister cities==

Bari is twinned with:

*Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina
*Batumi, Georgia
*Corfu, Greece
*Durrës, Albania
*Guangzhou, China
*Kostroma, Russia
*Mar del Plata, Argentina
*Monte Sant&#x27;Angelo, Italy
*Palma de Mallorca, Spain
*Patras, Greece
*San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy
*Słupsk, Poland
*Szczecin, Poland
*Sumgait, Azerbaijan


== See also ==

* Accademia Apulia
* Antivari (means &quot;opposite Bari&quot;)
* Bari Light – the Punta San Cataldo di Bari Lighthouse
* Durrës
* Province of Bari

== References ==
== Further reading ==

* Glenn B. Infield. 1973. &quot;Disaster at Bari&quot;. Ace Books. New York, N.Y.
* Vito Antonio Melchiorre. 2001. &quot;Note storiche su Bari&quot;.

== External links ==
* City of Bari
* Province of Bari 
* Region of Apulia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3519" start="0" end="4" title="Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q18241854" start="42" end="67" title="Metropolitan City of Bari" label="Metropolitan City of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="79" end="85" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16110" start="86" end="92" title="Regions of Italy" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="101" end="113" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="124" end="129" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="190" end="204" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="214" end="218" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="223" end="233" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="262" end="276" title="Saint Nicholas" label="Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="407" end="424" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q550514" start="603" end="629" title="Basilica di San Nicola" label="Basilica of Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q383884" start="635" end="658" title="Cathedral of San Sabino" label="Cathedral of San Sabino"/>
<link wikidata="Q790430" start="679" end="700" title="Castello Normanno-Svevo (Bari)" label="Norman-Swabian Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="794" end="807" title="Joachim Murat" label="Joachim Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q787113" start="892" end="901" title="promenade" label="promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q841576" start="1376" end="1384" title="Iapygians" label="Iapygian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267337" start="1385" end="1392" title="Peuceti" label="Peuceti"/>
<link wikidata="Q175630" start="1413" end="1432" title="Etymologicum Magnum" label="Etymologicum Magnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36383" start="1563" end="1571" title="Messapic language" label="Messapic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1635" end="1648" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1731" end="1745" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q432579" start="1876" end="1887" title="Via Traiana" label="Via Traiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="1939" end="1947" title="Taranto" label="Tarentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q541341" start="2159" end="2163" title="Bishopric of Bari" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515920" start="2168" end="2177" title="Gervasius and Protasius" label="Gervasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277136" start="2199" end="2217" title="Council of Sardica" label="Council of Sardica"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="2256" end="2288" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="2315" end="2325" title="Barbarian" label="Barbarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="2346" end="2356" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2388" end="2404" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331223" start="2416" end="2427" title="Gothic wars" label="Gothic wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="2482" end="2490" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q267816" start="2498" end="2516" title="Duchy of Benevento" label="Duchy of Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="2637" end="2642" title="slavery" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="2718" end="2724" title="Slavic peoples" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="2768" end="2774" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="2780" end="2788" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2797" end="2814" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q675430" start="2832" end="2847" title="Eastern germany" label="Eastern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2852" end="2858" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="3056" end="3073" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="3079" end="3086" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="3087" end="3107" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Caliphate of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="3113" end="3130" title="Emirate of Sicily" label="Emirate of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="3140" end="3157" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="3238" end="3244" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878022" start="3290" end="3305" title="Emirate of Bari" label="Emirate of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878022" start="3348" end="3354" title="Kalfun" label="Kalfun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344194" start="3426" end="3450" title="Radelchis I of Benevento" label="Radelchis I of Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q102361734" start="3521" end="3539" title="Louis II&amp;#x27;s campaign against Bari (866–871)" label="five-year campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q215204" start="3543" end="3568" title="Emperor Louis II" label="Frankish Emperor Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3584" end="3593" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878022" start="4075" end="4082" title="Sawdan" label="Sawadān"/>
<link wikidata="Q169955" start="4161" end="4168" title="catapan" label="catapan"/>
<link wikidata="Q168393" start="4241" end="4254" title="Melus of Bari" label="Melus of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16658574" start="4263" end="4277" title="brother-in-law" label="brother-in-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q608438" start="4359" end="4382" title="Battle of Cannae (1018)" label="Battle of Cannae (1018)"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="4398" end="4404" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004728" start="4474" end="4494" title="Byzantius (archbishop of Bari)" label="Archbishop Byzantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="4524" end="4535" title="Holy See" label="see of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="4558" end="4568" title="province" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q203792" start="4614" end="4629" title="Robert Guiscard" label="Robert Guiscard"/>
<link wikidata="Q815120" start="4643" end="4659" title="Siege of Bari" label="three-year siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q311845" start="4730" end="4746" title="Peter the Hermit" label="Peter the Hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60797" start="4747" end="4753" title="Preaching" label="preach"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="4760" end="4773" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q30578" start="4798" end="4806" title="Urban II" label="Urban II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608785" start="4863" end="4878" title="Council of Bari" label="Council of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="4899" end="4904" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="4953" end="4960" title="Eastern Church" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="4965" end="4979" title="Western Church" label="Western Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q204085" start="5003" end="5011" title="filioque" label="filioque"/>
<link wikidata="Q43939" start="5039" end="5045" title="Anselm of Canterbury" label="Anselm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="5075" end="5079" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609385" start="5196" end="5225" title="Aldoino Filangieri di Candida" label="Aldoino Filangieri di Candida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862798" start="5244" end="5259" title="Kings of Naples" label="Kings of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q130858" start="5406" end="5413" title="Sforzas" label="Sforzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20009900" start="5437" end="5450" title="Duchy of Bari" label="Dukes of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q236853" start="5533" end="5541" title="Ludovico Sforza" label="Ludovico"/>
<link wikidata="Q813280" start="5546" end="5566" title="Beatrice d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Beatrice d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799532" start="5590" end="5608" title="Isabella of Aragon, Duchess of Milan" label="Isabella of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q229434" start="5613" end="5624" title="Bona Sforza" label="Bona Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="5890" end="5916" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="King of Poland Sigismund I"/>
<link wikidata="Q151173" start="6423" end="6436" title="Joachim Murat" label="Joachim Murat"/>
<link wikidata="Q48779892" start="6438" end="6452" title="Kingdom of Naples (Napoleonic)" label="King of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q122204616" start="6460" end="6474" title="Napoleonic era" label="Napoleonic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859469" start="6859" end="6880" title="Araldo di Crollalanza" label="Araldo di Crollalanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="7031" end="7053" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Armistice of Cassibile"/>
<link wikidata="Q161891" start="7096" end="7125" title="1st Airborne Division (United Kingdom)" label="British 1st Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q608386" start="7243" end="7259" title="Balkan Air Force" label="Balkan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q155198" start="7275" end="7293" title="Yugoslav partisans" label="Yugoslav partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7434" end="7446" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q483610" start="7580" end="7596" title="chemical warfare" label="chemical warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q155661" start="7643" end="7656" title="Junkers Ju 88" label="Junkers Ju 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="7726" end="7732" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="7766" end="7783" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q593485" start="7863" end="7875" title="Liberty ship" label="Liberty ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393901" start="7882" end="7893" title="SS John Harvey" label="John Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q81166" start="7920" end="7931" title="mustard gas" label="mustard gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="8758" end="8778" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q319506" start="8907" end="8923" title="Edgewood Arsenal" label="Edgewood Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="9605" end="9617" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q418011" start="9636" end="9643" title="Mustine" label="Mustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="9678" end="9699" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9701" end="9718" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028013" start="10636" end="10649" title="Nick T. Spark" label="Nick T. Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189069" start="10665" end="10681" title="Dennis DeConcini" label="Dennis DeConcini"/>
<link wikidata="Q504025" start="10686" end="10698" title="Bill Bradley" label="Bill Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19826104" start="10748" end="10789" title="Surgeon General of the United States Army" label="Surgeon General of the United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q29018510" start="10973" end="10990" title="SS Charles Henderson" label="Charles Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="11338" end="11346" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207989" start="11365" end="11379" title="Southern Italy" label="Southern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="11415" end="11421" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="11442" end="11446" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="11487" end="11508" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11510" end="11516" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="11550" end="11575" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11577" end="11583" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="11818" end="11827" title="quartiere" label="quartieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982048" start="11876" end="11893" title="Teatro Margherita" label="Teatro Margherita"/>
<link wikidata="Q845517" start="11909" end="11924" title="Teatro Piccinni" label="Teatro Piccinni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105063" start="11940" end="11961" title="Orto Botanico dell&amp;#x27;Università di Bari" label="Orto botanico di Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="11971" end="11987" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="12036" end="12052" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q277466" start="12204" end="12215" title="Historism (art)" label="historicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q174520" start="12339" end="12350" title="rose window" label="rose window"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543765" start="12374" end="12394" title="Conservatory of Bari" label="Conservatory of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q550514" start="12858" end="12880" title="Basilica di San Nicola" label="Basilica di San Nicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q652024" start="12985" end="12989" title="Myra" label="Myra"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927" start="12993" end="12998" title="Lycia" label="Lycia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="13024" end="13029" title="altar" label="altar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192619" start="13037" end="13042" title="crypt" label="crypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="13124" end="13133" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q51810" start="13138" end="13159" title="Acquaviva delle Fonti" label="Acquaviva delle Fonti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13164" end="13172" title="Altamura#Main sights" label="Altamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q51935" start="13192" end="13214" title="Monte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Monte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q383884" start="13253" end="13267" title="Bari Cathedral" label="Bari Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460530" start="13282" end="13305" title="Saint Sabinus of Canosa" label="Saint Sabinus of Canosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="13345" end="13360" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine style"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="13594" end="13602" title="transept" label="transept"/>
<link wikidata="Q845510" start="13637" end="13656" title="Teatro Petruzzelli" label="Petruzzelli Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q193901" start="14015" end="14033" title="Roger II of Sicily" label="Roger II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="14084" end="14112" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II of Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388587" start="14245" end="14275" title="Pinacoteca Provinciale di Bari" label="Pinacoteca Provinciale di Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q753483" start="14509" end="14541" title="Russian Orthodox Church of Saint Nicholas, Bari" label="Russian Church of Saint Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="15255" end="15261" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="15707" end="15712" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="15758" end="15768" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19969" start="17667" end="17678" title="orecchiette" label="orecchiette"/>
<link wikidata="Q19959" start="17824" end="17833" title="cavatelli" label="cavatelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815560" start="17886" end="17893" title="calzoni" label="calzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132009" start="17966" end="17976" title="panzerotti" label="panzerotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935158" start="18006" end="18019" title="ricotta forte" label="ricotta forte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150150" start="18110" end="18117" title="taralli" label="taralli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="18292" end="18303" title="Vicia faba" label="broad beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688975" start="18374" end="18383" title="side dish" label="side dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571808" start="18427" end="18431" title="ragù" label="ragù"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897485" start="18468" end="18482" title="Pasta al forno" label="Pasta al forno"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="18595" end="18599" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063736" start="18728" end="18733" title="penne" label="penne"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088" start="18884" end="18894" title="mozzarella" label="mozzarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q112623018" start="19033" end="19061" title="spaghetti all&amp;#x27;assassina" label="spaghetti all&amp;#x27;assassina"/>
<link wikidata="Q204433" start="19480" end="19489" title="Primitivo" label="Primitivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q215897" start="19491" end="19507" title="Castel del Monte (Apulia)" label="Castel del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q181486" start="19513" end="19519" title="Muscat (grape and wine)" label="Muscat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19529" end="19545" title="Moscato di Trani" label="Moscato di Trani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641" start="19757" end="19768" title="S.S.C. Bari" label="S.S.C. Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q194052" start="19793" end="19800" title="Serie B" label="Serie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q328698" start="19844" end="19861" title="Stadio San Nicola" label="Stadio San Nicola"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="19937" end="19956" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q597541" start="19986" end="20009" title="1991 European Cup final" label="1991 European Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q126525418" start="20037" end="20085" title="2007 CMAS World Games" label="first and only world games for underwater sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q15178043" start="20106" end="20135" title="Accademia di Belle Arti di Bari" label="Accademy of Fine Arts of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16543765" start="20139" end="20159" title="Conservatory of Bari" label="Conservatory of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054324" start="20162" end="20192" title="Polytechnic University of Bari" label="Polytechnic University of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236136" start="20195" end="20213" title="University of Bari" label="University of Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q779805" start="20258" end="20284" title="Bari Karol Wojtyła Airport" label="Bari Karol Wojtyła Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14847264" start="20389" end="20419" title="Bari Aeroporto railway station" label="Bari Aeroporto railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q790420" start="20422" end="20442" title="Bari Centrale railway station" label="Bari Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743280" start="20455" end="20471" title="Adriatic railway" label="Adriatic railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="20509" end="20513" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="20515" end="20520" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="20522" end="20529" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="20531" end="20536" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="20541" end="20547" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743308" start="20598" end="20618" title="Bari-Taranto railway" label="Bari-Taranto railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642213" start="20624" end="20657" title="Bari metropolitan railway service" label="Bari metropolitan railway service"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="20732" end="20738" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13470" start="20740" end="20748" title="Barletta" label="Barletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="20750" end="20758" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13386" start="20760" end="20765" title="Lecce" label="Lecce"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="20767" end="20774" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="21004" end="21020" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="21093" end="21100" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="21102" end="21112" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="21116" end="21125" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q213874" start="21134" end="21145" title="Igoumenitsa" label="Igoumenitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246500" start="21270" end="21289" title="Gianrico Carofiglio" label="Gianrico Carofiglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874795" start="21459" end="21477" title="The Black Mountain (novel)" label="The Black Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q337351" start="21487" end="21496" title="Rex Stout" label="Rex Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="21549" end="21569" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Communist Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q399823" start="21595" end="21624" title="The Bridges of Madison County (film)" label="The Bridges of Madison County"/>
<link wikidata="Q873" start="21669" end="21681" title="Meryl Streep" label="Meryl Streep"/>
<link wikidata="Q85807735" start="21777" end="21797" title="The Life Ahead" label="La vita davanti a sé"/>
<link wikidata="Q43252" start="21814" end="21826" title="Sophia Loren" label="Sophia Loren"/>
<link wikidata="Q239886" start="21869" end="21883" title="Licia Albanese" label="Licia Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q463130" start="21886" end="21903" title="Giovanni Alemanno" label="Giovanni Alemanno"/>
<link wikidata="Q370876" start="21906" end="21922" title="Emanuele Arciuli" label="Emanuele Arciuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q928438" start="21925" end="21951" title="Argyrus (catepan of Italy)" label="Argyrus (catepan of Italy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q944946" start="21954" end="21972" title="Francesco Attolico" label="Francesco Attolico"/>
<link wikidata="Q434479" start="21975" end="21985" title="Lino Banfi" label="Lino Banfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610470" start="21988" end="21999" title="Alessio Bax" label="Alessio Bax"/>
<link wikidata="Q155971" start="22002" end="22020" title="Pope Benedict XIII" label="Pope Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563351" start="22023" end="22034" title="Gioia Bruno" label="Gioia Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246500" start="22037" end="22056" title="Gianrico Carofiglio" label="Gianrico Carofiglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q180993" start="22059" end="22074" title="Antonio Cassano" label="Antonio Cassano"/>
<link wikidata="Q464757" start="22077" end="22095" title="Riccardo Cucciolla" label="Riccardo Cucciolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715131" start="22098" end="22120" title="Niccolò dell&amp;#x27;Arca" label="Niccolò dell&amp;#x27;Arca"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440960" start="22123" end="22135" title="Chiara Fumai" label="Chiara Fumai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3767941" start="22138" end="22159" title="Giovanni Pietro Gallo" label="Giovanni Pietro Gallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056330" start="22162" end="22177" title="Franco Giordano" label="Franco Giordano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835599" start="22180" end="22195" title="Alfredo Giovine" label="Alfredo Giovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804715" start="22198" end="22208" title="Ivan Iusco" label="Ivan Iusco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355714" start="22211" end="22226" title="Gaetano Latilla" label="Gaetano Latilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452223" start="22229" end="22243" title="Guido Marzulli" label="Guido Marzulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080779" start="22246" end="22263" title="Antonio Matarrese" label="Antonio Matarrese"/>
<link wikidata="Q19365890" start="22266" end="22276" title="Ermal Meta" label="Ermal Meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q117184901" start="22279" end="22294" title="Marco Misciagna" label="Marco Misciagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q201392" start="22297" end="22313" title="Domenico Modugno" label="Domenico Modugno"/>
<link wikidata="Q171834" start="22316" end="22325" title="Aldo Moro" label="Aldo Moro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907903" start="22328" end="22342" title="Pomponio Nenna" label="Pomponio Nenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293529" start="22345" end="22360" title="Mario Nuzzolese" label="Mario Nuzzolese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281152" start="22363" end="22374" title="Joe Orlando" label="Joe Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q238061" start="22377" end="22385" title="Anna Oxa" label="Anna Oxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093530" start="22388" end="22400" title="Pino Pascali" label="Pino Pascali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454956" start="22403" end="22415" title="Nico Perrone" label="Nico Perrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q310687" start="22418" end="22434" title="Niccolò Piccinni" label="Niccolò Piccinni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379548" start="22437" end="22448" title="Victor Posa" label="Victor Posa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56226005" start="22451" end="22468" title="Lazarus Racanelli" label="Lazarus Racanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081060" start="22471" end="22490" title="Francesco Racanelli" label="Francesco Racanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479530" start="22493" end="22510" title="Francesco Riefolo" label="Francesco Riefolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939598" start="22513" end="22524" title="Rocco Rodio" label="Rocco Rodio"/>
<link wikidata="Q697816" start="22527" end="22540" title="Sergio Rubini" label="Sergio Rubini"/>
<link wikidata="Q730889" start="22543" end="22560" title="Gaetano Salvemini" label="Gaetano Salvemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q229434" start="22563" end="22574" title="Bona Sforza" label="Bona Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065510" start="22577" end="22588" title="Cesare Stea" label="Cesare Stea"/>
<link wikidata="Q124635796" start="22591" end="22605" title="Catia Summaria" label="Catia Summaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q117834422" start="22608" end="22622" title="Gemma Taccogna" label="Gemma Taccogna"/>
<link wikidata="Q171626" start="22625" end="22638" title="Pope Urban VI" label="Pope Urban VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q507595" start="22641" end="22654" title="Nichi Vendola" label="Nichi Vendola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666978" start="22657" end="22670" title="Checco Zalone" label="Checco Zalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3716193" start="22673" end="22687" title="Dulcita Lieggi" label="Dulcita Lieggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q61791970" start="22690" end="22703" title="Fabio Delvino" label="Fabio Delvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="22744" end="22751" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q131127" start="22760" end="22770" title="Banja Luka" label="Banja Luka"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="22796" end="22802" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q205832" start="22813" end="22818" title="Corfu (city)" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83285" start="22828" end="22834" title="Durrës" label="Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="22845" end="22854" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592" start="22863" end="22871" title="Kostroma" label="Kostroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q52607" start="22881" end="22894" title="Mar del Plata" label="Mar del Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q51935" start="22907" end="22929" title="Monte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Monte Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8826" start="22938" end="22955" title="Palma de Mallorca" label="Palma de Mallorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q133123" start="22964" end="22970" title="Patras" label="Patras"/>
<link wikidata="Q51951" start="22980" end="23000" title="San Giovanni Rotondo" label="San Giovanni Rotondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105048" start="23009" end="23015" title="Słupsk" label="Słupsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="23025" end="23033" title="Szczecin" label="Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179833" start="23043" end="23050" title="Sumgait" label="Sumgait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672240" start="23083" end="23099" title="Youmanity" label="Accademia Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115276" start="23102" end="23110" title="Bar, Montenegro" label="Antivari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378175" start="23147" end="23157" title="Bari Light" label="Bari Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q83285" start="23203" end="23209" title="Durrës" label="Durrës"/>
<link wikidata="Q16123" start="23212" end="23228" title="Province of Bari" label="Province of Bari"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44785" wikidata="Q36348" url="?curid=44785" title="Dream">
<text>A dream is a succession of images, ideas, emotions, and sensations that usually occur involuntarily in the mind during certain stages of sleep. Humans spend about two hours dreaming per night, and each dream lasts around 5–20 minutes, although the dreamer may perceive the dream as being much longer.

The content and function of dreams have been topics of scientific, philosophical and religious interest throughout recorded history. Dream interpretation, practiced by the Babylonians in the third millennium BCE and even earlier by the ancient Sumerians, figures prominently in religious texts in several traditions, and has played a lead role in psychotherapy. The scientific study of dreams is called oneirology. Most modern dream study focuses on the neurophysiology of dreams and on proposing and testing hypotheses regarding dream function. It is not known where in the brain dreams originate, if there is a single origin for dreams or if multiple regions of the brain are involved, or what the purpose of dreaming is for the body or mind.

The human dream experience and what to make of it has undergone sizable shifts over the course of history. Long ago, according to writings from Mesopotamia and Ancient Egypt, dreams dictated post-dream behaviors to an extent that was sharply reduced in later millennia. These ancient writings about dreams highlight visitation dreams, where a dream figure, usually a deity or a prominent forebear, commands the dreamer to take specific actions, and which may predict future events. Framing the dream experience varies across cultures as well as through time.

Dreaming and sleep are intertwined. Dreams occur mainly in the rapid-eye movement (REM) stage of sleep—when brain activity is high and resembles that of being awake. Because REM sleep is detectable in many species, and because research suggests that all mammals experience REM, linking dreams to REM sleep has led to conjectures that animals dream. However, humans dream during non-REM sleep, also, and not all REM awakenings elicit dream reports. To be studied, a dream must first be reduced to a verbal report, which is an account of the subject&#x27;s memory of the dream, not the subject&#x27;s dream experience itself. So, dreaming by non-humans is currently unprovable, as is dreaming by human fetuses and pre-verbal infants.

== Subjective experience and content ==

Preserved writings from early Mediterranean civilizations indicate a relatively abrupt change in subjective dream experience between Bronze Age antiquity and the beginnings of the classical era.

In visitation dreams reported in ancient writings, dreamers were largely passive in their dreams, and visual content served primarily to frame authoritative auditory messaging. Gudea, the king of the Sumerian city-state of Lagash (reigned 2144–2124 BCE), rebuilt the temple of Ningirsu as the result of a dream in which he was told to do so. After antiquity, the passive hearing of visitation dreams essentially gave way to visualized narratives in which the dreamer becomes a character who actively participates.

From the 1940s to 1985, Calvin S. Hall collected more than 50,000 dream reports at Western Reserve University. In 1966, Hall and Robert Van de Castle published &quot;The Content Analysis of Dreams&quot;, outlining a coding system to study 1,000 dream reports from college students. Results indicated that participants from varying parts of the world demonstrated similarity in their dream content. The only residue of antiquity&#x27;s authoritative dream figure in the Hall and Van de Castle listing of dream characters is the inclusion of God in the category of prominent persons. Hall&#x27;s complete dream reports were made publicly available in the mid-1990s by his protégé William Domhoff. More recent studies of dream reports, while providing more detail, continue to cite the Hall study favorably.

In the Hall study, the most common emotion experienced in dreams was anxiety. Other emotions included abandonment, anger, fear, joy, and happiness. Negative emotions were much more common than positive ones. The Hall data analysis showed that sexual dreams occur no more than 10% of the time and are more prevalent in young to mid-teens. Another study showed that 8% of both men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s dreams have sexual content. In some cases, sexual dreams may result in orgasms or nocturnal emissions. These are colloquially known as &quot;wet dreams&quot;.

The visual nature of dreams is generally highly phantasmagoric; that is, different locations and objects continuously blend into each other. The visuals (including locations, people, and objects) are generally reflective of a person&#x27;s memories and experiences, but conversation can take on highly exaggerated and bizarre forms. Some dreams may even tell elaborate stories wherein the dreamer enters entirely new, complex worlds and awakes with ideas, thoughts, and feelings never experienced before the dream.

People who are blind from birth do not have visual dreams. Their dream contents are related to other senses, such as hearing, touch, smell, and taste, whichever are present since birth.

=== Effects of regional or global catastrophes === 
The COVID-19 pandemic also influenced the content of people&#x27;s dreams, according to a scientific study of over 15,000 dream reports by Deirdre Barrett. This analysis revealed that themes involving fear, illness, and death were two to four times more prevalent in dreams following the onset of the pandemic than they were before.

== Neurophysiology ==

Dream study is popular with scientists exploring the mind–brain problem. Some &quot;propose to reduce aspects of dream phenomenology to neurobiology.&quot; But current science cannot specify dream physiology in detail. Protocols in most nations restrict human brain research to non-invasive procedures. In the United States, invasive brain procedures with a human subject are allowed only when these are deemed necessary in surgical treatment to address medical needs of the same human subject. Non-invasive measures of brain activity like electroencephalogram (EEG) voltage averaging or cerebral blood flow cannot identify small but influential neuronal populations. Also, fMRI signals are too slow to explain how brains compute in real time.

Scientists researching some brain functions can work around current restrictions by examining animal subjects. As stated by the Society for Neuroscience, &quot;Because no adequate alternatives exist, much of this research must &quot;[sic]&quot; be done on animal subjects.&quot; However, since animal dreaming can be only inferred, not confirmed, animal studies yield no hard facts to illuminate the neurophysiology of dreams. Examining human subjects with brain lesions can provide clues, but the lesion method cannot discriminate between the effects of destruction and disconnection and cannot target specific neuronal groups in heterogeneous regions like the brain stem.

== Generation ==
Denied precision tools and obliged to depend on imaging, much dream research has succumbed to the law of the instrument. Studies detect an increase of blood flow in a specific brain region and then credit that region with a role in generating dreams. But pooling study results has led to the newer conclusion that dreaming involves large numbers of regions and pathways, which likely are different for different dream events.

Image creation in the brain involves significant neural activity downstream from eye intake, and it is theorized that &quot;the visual imagery of dreams is produced by activation during sleep of the same structures that generate complex visual imagery in waking perception.&quot;

Dreams present a running narrative rather than exclusively visual imagery. Following their work with split-brain subjects, Gazzaniga and LeDoux postulated, without attempting to specify the neural mechanisms, a &quot;left-brain interpreter&quot; that seeks to create a plausible narrative from whatever electro-chemical signals reach the brain&#x27;s left hemisphere. Sleep research has determined that some brain regions fully active during waking are, during REM sleep, activated only in a partial or fragmentary way. Drawing on this knowledge, textbook author James W. Kalat explains, &quot;[A] dream represents the brain&#x27;s effort to make sense of sparse and distorted information... The cortex combines this haphazard input with whatever other activity was already occurring and does its best to synthesize a story that makes sense of the information.&quot; Neuroscientist Indre Viskontas is even more blunt, calling often bizarre dream content &quot;just the result of your interpreter trying to create a story out of random neural signaling.&quot;

== Theories on function ==

For many humans across multiple eras and cultures, dreams are believed to have functioned as revealers of truths sourced during sleep from gods or other external entities. Ancient Egyptians believed that dreams were the best way to receive divine revelation, and thus they would induce (or &quot;incubate&quot;) dreams. They went to sanctuaries and slept on special &quot;dream beds&quot; in hope of receiving advice, comfort, or healing from the gods. From a Darwinian perspective dreams would have to fulfill some kind of biological requirement, provide some benefit for natural selection to take place, or at least have no negative impact on fitness. Robert (1886), a physician from Hamburg, was the first who suggested that dreams are a need and that they have the function to erase (a) sensory impressions that were not fully worked up, and (b) ideas that were not fully developed during the day. In dreams, incomplete material is either removed (suppressed) or deepened and included into memory. Freud, whose dream studies focused on interpreting dreams, not explaining how or why humans dream, disputed Robert&#x27;s hypothesis and proposed that dreams preserve sleep by representing as fulfilled those wishes that otherwise would awaken the dreamer. Freud wrote that dreams &quot;serve the purpose of prolonging sleep instead of waking up. &quot;Dreams are the&quot; GUARDIANS &quot;of sleep and not its disturbers.&quot;&quot;

A turning point in theorizing about dream function came in 1953, when &quot;Science&quot; published the Aserinsky and Kleitman paper establishing REM sleep as a distinct phase of sleep and linking dreams to REM sleep. Until and even after publication of the Solms 2000 paper that certified the separability of REM sleep and dream phenomena, many studies purporting to uncover the function of dreams have in fact been studying not dreams but measurable REM sleep.

Theories of dream function since the identification of REM sleep include:

Hobson&#x27;s and McCarley&#x27;s 1977 activation-synthesis hypothesis, which proposed &quot;a functional role for dreaming sleep in promoting some aspect of the learning process...&quot; In 2010 a Harvard study was published showing experimental evidence that dreams were correlated with improved learning.

Crick&#x27;s and Mitchison&#x27;s 1983 &quot;reverse learning&quot; theory, which states that dreams are like the cleaning-up operations of computers when they are offline, removing (suppressing) parasitic nodes and other &quot;junk&quot; from the mind during sleep.

Hartmann&#x27;s 1995 proposal that dreams serve a &quot;quasi-therapeutic&quot; function, enabling the dreamer to process trauma in a safe place.

Revonsuo&#x27;s 2000 threat simulation hypothesis, whose premise is that during much of human evolution, physical and interpersonal threats were serious, giving reproductive advantage to those who survived them. Dreaming aided survival by replicating these threats and providing the dreamer with practice in dealing with them. In 2015, Revonsuo proposed social simulation theory, which describes dreams as a simulation for training social skills and bonds.

Eagleman&#x27;s and Vaughn&#x27;s 2021 defensive activation theory, which says that, given the brain&#x27;s neuroplasticity, dreams evolved as a visual hallucinatory activity during sleep&#x27;s extended periods of darkness, busying the occipital lobe and thereby protecting it from possible appropriation by other, non-vision, sense operations.

Erik Hoel proposes, based on artificial neural networks, that dreams prevent overfitting to past experiences; that is, they enable the dreamer to learn from novel situations.

== Religious and other cultural contexts ==
Dreams figure prominently in major world religions. The dream experience for early humans, according to one interpretation, gave rise to the notion of a human &quot;soul&quot;, a central element in much religious thought. J. W. Dunne wrote: But there can be no reasonable doubt that the idea of a soul must have first arisen in the mind of primitive man as a result of observation of his dreams. Ignorant as he was, he could have come to no other conclusion but that, in dreams, he left his sleeping body in one universe and went wandering off into another. It is considered that, but for that savage, the idea of such a thing as a &#x27;soul&#x27; would never have even occurred to mankind...

=== Hindu ===
In the Mandukya Upanishad, part of the Veda scriptures of Indian Hinduism, a dream is one of three states that the soul experiences during its lifetime, the other two states being the waking state and the sleep state. The earliest Upanishads, written before 300 BCE, emphasize two meanings of dreams. The first says that dreams are merely expressions of inner desires. The second is the belief of the soul leaving the body and being guided until awakened.

=== Abrahamic ===
In Judaism, dreams are considered part of the experience of the world that can be interpreted and from which lessons can be garnered. It is discussed in the Talmud, Tractate Berachot 55–60.

The ancient Hebrews connected their dreams heavily with their religion, though the Hebrews were monotheistic and believed that dreams were the voice of one God alone. Hebrews also differentiated between good dreams (from God) and bad dreams (from evil spirits). The Hebrews, like many other ancient cultures, incubated dreams in order to receive a divine revelation. For example, the Hebrew prophet Samuel would &quot;lie down and sleep in the temple at Shiloh before the Ark and receive the word of the Lord&quot;, and Joseph interpreted a Pharaoh&#x27;s dream of seven lean cows swallowing seven fat cows as meaning the subsequent seven years would be bountiful, followed by seven years of famine. Most of the dreams in the Bible are in the Book of Genesis.

Christians mostly shared the beliefs of the Hebrews and thought that dreams were of a supernatural character because the Old Testament includes frequent stories of dreams with divine inspiration. The most famous of these dream stories was Jacob&#x27;s dream of a ladder that stretches from Earth to Heaven. Many Christians preach that God can speak to people through their dreams. The famous glossary, the Somniale Danielis, written in the name of Daniel, attempted to teach Christian populations to interpret their dreams.

Iain R. Edgar has researched the role of dreams in Islam. He has argued that dreams play an important role in the history of Islam and the lives of Muslims, since dream interpretation is the only way that Muslims can receive revelations from God since the death of the last prophet, Muhammad. According to Edgar, Islam classifies three types of dreams. Firstly, there is the true dream (al-ru’ya), then the false dream, which may come from the devil (shaytan), and finally, the meaningless everyday dream (hulm). This last dream could be brought forth by the dreamer&#x27;s ego or base appetite based on what they experienced in the real world. The true dream is often indicated by Islam&#x27;s hadith tradition. In one narration by Aisha, the wife of the Prophet, it is said that the Prophet&#x27;s dreams would come true like the ocean&#x27;s waves. Just as in its predecessors, the Quran also recounts the story of Joseph and his unique ability to interpret dreams.

In both Christianity and Islam dreams feature in conversion stories. According to ancient authors, Constantine the Great started his conversion to Christianity because he had a dream which prophesied that he would win the battle of the Milvian Bridge if he adopted the Chi-Rho as his battle standard.&quot;

=== Buddhist ===
In Buddhism, ideas about dreams are similar to the classical and folk traditions in South Asia. The same dream is sometimes experienced by multiple people, as in the case of the Buddha-to-be, before he is leaving his home. It is described in the &quot;Mahāvastu&quot; that several of the Buddha&#x27;s relatives had premonitory dreams preceding this. Some dreams are also seen to transcend time: the Buddha-to-be has certain dreams that are the same as those of previous Buddhas, the &quot;Lalitavistara&quot; states. In Buddhist literature, dreams often function as a &quot;signpost&quot; motif to mark certain stages in the life of the main character.

Buddhist views about dreams are expressed in the Pāli Commentaries and the Milinda Pañhā.

=== Other ===
In Chinese history, people wrote of two vital aspects of the soul of which one is freed from the body during slumber to journey in a dream realm, while the other remained in the body. This belief and dream interpretation had been questioned since early times, such as by the philosopher Wang Chong ().

The Babylonians and Assyrians divided dreams into &quot;good,&quot; which were sent by the gods, and &quot;bad,&quot; sent by demons. A surviving collection of dream omens entitled &quot;Iškar Zaqīqu&quot; records various dream scenarios as well as prognostications of what will happen to the person who experiences each dream, apparently based on previous cases. Some list different possible outcomes, based on occasions in which people experienced similar dreams with different results. The Greeks shared their beliefs with the Egyptians on how to interpret good and bad dreams, and the idea of incubating dreams. Morpheus, the Greek god of dreams, also sent warnings and prophecies to those who slept at shrines and temples. The earliest Greek beliefs about dreams were that their gods physically visited the dreamers, where they entered through a keyhole, exiting the same way after the divine message was given.

Antiphon wrote the first known Greek book on dreams in the 5th century BCE. In that century, other cultures influenced Greeks to develop the belief that souls left the sleeping body. The father of modern medicine, Hippocrates (), thought dreams could analyze illness and predict diseases. For instance, a dream of a dim star high in the night sky indicated problems in the head region, while low in the night sky indicated bowel issues. Galen (129–216 AD) believed the same thing. Greek philosopher Plato (427–347 BCE) wrote that people harbor secret, repressed desires, such as incest, murder, adultery, and conquest, which build up during the day and run rampant during the night in dreams. Plato&#x27;s student, Aristotle (384–322 BCE), believed dreams were caused by processing incomplete physiological activity during sleep, such as eyes trying to see while the sleeper&#x27;s eyelids were closed. Marcus Tullius Cicero, for his part, believed that all dreams are produced by thoughts and conversations a dreamer had during the preceding days. Cicero&#x27;s &quot;Somnium Scipionis&quot; described a lengthy dream vision, which in turn was commented on by Macrobius in his &quot;Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis&quot;.

Herodotus in his &quot;The Histories&quot;, writes &quot;The visions that occur to us in dreams are, more often than not, the things we have been concerned about during the day.&quot;

The Dreaming is a common term within the animist creation narrative of indigenous Australians for a personal, or group, creation and for what may be understood as the &quot;timeless time&quot; of formative creation and perpetual creating.

Some Indigenous American tribes and Mexican populations believe that dreams are a way of visiting and having contact with their ancestors. Some Native American tribes have used vision quests as a rite of passage, fasting and praying until an anticipated guiding dream was received, to be shared with the rest of the tribe upon their return.

== Interpretation ==


Beginning in the late 19th century, Austrian neurologist Sigmund Freud, founder of psychoanalysis, theorized that dreams reflect the dreamer&#x27;s unconscious mind and specifically that dream content is shaped by unconscious wish fulfillment. He argued that important unconscious desires often relate to early childhood memories and experiences. Carl Jung and others expanded on Freud&#x27;s idea that dream content reflects the dreamer&#x27;s unconscious desires.
Dream interpretation can be a result of subjective ideas and experiences. One study found that most people believe that &quot;their dreams reveal meaningful hidden truths&quot;. The researchers surveyed students in the United States, South Korea, and India, and found that 74% of Indians, 65% of South Koreans and 56% of Americans believed their dream content provided them with meaningful insight into their unconscious beliefs and desires. This Freudian view of dreaming was believed significantly more than theories of dreaming that attribute dream content to memory consolidation, problem-solving, or as a byproduct of unrelated brain activity. The same study found that people attribute more importance to dream content than to similar thought content that occurs while they are awake. Americans were more likely to report that they would intentionally miss their flight if they dreamt of their plane crashing than if they thought of their plane crashing the night before flying (while awake), and that they would be as likely to miss their flight if they dreamt of their plane crashing the night before their flight as if there was an actual plane crash on the route they intended to take. Participants in the study were more likely to perceive dreams to be meaningful when the content of dreams was in accordance with their beliefs and desires while awake. They were more likely to view a positive dream about a friend to be meaningful than a positive dream about someone they disliked, for example, and were more likely to view a negative dream about a person they disliked as meaningful than a negative dream about a person they liked.

According to surveys, it is common for people to feel their dreams are predicting subsequent life events. Psychologists have explained these experiences in terms of memory biases, namely a selective memory for accurate predictions and distorted memory so that dreams are retrospectively fitted onto life experiences. The multi-faceted nature of dreams makes it easy to find connections between dream content and real events. The term &quot;veridical dream&quot; has been used to indicate dreams that reveal or contain truths not yet known to the dreamer, whether future events or secrets.

In one experiment, subjects were asked to write down their dreams in a diary. This prevented the selective memory effect, and the dreams no longer seemed accurate about the future. Another experiment gave subjects a fake diary of a student with apparently precognitive dreams. This diary described events from the person&#x27;s life, as well as some predictive dreams and some non-predictive dreams. When subjects were asked to recall the dreams they had read, they remembered more of the successful predictions than unsuccessful ones.

== Images and literature ==

Graphic artists, writers and filmmakers all have found dreams to offer a rich vein for creative expression. In the West, artists&#x27; depictions of dreams in Renaissance and Baroque art often were related to Biblical narrative. Especially preferred by visual artists were the Jacob&#x27;s Ladder dream in Genesis and St. Joseph&#x27;s dreams in the Gospel according to Matthew.

Many later graphic artists have depicted dreams, including Japanese woodblock artist Hokusai (1760–1849) and Western European painters Rousseau (1844–1910), Picasso (1881–1973), and Dalí (1904–1989).

In literature, dream frames were frequently used in medieval allegory to justify the narrative; &quot;The Book of the Duchess&quot; and &quot;The Vision Concerning Piers Plowman&quot; are two such dream visions. Even before them, in antiquity, the same device had been used by Cicero and Lucian of Samosata.

Dreams have also featured in fantasy and speculative fiction since the 19th century. One of the best-known dream worlds is Wonderland from Lewis Carroll&#x27;s &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;, as well as Looking-Glass Land from its sequel, &quot;Through the Looking-Glass&quot;. Unlike many dream worlds, Carroll&#x27;s logic is like that of actual dreams, with transitions and flexible causality.

Other fictional dream worlds include the Dreamlands of H. P. Lovecraft&#x27;s &quot;Dream Cycle&quot; and &quot;The Neverending Story&quot;″s world of Fantastica, which includes places like the Desert of Lost Dreams, the Sea of Possibilities and the Swamps of Sadness. Dreamworlds, shared hallucinations and other alternate realities feature in a number of works by Philip K. Dick, such as &quot;The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch&quot; and &quot;Ubik&quot;. Similar themes were explored by Jorge Luis Borges, for instance in &quot;The Circular Ruins&quot;.

Modern popular culture often conceives of dreams, as did Freud, as expressions of the dreamer&#x27;s deepest fears and desires. In speculative fiction, the line between dreams and reality may be blurred even more in service to the story. Dreams may be psychically invaded or manipulated (&quot;Dreamscape&quot;, 1984; the &quot;Nightmare on Elm Street&quot; films, 1984–2010; &quot;Inception&quot;, 2010) or even come literally true (as in &quot;The Lathe of Heaven&quot;, 1971).

== Lucidity ==
Lucid dreaming is the conscious perception of one&#x27;s state while dreaming. In this state the dreamer may often have some degree of control over their own actions within the dream or even the characters and the environment of the dream. Dream control has been reported to improve with practiced deliberate lucid dreaming, but the ability to control aspects of the dream is not necessary for a dream to qualify as &quot;lucid&quot;—a lucid dream is any dream during which the dreamer knows they are dreaming. The occurrence of lucid dreaming has been scientifically verified.

&quot;Oneironaut&quot; is a term sometimes used for those who lucidly dream.

In 1975, psychologist Keith Hearne successfully recorded a communication from a dreamer experiencing a lucid dream. On April 12, 1975, after agreeing to move his eyes left and right upon becoming lucid, the subject and Hearne&#x27;s co-author on the resulting article, Alan Worsley, successfully carried out this task. Years later, psychophysiologist Stephen LaBerge conducted similar work including:
* Using eye signals to map the subjective sense of time in dreams.
* Comparing the electrical activity of the brain while singing awake and while dreaming.
* Studies comparing in-dream sex, arousal, and orgasm.
Communication between two dreamers has also been documented. The processes involved included EEG monitoring, ocular signaling, incorporation of reality in the form of red light stimuli and a coordinating website. The website tracked when both dreamers were dreaming and sent the stimulus to one of the dreamers where it was incorporated into the dream. This dreamer, upon becoming lucid, signaled with eye movements; this was detected by the website whereupon the stimulus was sent to the second dreamer, invoking incorporation into that dreamer&#x27;s dream.

== Recollection ==

The recollection of dreams is extremely unreliable, though it is a skill that can be trained. Dreams can usually be recalled if a person is awakened while dreaming. Women tend to have more frequent dream recall than men. Dreams that are difficult to recall may be characterized by relatively little affect, and factors such as salience, arousal, and interference play a role in dream recall. Often, a dream may be recalled upon viewing or hearing a random trigger or stimulus. The salience hypothesis proposes that dream content that is salient, that is, novel, intense, or unusual, is more easily remembered. There is considerable evidence that vivid, intense, or unusual dream content is more frequently recalled. A dream journal can be used to assist dream recall, for personal interest or psychotherapy purposes.

Adults report remembering around two dreams per week, on average. Unless a dream is particularly vivid and if one wakes during or immediately after it, the content of the dream is typically not remembered.

In line with the salience hypothesis, there is considerable evidence that people who have more vivid, intense or unusual dreams show better recall. There is evidence that continuity of consciousness is related to recall. Specifically, people who have vivid and unusual experiences during the day tend to have more memorable dream content and hence better dream recall. People who score high on measures of personality traits associated with creativity, imagination, and fantasy, such as openness to experience, daydreaming, fantasy proneness, absorption, and hypnotic susceptibility, tend to show more frequent dream recall. There is also evidence for continuity between the bizarre aspects of dreaming and waking experience. That is, people who report more bizarre experiences during the day, such as people high in schizotypy (psychosis proneness), have more frequent dream recall and also report more frequent nightmares.

=== Dream-recording machine ===
Recording or reconstructing dreams may one day assist with dream recall. Using the permitted non-invasive technologies, functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electromyography (EMG), researchers have been able to identify basic dream imagery, dream speech activity and dream motor behavior (such as walking and hand movements).

== Miscellany ==
=== Illusion of reality ===
Some philosophers have proposed that what we think of as the &quot;real world&quot; could be or is an illusion (an idea known as the skeptical hypothesis about ontology). The first recorded mention of the idea was in the 4th century BCE by Zhuangzi, and in Eastern philosophy, the problem has been named the &quot;Zhuangzi Paradox.&quot;
He who dreams of drinking wine may weep when morning comes; he who dreams of weeping may in the morning go off to hunt. While he is dreaming he does not know it is a dream, and in his dream he may even try to interpret a dream. Only after he wakes does he know it was a dream. And someday there will be a great awakening when we know that this is all a great dream. Yet the stupid believe they are awake, busily and brightly assuming they understand things, calling this man ruler, that one herdsman—how dense! Confucius and you are both dreaming! And when I say you are dreaming, I am dreaming, too. Words like these will be labeled the Supreme Swindle. Yet, after ten thousand generations, a great sage may appear who will know their meaning, and it will still be as though he appeared with astonishing speed.

The idea also is discussed in Hindu and Buddhist writings. It was formally introduced to Western philosophy by Descartes in the 17th century in his &quot;Meditations on First Philosophy&quot;.

=== Absent-minded transgression ===
Dreams of absent-minded transgression (DAMT) are dreams wherein the dreamer absent-mindedly performs an action that he or she has been trying to stop (one classic example is of a quitting smoker having dreams of lighting a cigarette). Subjects who have had DAMT have reported waking with intense feelings of guilt. One study found a positive association between having these dreams and successfully stopping the behavior.

===Non-REM dreams===
Hypnogogic and hypnopompic dreams, dreamlike states shortly after falling asleep and shortly before awakening, and dreams during stage 2 of NREM-sleep, also occur, but are shorter than REM-dreams.

=== Daydreams ===

A daydream is a visionary fantasy, especially one of happy, pleasant thoughts, hopes or ambitions, imagined as coming to pass, and experienced while awake. There are many different types of daydreams, and there is no consistent definition amongst psychologists. The general public also uses the term for a broad variety of experiences. Research by Harvard psychologist Deirdre Barrett has found that people who experience vivid dreamlike mental images reserve the word for these, whereas many other people refer to milder imagery, realistic future planning, review of memories or just &quot;spacing out&quot;—i.e. one&#x27;s mind going relatively blank—when they talk about &quot;daydreaming&quot;.

While daydreaming has long been derided as a lazy, non-productive pastime, it is now commonly acknowledged that daydreaming can be constructive in some contexts. There are numerous examples of people in creative or artistic careers, such as composers, novelists and filmmakers, developing new ideas through daydreaming. Similarly, research scientists, mathematicians and physicists have developed new ideas by daydreaming about their subject areas.

=== Hallucination ===
A hallucination, in the broadest sense of the word, is a perception in the absence of a stimulus. In a stricter sense, hallucinations are perceptions in a conscious and awake state, in the absence of external stimuli, and have qualities of real perception, in that they are vivid, substantial, and located in external objective space. The latter definition distinguishes hallucinations from the related phenomena of dreaming, which does not involve wakefulness.

=== Nightmare ===

A nightmare is an unpleasant dream that can cause a strong negative emotional response from the mind, typically fear or horror, but also despair, anxiety and great sadness. The dream may contain situations of danger, discomfort, psychological or physical terror. Sufferers usually awaken in a state of distress and may be unable to return to sleep for a prolonged period of time.

=== Night terror ===
A night terror, also known as a sleep terror or &quot;pavor nocturnus&quot;, is a parasomnia disorder that predominantly affects children, causing feelings of terror or dread. Night terrors should not be confused with nightmares, which are bad dreams that cause the feeling of horror or fear.

=== Déjà vu ===
One theory of déjà vu attributes the feeling of having previously seen or experienced something to having dreamed about a similar situation or place, and forgetting about it until one seems to be mysteriously reminded of the situation or the place while awake.

=== Melatonin ===
Melatonin is a natural hormone secreted by the brain&#x27;s pineal gland, inducing nocturnal behaviors in animals and sleep in humans during nighttime. Chemically isolated in 1958, melatonin has been marketed as a sleep aid since the 1990s and is currently sold in the United States as an over-the-counter product requiring no prescription. Anecdotal reports and formal research studies over the past few decades have established a link between melatonin supplementation and more vivid dreams.

== See also ==

* Dream dictionary
* Dream incubation
* Dream of Macsen Wledig
* Dream pop
* Dream sequence
* Dream yoga
* Dreamcatcher
* Dreams in analytical psychology
* Dreamwork
* False awakening
* &quot;Hatsuyume&quot;
* Incubus
* Lilith, a Sumerian dream demoness
* List of dream diaries
* Mare (folklore)
* Mabinogion
* Recurring dream
* Sleep in animals
* Sleep paralysis
* Spirit spouse
* Succubus
* Works based on dreams

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* &quot;Dreaming&quot; – journal published by the American Psychological Association
* 
* Harris, William V. (2009) &quot;Dreams and Еxperience in Classical Antiquity&quot;. Cambridge, MA &amp; London: Harvard University Press. 

== External links ==
* 
* Archive for Research in Archetypal Symbolism website
* The International Association for the Study of Dreams
* alt.dreams A long-running USENET forum wherein readers post and analyze dreams
* LSDBase – online sleep research database documenting physiological effects of dreams through biofeedback</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36348" start="2" end="7" title="Dream" label="dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q478798" start="27" end="32" title="image" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q131841" start="35" end="39" title="idea" label="idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="42" end="50" title="emotions" label="emotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="56" end="66" title="sensation (psychology)" label="sensations"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="107" end="111" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="137" end="142" title="sleep" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="417" end="433" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q867634" start="435" end="455" title="Dream interpretation" label="Dream interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="474" end="483" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="510" end="513" title="BCE" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="546" end="551" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461938" start="705" end="715" title="oneirology" label="oneirology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="1192" end="1203" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1208" end="1221" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q211402" start="1671" end="1710" title="Rapid eye movement sleep" label="rapid-eye movement (REM) stage of sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="1716" end="1730" title="brain activity" label="brain activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2515" end="2525" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="2562" end="2575" title="classical antiquity" label="classical era"/>
<link wikidata="Q310336" start="2755" end="2760" title="Gudea" label="Gudea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207330" start="2801" end="2807" title="Lagash" label="Lagash"/>
<link wikidata="Q726282" start="2855" end="2863" title="Ningirsu" label="Ningirsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027727" start="3117" end="3131" title="Calvin S. Hall" label="Calvin S. Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="3176" end="3202" title="Western Reserve University" label="Western Reserve University"/>
<link wikidata="Q326996" start="3771" end="3786" title="William Domhoff" label="William Domhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="3968" end="3975" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001341" start="4001" end="4012" title="Abandonment (emotional)" label="abandonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q79871" start="4014" end="4019" title="anger" label="anger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44619" start="4021" end="4025" title="fear" label="fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q935526" start="4027" end="4030" title="joy" label="joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8" start="4036" end="4045" title="happiness" label="happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987190" start="4047" end="4063" title="Negative emotion" label="Negative emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887" start="4373" end="4379" title="orgasm" label="orgasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102452" start="4384" end="4402" title="nocturnal emission" label="nocturnal emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q160289" start="5095" end="5102" title="hearing" label="hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q328835" start="5104" end="5109" title="Somatosensory system" label="touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="5111" end="5116" title="Olfaction" label="smell"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="5122" end="5127" title="taste" label="taste"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5221" end="5238" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252549" start="5356" end="5371" title="Deirdre Barrett" label="Deirdre Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="5627" end="5645" title="mind–body problem" label="mind–brain problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="6114" end="6134" title="electroencephalogram" label="electroencephalogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="6162" end="6181" title="functional magnetic resonance imaging" label="cerebral blood flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q903809" start="6248" end="6252" title="functional magnetic resonance imaging" label="fMRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127934" start="6447" end="6471" title="Society for Neuroscience" label="Society for Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q182490" start="7109" end="7130" title="law of the instrument" label="law of the instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q551840" start="7820" end="7831" title="split-brain" label="split-brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q738789" start="7842" end="7851" title="Michael Gazzaniga" label="Gazzaniga"/>
<link wikidata="Q707263" start="7856" end="7862" title="Joseph E. LeDoux" label="LeDoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516942" start="7936" end="7958" title="left-brain interpreter" label="left-brain interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015250" start="8601" end="8616" title="Indre Viskontas" label="Indre Viskontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="9809" end="9814" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="10314" end="10333" title="Science (journal)" label="&amp;quot;Science&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q979704" start="10348" end="10357" title="Eugene Aserinsky" label="Aserinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q967413" start="10362" end="10370" title="Nathaniel Kleitman" label="Kleitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q211402" start="10390" end="10399" title="Rapid eye movement sleep" label="REM sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q943092" start="10783" end="10796" title="Allan Hobson" label="Hobson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347468" start="10801" end="10816" title="Robert McCarley" label="McCarley&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677461" start="10822" end="10853" title="activation-synthesis hypothesis" label="activation-synthesis hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="11092" end="11104" title="Francis Crick" label="Crick&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149423" start="11137" end="11153" title="reverse learning" label="reverse learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q33026735" start="11360" end="11375" title="Ernest Hartmann" label="Hartmann&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777427" start="11507" end="11522" title="Antti Revonsuo" label="Revonsuo&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q999577" start="11965" end="11980" title="David Eagleman" label="Eagleman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096365" start="11985" end="11998" title="Don Vaughn" label="Vaughn&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q849491" start="12073" end="12088" title="neuroplasticity" label="neuroplasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q104560531" start="12312" end="12321" title="Erik Hoel" label="Erik Hoel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12697" end="12701" title="Soul#Religious views" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632506" start="12754" end="12765" title="J. W. Dunne" label="J. W. Dunne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108830" start="13248" end="13266" title="Mandukya Upanishad" label="Mandukya Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="13280" end="13284" title="Veda" label="Veda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="13299" end="13314" title="Hinduism" label="Indian Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="13472" end="13482" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishads"/>
<link wikidata="Q570868" start="13919" end="13926" title="Hebrews" label="Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="14003" end="14015" title="monotheistic" label="monotheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577515" start="14306" end="14312" title="Samuel" label="Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q985542" start="14361" end="14367" title="Shiloh (biblical city)" label="Shiloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q145746" start="14427" end="14433" title="Joseph (Genesis)" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="14633" end="14638" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="14650" end="14665" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="14668" end="14678" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="14789" end="14802" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q607715" start="14907" end="14937" title="Jacob&amp;#x27;s ladder" label="Jacob&amp;#x27;s dream of a ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="14967" end="14973" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q12902138" start="15074" end="15091" title="Somniale Danielis" label="Somniale Danielis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171724" start="15116" end="15122" title="Daniel (biblical figure)" label="Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980600" start="15193" end="15206" title="Iain R. Edgar" label="Iain R. Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="15244" end="15249" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="15476" end="15484" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959257" start="15644" end="15651" title="shaytan" label="shaytan"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="15888" end="15894" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730963" start="15926" end="15931" title="Aisha" label="Aisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="16078" end="16083" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q339321" start="16385" end="16413" title="battle of the Milvian Bridge" label="battle of the Milvian Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16420" end="16462" title="Constantine the Great#Constantine adopts the Greek letters Chi Rho for Christ&amp;#x27;s initials" label="adopted the Chi-Rho as his battle standard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16666" end="16678" title="bodhisattva#Theravada Buddhism" label="Buddha-to-be"/>
<link wikidata="Q73413583" start="16693" end="16709" title="great Renunciation" label="leaving his home"/>
<link wikidata="Q4285610" start="16740" end="16749" title="Mahavastu" label="Mahāvastu"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="16950" end="16966" title="List of the named Buddhas" label="previous Buddhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381826" start="16978" end="16991" title="Lalitavistara" label="Lalitavistara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986204" start="17192" end="17209" title="atthakatha" label="Pāli Commentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q497089" start="17218" end="17231" title="Milinda Panha" label="Milinda Pañhā"/>
<link wikidata="Q319329" start="17535" end="17545" title="Wang Chong" label="Wang Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103498" start="17738" end="17750" title="Iškar Zaqīqu" label="Iškar Zaqīqu"/>
<link wikidata="Q592442" start="17800" end="17816" title="Prognosis" label="prognostications"/>
<link wikidata="Q194012" start="18167" end="18175" title="Morpheus" label="Morpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q335560" start="18469" end="18477" title="Antiphon (orator)" label="Antiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="18683" end="18694" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="18906" end="18911" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="18968" end="18973" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="19184" end="19193" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="19262" end="19275" title="physiological" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="19372" end="19393" title="Marcus Tullius Cicero" label="Marcus Tullius Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242501" start="19538" end="19555" title="Somnium Scipionis" label="Somnium Scipionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q313934" start="19630" end="19639" title="Macrobius" label="Macrobius"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="19694" end="19703" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="19717" end="19730" title="Histories (Herodotus)" label="The Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q155881" start="19879" end="19891" title="The Dreaming" label="The Dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="19920" end="19927" title="animist" label="animist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="19950" end="19972" title="indigenous Australians" label="indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q215304" start="19999" end="20007" title="Creation myth" label="creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="20124" end="20143" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous American"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="20155" end="20162" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q402152" start="20247" end="20255" title="ancestor" label="ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="20263" end="20278" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528354" start="20296" end="20308" title="vision quest" label="vision quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="20541" end="20554" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="20567" end="20581" title="psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="20632" end="20648" title="unconscious mind" label="unconscious mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="20831" end="20840" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607828" start="22761" end="22774" title="List of memory biases" label="memory biases"/>
<link wikidata="Q607715" start="24029" end="24048" title="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ladder" label="Jacob&amp;#x27;s Ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q128710" start="24070" end="24094" title="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s dreams" label="St. Joseph&amp;#x27;s dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="24102" end="24129" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Gospel according to Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192525" start="24200" end="24209" title="Woodblock printing in Japan" label="woodblock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717022" start="24217" end="24224" title="The Dream of the Fisherman&amp;#x27;s Wife" label="Hokusai"/>
<link wikidata="Q548141" start="24267" end="24275" title="The Dream (Rousseau painting)" label="Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810165" start="24289" end="24296" title="Le Rêve (Picasso)" label="Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q172354" start="24314" end="24318" title="Dream Caused by the Flight of a Bee Around a Pomegranate a Second Before Awakening" label="Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090634" start="24435" end="24458" title="The Book of the Duchess" label="The Book of the Duchess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757630" start="24497" end="24510" title="Piers Plowman" label="Piers Plowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744605" start="24530" end="24542" title="dream vision" label="dream vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="24610" end="24616" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="24621" end="24639" title="Lucian of Samosata" label="Lucian of Samosata"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="24671" end="24678" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326077" start="24683" end="24702" title="speculative fiction" label="speculative fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402263" start="24765" end="24775" title="Wonderland (fictional country)" label="Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="24781" end="24794" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="24808" end="24845" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675253" start="24864" end="24882" title="Looking-Glass Land" label="Looking-Glass Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q220331" start="24906" end="24931" title="Through the Looking-Glass" label="Through the Looking-Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271327" start="25100" end="25110" title="Dreamlands" label="Dreamlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="25114" end="25129" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271327" start="25143" end="25154" title="Dream Cycle" label="Dream Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q463108" start="25171" end="25192" title="The Neverending Story" label="The Neverending Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="25425" end="25439" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193211" start="25455" end="25492" title="The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch" label="The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch"/>
<link wikidata="Q617357" start="25509" end="25513" title="Ubik" label="Ubik"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="25553" end="25570" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135787" start="25594" end="25612" title="The Circular Ruins" label="The Circular Ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="25628" end="25643" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256261" start="25915" end="25925" title="Dreamscape (1984 film)" label="Dreamscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q617871" start="25949" end="25972" title="A Nightmare on Elm Street (franchise)" label="Nightmare on Elm Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q25188" start="26003" end="26012" title="Inception" label="Inception"/>
<link wikidata="Q132062" start="26067" end="26086" title="The Lathe of Heaven" label="The Lathe of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360060" start="26702" end="26712" title="Oneironautics" label="Oneironaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758346" start="27125" end="27140" title="Stephen LaBerge" label="Stephen LaBerge"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="27479" end="27482" title="Electroencephalography" label="EEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q159904" start="28266" end="28272" title="affect (psychology)" label="affect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469792" start="28294" end="28302" title="salience (neuroscience)" label="salience"/>
<link wikidata="Q379784" start="28304" end="28311" title="arousal" label="arousal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105875" start="28448" end="28467" title="Graded Salience Hypothesis" label="salience hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q336468" start="28685" end="28698" title="dream journal" label="dream journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="28760" end="28773" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015673" start="29479" end="29501" title="openness to experience" label="openness to experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028924" start="29503" end="29511" title="daydream" label="daydream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895359" start="29516" end="29533" title="fantasy prone personality" label="fantasy proneness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669895" start="29535" end="29545" title="absorption (psychology)" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959072" start="29551" end="29574" title="hypnotic susceptibility" label="hypnotic susceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099410" start="29809" end="29819" title="schizotypy" label="schizotypy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192692" start="29905" end="29914" title="nightmare" label="nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q507369" start="30119" end="30135" title="electromyography" label="electromyography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217193" start="30203" end="30215" title="dream speech" label="dream speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="30467" end="30487" title="skeptical hypothesis" label="skeptical hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="30494" end="30502" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q47739" start="30574" end="30582" title="Zhuang Zhou" label="Zhuangzi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30648" end="30664" title="Zhuangzi (book)#&amp;quot;The Butterfly Dream&amp;quot;" label="Zhuangzi Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="31596" end="31605" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q605790" start="31639" end="31670" title="Meditations on First Philosophy" label="Meditations on First Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q628939" start="32023" end="32028" title="guilt (emotion)" label="guilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752878" start="32299" end="32309" title="Non-rapid eye movement sleep" label="NREM-sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356411" start="32402" end="32409" title="fantasy (psychology)" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252549" start="32745" end="32760" title="Deirdre Barrett" label="Deirdre Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q860959" start="32814" end="32826" title="mental image" label="mental image"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="33605" end="33615" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q859031" start="33636" end="33644" title="stimulus (physiology)" label="stimulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987190" start="34089" end="34105" title="negative emotion" label="negative emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44619" start="34142" end="34146" title="fear" label="fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543778" start="34150" end="34156" title="horror and terror" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="34167" end="34174" title="despair" label="despair"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="34176" end="34183" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q169251" start="34194" end="34201" title="sadness" label="sadness"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="34372" end="34377" title="sleep" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q559869" start="34514" end="34524" title="parasomnia" label="parasomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177190" start="34525" end="34533" title="sleep disorder" label="disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q192692" start="34650" end="34659" title="nightmare" label="nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q198654" start="35082" end="35094" title="pineal gland" label="pineal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="35236" end="35245" title="sleep aid" label="sleep aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306496" start="35535" end="35551" title="Dream dictionary" label="Dream dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306501" start="35554" end="35570" title="Dream incubation" label="Dream incubation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35573" end="35595" title="Welsh mythology#The Dream of Macsen Wledig" label="Dream of Macsen Wledig"/>
<link wikidata="Q592330" start="35598" end="35607" title="Dream pop" label="Dream pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q998854" start="35610" end="35624" title="Dream sequence" label="Dream sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417053" start="35627" end="35637" title="Dream yoga" label="Dream yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q257179" start="35640" end="35652" title="Dreamcatcher" label="Dreamcatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458472" start="35655" end="35686" title="Dreams in analytical psychology" label="Dreams in analytical psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538123" start="35689" end="35698" title="Dreamwork" label="Dreamwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364020" start="35701" end="35716" title="False awakening" label="False awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588971" start="35725" end="35734" title="Hatsuyume" label="Hatsuyume"/>
<link wikidata="Q378070" start="35743" end="35750" title="Incubus" label="Incubus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180627" start="35753" end="35759" title="Lilith" label="Lilith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11814173" start="35789" end="35810" title="List of dream diaries" label="List of dream diaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262457" start="35813" end="35828" title="Mare (folklore)" label="Mare (folklore)"/>
<link wikidata="Q815523" start="35831" end="35841" title="Mabinogion" label="Mabinogion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4366501" start="35844" end="35859" title="Recurring dream" label="Recurring dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318283" start="35862" end="35878" title="Sleep in animals" label="Sleep in animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q486851" start="35881" end="35896" title="Sleep paralysis" label="Sleep paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578054" start="35899" end="35912" title="Spirit spouse" label="Spirit spouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q715822" start="35915" end="35923" title="Succubus" label="Succubus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617277" start="35926" end="35947" title="Works based on dreams" label="Works based on dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306600" start="35996" end="36004" title="Dreaming (journal)" label="Dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="36038" end="36072" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44787" wikidata="Q2914964" url="?curid=44787" title="Up to">
<text>Two mathematical objects and are called &quot;equal up to an equivalence relation &quot;
* if and are related by , that is,
* if holds, that is,
* if the equivalence classes of and with respect to are equal.

This figure of speech is mostly used in connection with expressions derived from equality, such as uniqueness or count.
For example, &quot; is unique up to &quot; means that all objects under consideration are in the same equivalence class with respect to the relation .

Moreover, the equivalence relation is often designated rather implicitly by a generating condition or transformation.
For example, the statement &quot;an integer&#x27;s prime factorization is unique up to ordering&quot; is a concise way to say that any two lists of prime factors of a given integer are equivalent with respect to the relation that relates two lists if one can be obtained by reordering (permuting) the other. As another example, the statement &quot;the solution to an indefinite integral is , up to addition of a constant&quot; tacitly employs the equivalence relation between functions, defined by if the difference is a constant function, and means that the solution and the function are equal up to this .
In the picture, &quot;there are 4 partitions up to rotation&quot; means that the set has 4 equivalence classes with respect to defined by if can be obtained from by rotation; one representative from each class is shown in the bottom left picture part.

Equivalence relations are often used to disregard possible differences of objects, so &quot;up to &quot; can be understood informally as &quot;ignoring the same subtleties as ignores&quot;.
In the factorization example, &quot;up to ordering&quot; means &quot;ignoring the particular ordering&quot;.

Further examples include &quot;up to isomorphism&quot;, &quot;up to permutations&quot;, and &quot;up to rotations&quot;, which are described in the Examples section.

In informal contexts, mathematicians often use the word [[modulo (jargon)|modulo]] (or simply mod) for similar purposes, as in &quot;modulo isomorphism&quot;.

Objects that are distinct up to an equivalence relation defined by a group action, such as rotation, reflection, or permutation, can be counted using Burnside&#x27;s lemma or its generalization, Pólya enumeration theorem.

==Examples==
===Tetris===

Consider the seven Tetris pieces (I, J, L, O, S, T, Z), known mathematically as the tetrominoes. If you consider all the possible rotations of these pieces — for example, if you consider the &quot;I&quot; oriented vertically to be distinct from the &quot;I&quot; oriented horizontally — then you find there are 19 distinct possible shapes to be displayed on the screen. (These 19 are the so-called &quot;fixed&quot; tetrominoes.) But if rotations are not considered distinct — so that we treat both &quot;I vertically&quot; and &quot;I horizontally&quot; indifferently as &quot;I&quot; — then there are only seven. We say that &quot;there are seven tetrominoes, up to rotation&quot;. One could also say that &quot;there are five tetrominoes, up to rotation and reflection&quot;, which accounts for the fact that L reflected gives J, and S reflected gives Z.

===Eight queens===

In the eight queens puzzle, if the queens are considered to be distinct (e.g. if they are colored with eight different colors), then there are 3709440 distinct solutions. Normally, however, the queens are considered to be interchangeable, and one usually says &quot;there are unique solutions up to permutation of the queens&quot;, or that &quot;there are 92 solutions modulo the names of the queens&quot;, signifying that two different arrangements of the queens are considered equivalent if the queens have been permuted, as long as the set of occupied squares remains the same.

If, in addition to treating the queens as identical, rotations and reflections of the board were allowed, we would have only 12 distinct solutions &quot;up to symmetry and the naming of the queens&quot;. For more, see .

===Polygons===
The regular -gon, for a fixed , is unique up to similarity. In other words, the &quot;similarity&quot; equivalence relation over the regular -gons (for a fixed ) has only one equivalence class; it is impossible to produce two regular -gons which are not similar to each other.

===Group theory===
In group theory, one may have a group acting on a set , in which case, one might say that two elements of are equivalent &quot;up to the group action&quot;—if they lie in the same orbit.

Another typical example is the statement that &quot;there are two different groups of order 4 up to isomorphism&quot;, or &quot;modulo isomorphism, there are two groups of order 4&quot;. This means that, if one considers isomorphic groups &quot;equivalent&quot;, there are only two equivalence classes of groups of order 4.

===Nonstandard analysis===
A hyperreal and its standard part are equal up to an infinitesimal difference.

==See also==

*Abuse of notation
*Adequality
*Essentially unique
*List of mathematical jargon
*Modulo (jargon)
*Quotient group
*Quotient set

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q246672" start="4" end="24" title="Mathematical object" label="mathematical objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914964" start="52" end="57" title="Up to" label="up to"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="61" end="81" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="154" end="173" title="equivalence classes" label="equivalence classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="885" end="894" title="permutation" label="permuting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1908" end="1924" title="Up to#Examples" label="Examples section"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914964" start="1983" end="2009" title="Up to" label="[[modulo (jargon)|modulo]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914964" start="2021" end="2024" title="Up to" label="mod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330377" start="2237" end="2258" title="Burnside&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="Burnside&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037559" start="2282" end="2307" title="Pólya enumeration theorem" label="Pólya enumeration theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q71910" start="2356" end="2362" title="Tetris" label="Tetris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082757" start="2421" end="2430" title="tetromino" label="tetromino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082757" start="2986" end="2995" title="tetromino" label="tetromino"/>
<link wikidata="Q623317" start="3223" end="3242" title="eight queens puzzle" label="eight queens puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q161519" start="3515" end="3526" title="permutation" label="permutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107617" start="3851" end="3859" title="rotation" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q426221" start="3865" end="3875" title="Reflection (mathematics)" label="reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="3957" end="3965" title="symmetry" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q714886" start="4038" end="4050" title="regular polygon" label="regular -gon"/>
<link wikidata="Q254465" start="4082" end="4092" title="similarity (geometry)" label="similarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="4334" end="4346" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="4363" end="4368" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="4369" end="4375" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q288465" start="4511" end="4516" title="Group action (mathematics)" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="4595" end="4601" title="group (mathematics)" label="groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="4619" end="4630" title="isomorphism" label="isomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q742064" start="4740" end="4750" title="group isomorphism" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958543" start="4873" end="4882" title="hyperreal number" label="hyperreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439341" start="4891" end="4904" title="standard part function" label="standard part"/>
<link wikidata="Q193885" start="4924" end="4937" title="infinitesimal" label="infinitesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q842159" start="4966" end="4983" title="Abuse of notation" label="Abuse of notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825450" start="4985" end="4995" title="Adequality" label="Adequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399590" start="4997" end="5015" title="Essentially unique" label="Essentially unique"/>
<link wikidata="Q728368" start="5017" end="5044" title="List of mathematical jargon" label="List of mathematical jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415345" start="5046" end="5061" title="Modulo (jargon)" label="Modulo (jargon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138961" start="5063" end="5077" title="Quotient group" label="Quotient group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="5079" end="5091" title="Quotient set" label="Quotient set"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44789" wikidata="Q42495" url="?curid=44789" title="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto">
<text>Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto (; Sicilian: Baccialona Pizzaottu) is a town and &quot;comune&quot; of about 50,000 inhabitants in the north coast of Sicily, Italy, from Messina towards Palermo. It belongs to the Metropolitan City of Messina.

==History==
=== Ancient history ===

In the area corresponding to the current municipal area, the following ancient settlements were identified:

* Settlement and necropolis of the Bronze Age and Iron Age, in Maloto locality.
* Settlement and necropolis, from around the 10th century BC, in Pizzo Lando.
* Settlement and necropolis of ancient Greek or Hellenistic times, assigned to 8th century BC, in Oliveto locality.
* Settlement and necropolis of Sicani/Greek origins, dating from around the 6th and 5th centuries BC, in Sant&#x27;Onofrio locality.

In 265 BC, the Battle of Longano, between the army of Hiero II of Syracuse and the Mamertines under the command of the leader Cione, took place in this area. The exact assignment of the place in the absence of identifiable cause remains earthquakes, floods, or diversion of water courses. There are several hypotheses that place the event along the courses of the rivers bordering the &quot;Mela&quot; or &quot;Patrì&quot;, and other in the vicinity of the mythical city &quot;Longane&quot; (Rodì Milici) or &quot;Abacena&quot; (Tripi), however settlements related to the same conflict.

=== Origins and etymology ===

Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto lies in the plain that slopes to the north close to the lush hills and the chain of Peloritani mountains, overlooking the Gulf of Patti in the Tyrrhenian Sea on the part near the Aeolian Islands in a portion of coast between the Milazzo peninsula to the east and to the west promontory of Tindari.

The most credible hypothesis for the derivation of its name is that it was derived during the era of rule by the Kingdom of Aragon (1282–1516). It is likely the first rulers of the town came from the County of Barcelona.

The oldest part of the town, Pozzo di Gotto, owes its name to the digging of a well for irrigation in cultivated lands located between the rivers Idria and Longano, belonging to Nicholas Goto as described in Vulgar Latin in a document dated 1463: &quot; ... Nicolao de Gotho, ..., in quo Puzzo de Gotho ...&quot;. In 1571 Pozzogottesi obtained from the Grand Court of the Archbishop of Messina permission to elect their chaplain stationed in San Vito no longer dependant on the Archpriest of Milazzo. The Spanish Viceroy removed Pozzo di Gotto from the under the jurisdiction of Milazzo on 22 May 1639, and ratified by royal during the reign of Philip IV of Spain, and the town assumes the title &quot;Libera et Realis Civitas Putei de Gotho&quot;. The village in the west of the river Longano in turn under the jurisdiction of Castroreale and had already followed the example of the neighboring community, rebelling against the jurors castrensian doing in the Church to recognize its independence. Notarial deeds dating back to 1522 in Castroreale report the name of the district or hamlet of &quot;Barsalona&quot;, a name likely to be attributed to the presence in the baptismal books of Pozzo di Gotto the name of &quot;Graziosa Barsalona&quot;, on the other hand is supported the thesis that the name of the location has been given by Iberian sailors having recognizing the remarkable similarity of the two territories.

The autonomy of the village of Barcellona was accepted by the Sicilian Parliament, recognized by the King on 15 May 1815 and ratified in Vienna 28 February 1823, by King Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies. The administrative union decreed 5 January 1835, comes into force on 1 June 1836 at the behest of King Ferdinand II of the Two Sicilies, deciding that the new municipality formed by the merger of the two ancient districts bore the full name of Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto. Are discarded by the King all the advanced options of names derived from the word &quot;Longano&quot;, receiving the unanimous appreciation, on the other hand the initial goodwill will turn into hatred and resentment towards the monarch as a result of criminal actions undertaken throughout the province, especially in Milazzo and Messina, which earned him the nickname of &quot;King Bomb&quot;. The city soon established covered a certain role with significant contributions to the definitive expulsion of the House of Bourbon from the province and the whole of Sicily and increasingly effective input in all the events included in the process of unification of constituting Kingdom of Italy.

=== Traditions and folklore ===

The procession of Varette which takes place on Good Friday, and at the same time two processions consist of twenty-six Vare depicting the mysteries of the Passion parade through the streets of the city.

== Main sights ==
The thirteenth-century village of Castroreale, home to a tower from a medieval castle built by King Frederick II of Aragon, is located nearby.

The Nello Cassata Ethnohistory Museum is based here.

=== Religious architecture ===

* &quot;Cave of Saint Venera&quot;, fiefdom of the Basilians, rock temple with a square plan and octagonal dome. Armenian - Byzantine origin from the 7th – 8th century.

==== Churches ====

These are some of the most important churches in Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto:

* 1936, Minor basilica of Saint Sebastian.
* 1579 - 1583, Church of Carmine and convent of the Carmelite Order.
* 1620 - 1646, Church of the Assumption, totally rebuilt in the 19th century.
* 1623, Church of Jesus and Mary.
* 1954, Church of Saint Francis of Paola. Reconstruction of a primitive place of worship from the 18th century.
* 1622, Church of Saint Anthony of Padua and convent of the Order of the Franciscan Friars Minor, founded in the neighborhood of the same name.
* 1635, Church of Saint John the Baptist, founded in the neighborhood of the same name, expanded in 1751 - 1754.
* 1663, Church of the Holy Crucifix. It was the seat of a brotherhood of the same name.
* 1623, Church of Saint Francis of Assisi under the title of the &quot;Immaculate Conception&quot; or simply &quot;Church of the Capuchins&quot;.
* 17th century, Church of Saint Andrew the Apostle.
* 1637, Church of Saint Anthony the Abbot. Restored and 
* 1776 - 1791, Church of Saint Mary of Tindari and monastery of the Basilian order. It replaces the old seat of the Basilians near Gala, re-founded in 1105 by Countess Adelaide, wife of the Grand Count Roger, dedicated to the &quot;Madonna Galaktotrophousa&quot; or &quot;Madonna breastfeeding the Child&quot; or Panaghia Galaktotrophousa.
* 1750, Church of the Immaculate Conception.
* 18th century, Church of Saint Rosalia.
* 1472 - 1571, Church of Saint Vitus.
* 1472 - 1663, Oratory of Purgative Souls, near Saint Vitus church.
* 1955 - 1959, Church of Saint Mary of Visitazion, Centineo.
* 1300 - 1310, Church of Saint Roch, Nasari.
* Church of Saint Mary of Pillar, Acquaficara.
* 2004, Church of Saints Andrew and Vitus.

==People==
*Giuseppa Bolognara Calcagno (1846–1884), freedom fighter of the Risorgimento
*Emilio Fede (born 1931), journalist
*Carmelo Freni (born 1934) journalist, writer, director
*Emilio Isgrò (born 1937), artist
*Leonardo Vitale (1941–1984), Mafia &quot;pentito&quot;
*Giuseppe (Beppe) Aldo Felice Alfano (1945-1993), journalist
*Francesca Chillemi (born 1985), Miss Italia 2003

==See also== 
*Duomo of Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto
*History of Roman Catholicism in Italy

==References==
==External links==
*Official website 
* Selected Civil Records Births, Marriages, Deaths.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42495" start="0" end="25" title="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto" label="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="29" end="37" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="81" end="87" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="144" end="150" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="152" end="157" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="164" end="171" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="180" end="187" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991250" start="207" end="235" title="Metropolitan City of Messina" label="Metropolitan City of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q952123" start="689" end="695" title="Sicani" label="Sicani"/>
<link wikidata="Q313675" start="846" end="866" title="Hiero II of Syracuse" label="Hiero II of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164281" start="875" end="885" title="Mamertines" label="Mamertines"/>
<link wikidata="Q42864939" start="918" end="923" title="Cione" label="Cione"/>
<link wikidata="Q492628" start="1284" end="1295" title="Rodì Milici" label="Rodì Milici"/>
<link wikidata="Q490889" start="1321" end="1326" title="Tripi" label="Tripi"/>
<link wikidata="Q599804" start="1521" end="1531" title="Peloritani" label="Peloritani"/>
<link wikidata="Q489948" start="1567" end="1572" title="Patti, Sicily" label="Patti"/>
<link wikidata="Q38882" start="1580" end="1594" title="Tyrrhenian Sea" label="Tyrrhenian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q179883" start="1616" end="1631" title="Aeolian Islands" label="Aeolian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q199442" start="1849" end="1866" title="Kingdom of Aragon" label="Kingdom of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233672" start="1936" end="1955" title="County of Barcelona" label="County of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="2166" end="2178" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q691402" start="2603" end="2621" title="Philip IV of Spain" label="Philip IV of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q495994" start="2786" end="2797" title="Castroreale" label="Castroreale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2894" end="2905" title="castrensian" label="castrensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18745381" start="3445" end="3464" title="Sicilian Parliament" label="Sicilian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="3520" end="3526" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q312325" start="3553" end="3584" title="Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies" label="Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q332717" start="3689" end="3721" title="Ferdinand II of the Two Sicilies" label="Ferdinand II of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="4368" end="4384" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="4533" end="4549" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40317" start="4632" end="4643" title="Good Friday" label="Good Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q495994" start="4841" end="4852" title="Castroreale" label="Castroreale"/>
<link wikidata="Q367226" start="4907" end="4929" title="Frederick II of Aragon" label="Frederick II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3868368" start="4955" end="4988" title="Nello Cassata Ethnohistory Museum" label="Nello Cassata Ethnohistory Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886875" start="5088" end="5097" title="Basilians" label="Basilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15011663" start="5312" end="5345" title="Basilica of St. Sebastian, Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto" label="Minor basilica of Saint Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560592" start="6981" end="7008" title="Giuseppa Bolognara Calcagno" label="Giuseppa Bolognara Calcagno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055001" start="7059" end="7070" title="Emilio Fede" label="Emilio Fede"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7096" end="7109" title="Carmelo Freni" label="Carmelo Freni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724435" start="7152" end="7164" title="Emilio Isgrò" label="Emilio Isgrò"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083607" start="7186" end="7201" title="Leonardo Vitale" label="Leonardo Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7242" end="7277" title="Giuseppe (Beppe) Aldo Felice Alfano" label="Giuseppe (Beppe) Aldo Felice Alfano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3749380" start="7303" end="7321" title="Francesca Chillemi" label="Francesca Chillemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15011663" start="7368" end="7402" title="Duomo of Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto" label="Duomo of Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201891" start="7404" end="7441" title="History of Roman Catholicism in Italy" label="History of Roman Catholicism in Italy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44790" wikidata="Q105902" url="?curid=44790" title="Luminosity">
<text>Luminosity is an absolute measure of radiated electromagnetic energy per unit time, and is synonymous with the radiant power emitted by a light-emitting object. In astronomy, luminosity is the total amount of electromagnetic energy emitted per unit of time by a star, galaxy, or other astronomical objects.

In SI units, luminosity is measured in joules per second, or watts. In astronomy, values for luminosity are often given in the terms of the luminosity of the Sun, &quot;L&quot;⊙. Luminosity can also be given in terms of the astronomical magnitude system: the absolute bolometric magnitude (&quot;M&quot;bol) of an object is a logarithmic measure of its total energy emission rate, while absolute magnitude is a logarithmic measure of the luminosity within some specific wavelength range or filter band.

In contrast, the term &quot;brightness&quot; in astronomy is generally used to refer to an object&#x27;s apparent brightness: that is, how bright an object appears to an observer. Apparent brightness depends on both the luminosity of the object and the distance between the object and observer, and also on any absorption of light along the path from object to observer. Apparent magnitude is a logarithmic measure of apparent brightness. The distance determined by luminosity measures can be somewhat ambiguous, and is thus sometimes called the luminosity distance.

== Measurement ==
When not qualified, the term &quot;luminosity&quot; means bolometric luminosity, which is measured either in the SI units, watts, or in terms of solar luminosities (). A bolometer is the instrument used to measure radiant energy over a wide band by absorption and measurement of heating. A star also radiates neutrinos, which carry off some energy (about 2% in the case of the Sun), contributing to the star&#x27;s total luminosity. The IAU has defined a nominal solar luminosity of to promote publication of consistent and comparable values in units of the solar luminosity.

While bolometers do exist, they cannot be used to measure even the apparent brightness of a star because they are insufficiently sensitive across the electromagnetic spectrum and because most wavelengths do not reach the surface of the Earth. In practice bolometric magnitudes are measured by taking measurements at certain wavelengths and constructing a model of the total spectrum that is most likely to match those measurements. In some cases, the process of estimation is extreme, with luminosities being calculated when less than 1% of the energy output is observed, for example with a hot Wolf-Rayet star observed only in the infrared. Bolometric luminosities can also be calculated using a bolometric correction to a luminosity in a particular passband.

The term luminosity is also used in relation to particular passbands such as a visual luminosity of K-band luminosity. These are not generally luminosities in the strict sense of an absolute measure of radiated power, but absolute magnitudes defined for a given filter in a photometric system. Several different photometric systems exist. Some such as the UBV or Johnson system are defined against photometric standard stars, while others such as the AB system are defined in terms of a spectral flux density.

== Stellar luminosity ==
A star&#x27;s luminosity can be determined from two stellar characteristics: size and effective temperature. The former is typically represented in terms of solar radii, &quot;R&quot;⊙, while the latter is represented in kelvins, but in most cases neither can be measured directly. To determine a star&#x27;s radius, two other metrics are needed: the star&#x27;s angular diameter and its distance from Earth. Both can be measured with great accuracy in certain cases, with cool supergiants often having large angular diameters, and some cool evolved stars having masers in their atmospheres that can be used to measure the parallax using VLBI. However, for most stars the angular diameter or parallax, or both, are far below our ability to measure with any certainty. Since the effective temperature is merely a number that represents the temperature of a black body that would reproduce the luminosity, it obviously cannot be measured directly, but it can be estimated from the spectrum.

An alternative way to measure stellar luminosity is to measure the star&#x27;s apparent brightness and distance. A third component needed to derive the luminosity is the degree of interstellar extinction that is present, a condition that usually arises because of gas and dust present in the interstellar medium (ISM), the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere, and circumstellar matter. Consequently, one of astronomy&#x27;s central challenges in determining a star&#x27;s luminosity is to derive accurate measurements for each of these components, without which an accurate luminosity figure remains elusive. Extinction can only be measured directly if the actual and observed luminosities are both known, but it can be estimated from the observed colour of a star, using models of the expected level of reddening from the interstellar medium.

In the current system of stellar classification, stars are grouped according to temperature, with the massive, very young and energetic Class O stars boasting temperatures in excess of 30,000 K while the less massive, typically older Class M stars exhibit temperatures less than 3,500 K. Because luminosity is proportional to temperature to the fourth power, the large variation in stellar temperatures produces an even vaster variation in stellar luminosity. Because the luminosity depends on a high power of the stellar mass, high mass luminous stars have much shorter lifetimes. The most luminous stars are always young stars, no more than a few million years for the most extreme. In the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram, the x-axis represents temperature or spectral type while the y-axis represents luminosity or magnitude. The vast majority of stars are found along the main sequence with blue Class O stars found at the top left of the chart while red Class M stars fall to the bottom right. Certain stars like Deneb and Betelgeuse are found above and to the right of the main sequence, more luminous or cooler than their equivalents on the main sequence. Increased luminosity at the same temperature, or alternatively cooler temperature at the same luminosity, indicates that these stars are larger than those on the main sequence and they are called giants or supergiants.

Blue and white supergiants are high luminosity stars somewhat cooler than the most luminous main sequence stars. A star like Deneb, for example, has a luminosity around 200,000 &quot;L&quot;⊙, a spectral type of A2, and an effective temperature around 8,500 K, meaning it has a radius around . For comparison, the red supergiant Betelgeuse has a luminosity around 100,000 &quot;L&quot;⊙, a spectral type of M2, and a temperature around 3,500 K, meaning its radius is about . Red supergiants are the largest type of star, but the most luminous are much smaller and hotter, with temperatures up to 50,000 K and more and luminosities of several million &quot;L&quot;⊙, meaning their radii are just a few tens of &quot;R&quot;⊙. For example, R136a1 has a temperature over 46,000 K and a luminosity of more than 6,100,000 &quot;L&quot;⊙ (mostly in the UV), it is only .

== Radio luminosity ==
The luminosity of a radio source is measured in , to avoid having to specify a bandwidth over which it is measured. The observed strength, or flux density, of a radio source is measured in Jansky where .

For example, consider a 10W transmitter at a distance of 1 million metres, radiating over a bandwidth of 1 MHz. By the time that power has reached the observer, the power is spread over the surface of a sphere with area or about , so its flux density is .

More generally, for sources at cosmological distances, a k-correction must be made for the spectral index α of the source, and a relativistic correction must be made for the fact that the frequency scale in the emitted rest frame is different from that in the observer&#x27;s rest frame. So the full expression for radio luminosity, assuming isotropic emission, is
formula_1
where &quot;L&quot;ν is the luminosity in , &quot;S&quot;obs is the observed flux density in , &quot;DL&quot; is the luminosity distance in metres, &quot;z&quot; is the redshift, &quot;α&quot; is the spectral index (in the sense formula_2, and in radio astronomy, assuming thermal emission the spectral index is typically equal to 2.)

For example, consider a 1 Jy signal from a radio source at a redshift of 1, at a frequency of 1.4 GHz.
Ned Wright&#x27;s cosmology calculator calculates a luminosity distance for a redshift of 1 to be 6701 Mpc = 2×1026 m giving a radio luminosity of .

To calculate the total radio power, this luminosity must be integrated over the bandwidth of the emission. A common assumption is to set the bandwidth to the observing frequency, which effectively assumes the power radiated has uniform intensity from zero frequency up to the observing frequency. In the case above, the total power is . This is sometimes expressed in terms of the total (i.e. integrated over all wavelengths) luminosity of the Sun which is , giving a radio power of .

== Luminosity formulae ==

The Stefan–Boltzmann equation applied to a black body gives the value for luminosity for a black body, an idealized object which is perfectly opaque and non-reflecting:
formula_3
where &quot;A&quot; is the surface area, &quot;T&quot; is the temperature (in kelvins) and is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant, with a value of 

Imagine a point source of light of luminosity formula_4 that radiates equally in all directions. A hollow sphere centered on the point would have its entire interior surface illuminated. As the radius increases, the surface area will also increase, and the constant luminosity has more surface area to illuminate, leading to a decrease in observed brightness.

formula_5
where
*formula_6 is the area of the illuminated surface.
*formula_7 is the flux density of the illuminated surface.

The surface area of a sphere with radius &quot;r&quot; is formula_8, so for stars and other point sources of light: 
formula_9
where formula_10 is the distance from the observer to the light source.

For stars on the main sequence, luminosity is also related to mass approximately as below:
formula_11

== Relationship to magnitude ==

Luminosity is an intrinsic measurable property of a star independent of distance. The concept of magnitude, on the other hand, incorporates distance. The apparent magnitude is a measure of the diminishing flux of light as a result of distance according to the inverse-square law. The Pogson logarithmic scale is used to measure both apparent and absolute magnitudes, the latter corresponding to the brightness of a star or other celestial body as seen if it would be located at an interstellar distance of . In addition to this brightness decrease from increased distance, there is an extra decrease of brightness due to extinction from intervening interstellar dust.

By measuring the width of certain absorption lines in the stellar spectrum, it is often possible to assign a certain luminosity class to a star without knowing its distance. Thus a fair measure of its absolute magnitude can be determined without knowing its distance nor the interstellar extinction.

In measuring star brightnesses, absolute magnitude, apparent magnitude, and distance are interrelated parameters—if two are known, the third can be determined. Since the Sun&#x27;s luminosity is the standard, comparing these parameters with the Sun&#x27;s apparent magnitude and distance is the easiest way to remember how to convert between them, although officially, zero point values are defined by the IAU.

The magnitude of a star, a unitless measure, is a logarithmic scale of observed visible brightness. The apparent magnitude is the observed visible brightness from Earth which depends on the distance of the object. The absolute magnitude is the apparent magnitude at a distance of , therefore the bolometric absolute magnitude is a logarithmic measure of the bolometric luminosity.

The difference in bolometric magnitude between two objects is related to their luminosity ratio according to:
formula_12

where:
*formula_13 is the bolometric magnitude of the first object
*formula_14 is the bolometric magnitude of the second object.
*formula_15 is the first object&#x27;s bolometric luminosity
*formula_16 is the second object&#x27;s bolometric luminosity

The zero point of the absolute magnitude scale is actually defined as a fixed luminosity of . Therefore, the absolute magnitude can be calculated from a luminosity in watts:
formula_17
where is the zero point luminosity 

and the luminosity in watts can be calculated from an absolute magnitude (although absolute magnitudes are often not measured relative to an absolute flux):
formula_18

==See also==
* Glossary of astronomy
* List of brightest stars
* List of most luminous stars
* Orders of magnitude (power)
* Solar luminosity

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

*Luminosity calculator
*Ned Wright&#x27;s cosmology calculator</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="0" end="10" title="Luminosity" label="Luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="46" end="68" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253356" start="111" end="124" title="radiant power" label="radiant power"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="164" end="173" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="225" end="231" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="252" end="256" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="262" end="266" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="268" end="274" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="285" end="305" title="astronomical object" label="astronomical objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="311" end="313" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="347" end="353" title="joules" label="joules"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="369" end="373" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q843877" start="448" end="469" title="Solar luminosity" label="luminosity of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028919" start="545" end="554" title="Magnitude (astronomy)" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="567" end="596" title="Absolute magnitude#Bolometric magnitude" label="absolute bolometric magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="695" end="713" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="778" end="788" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q254758" start="798" end="809" title="Passband" label="filter band"/>
<link wikidata="Q943247" start="1123" end="1133" title="Extinction (astronomy)" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="1183" end="1201" title="Apparent magnitude" label="Apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821402" start="1358" end="1377" title="luminosity distance" label="luminosity distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="1511" end="1513" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="1521" end="1525" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q843877" start="1543" end="1561" title="solar luminosity" label="solar luminosities"/>
<link wikidata="Q852212" start="1568" end="1577" title="bolometer" label="bolometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259526" start="1612" end="1626" title="radiant energy" label="radiant energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q905921" start="1647" end="1657" title="absorption (electromagnetic radiation)" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="1707" end="1715" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251" start="2570" end="2585" title="Wolf-Rayet star" label="Wolf-Rayet star"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147290" start="2672" end="2693" title="bolometric correction" label="bolometric correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q254758" start="2796" end="2804" title="passband" label="passband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520419" start="2837" end="2843" title="k band (infrared)" label="K-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q948944" start="3011" end="3029" title="photometric system" label="photometric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q129833" start="3100" end="3107" title="UBV photometric system" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650456" start="3188" end="3197" title="AB magnitude" label="AB system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575193" start="3224" end="3245" title="spectral flux density" label="spectral flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q854050" start="3359" end="3380" title="effective temperature" label="effective temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q173817" start="3436" end="3441" title="radius" label="radii"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="3494" end="3500" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q718647" start="3636" end="3652" title="angular diameter" label="angular diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341811" start="3836" end="3841" title="astrophysical maser" label="maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148351" start="3911" end="3915" title="VLBI" label="VLBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q943247" start="4443" end="4466" title="Extinction (astronomy)" label="interstellar extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="4555" end="4574" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="4586" end="4609" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012875" start="4615" end="4635" title="circumstellar dust" label="circumstellar matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="5121" end="5143" title="stellar classification" label="stellar classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q911809" start="5232" end="5239" title="O-type main sequence star" label="Class O"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="5288" end="5289" title="kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5330" end="5337" title="Stellar classification#Class M" label="Class M"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270143" start="5788" end="5815" title="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram" label="Hertzsprung–Russell diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="5968" end="5981" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12179" start="6110" end="6115" title="Deneb" label="Deneb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="6120" end="6130" title="Betelgeuse" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12179" start="6600" end="6605" title="Deneb" label="Deneb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="6804" end="6814" title="Betelgeuse" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q815835" start="7213" end="7219" title="R136a1" label="R136a1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931185" start="7384" end="7396" title="Astronomical radio source" label="radio source"/>
<link wikidata="Q249998" start="7443" end="7452" title="bandwidth (signal processing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485344" start="7506" end="7518" title="flux density" label="flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434381" start="7553" end="7559" title="Jansky" label="Jansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694453" start="7883" end="7895" title="k-correction" label="k-correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316045" start="8045" end="8055" title="rest frame" label="rest frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316045" start="8102" end="8112" title="rest frame" label="rest frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="8168" end="8177" title="isotropic" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485344" start="8278" end="8290" title="flux density" label="flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821402" start="8318" end="8337" title="luminosity distance" label="luminosity distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280060" start="8401" end="8415" title="spectral index" label="spectral index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280060" start="8523" end="8534" title="Spectral index" label="equal to 2."/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="8598" end="8606" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821402" start="8692" end="8711" title="luminosity distance" label="luminosity distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="9234" end="9237" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q704747" start="9307" end="9323" title="Stefan–Boltzmann law" label="Stefan–Boltzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="9346" end="9356" title="black body" label="black body"/>
<link wikidata="Q704747" start="9580" end="9605" title="Stefan–Boltzmann constant" label="Stefan–Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="9731" end="9737" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485344" start="10071" end="10083" title="flux density" label="flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="10330" end="10343" title="main sequence" label="main sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907452" start="10364" end="10379" title="mass–luminosity relation" label="related to mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="10603" end="10621" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="10709" end="10727" title="inverse-square law" label="inverse-square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="10878" end="10892" title="celestial body" label="celestial body"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377588" start="11176" end="11192" title="stellar classification" label="stellar spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q126818" start="11858" end="11866" title="unitless" label="unitless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="11994" end="11999" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571730" start="12994" end="13015" title="Glossary of astronomy" label="Glossary of astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184221" start="13018" end="13041" title="List of brightest stars" label="List of brightest stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141760" start="13044" end="13071" title="List of most luminous stars" label="List of most luminous stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q365764" start="13074" end="13101" title="Orders of magnitude (power)" label="Orders of magnitude (power)"/>
<link wikidata="Q843877" start="13104" end="13120" title="Solar luminosity" label="Solar luminosity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44791" wikidata="Q439361" url="?curid=44791" title="Battle of Dunbar">
<text>Battle of Dunbar may refer to:
*Battle of Dunbar (1296), a battle in the Wars of Scottish Independence
*Battle of Dunbar (1650), a battle in the 1650 to 1652 Anglo-Scottish War</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1509663" start="32" end="55" title="Battle of Dunbar (1296)" label="Battle of Dunbar (1296)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605977" start="104" end="127" title="Battle of Dunbar (1650)" label="Battle of Dunbar (1650)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44793" wikidata="Q5370620" url="?curid=44793" title="Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act">
<text>The Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA) is an act of the United States Congress, passed in 1986 as part of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA). It requires hospital emergency departments that accept payments from Medicare to provide an appropriate &quot;medical screening examination&quot; (MSE) for anyone seeking treatment for a medical condition regardless of citizenship, legal status, or ability to pay. Participating hospitals may not transfer or discharge patients needing emergency treatment except with the informed consent or stabilization of the patient or when the patient&#x27;s condition requires transfer to a hospital better equipped to administer the treatment.

EMTALA applies to &quot;participating hospitals&quot;. The statute defines participating hospitals as those that accept payment from the Department of Health and Human Services&#x27;, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) under the Medicare program. Because there are very few hospitals that do not accept Medicare, the law applies to nearly all hospitals. The combined payments of Medicare and Medicaid, $602 billion in 2004, or roughly 44% of all medical expenditures in the United States, make not participating in EMTALA impractical for nearly all hospitals. EMTALA&#x27;s provisions apply to all patients, not just to Medicare patients.

The cost of emergency care required by EMTALA is not covered directly by the federal government, so it has been characterized as an unfunded mandate. In 2009, uncompensated care represents 55% of emergency room care, and 6% of total hospital costs.

==Prior legislation==
The Hill-Burton Act of 1946, which provided federal assistance for the construction of community hospitals, established nondiscrimination requirements for institutions that received such federal assistance—including the requirement that a &quot;reasonable volume&quot; of free emergency care be provided for community members who could not pay—for a period for 20 years after the hospital&#x27;s construction. Amendments to the act in 1975 removed the 20-year expiration date and instead required hospitals receiving Hill-Burton funding to provide free care in perpetuity. However, the provisions of the act were vague and rarely enforced.

==Mandated and non-mandated care==
Congress passed EMTALA to eliminate the practice of &quot;patient dumping&quot;—that is, refusal to treat people because of inability to pay or insufficient insurance or transferring or discharging emergency patients on the basis of high anticipated diagnosis and treatment costs. The law applies when an individual seeks treatment for a medical condition &quot;or a request is made on the individual&#x27;s behalf for examination or treatment for that medical condition.&quot;

The U.S. government defines an emergency department as &quot;a specially equipped and staffed area of the hospital used a significant portion of the time for initial evaluation and treatment of outpatients for emergency medical conditions.&quot; That means, for example, that outpatient clinics not equipped to handle medical emergencies are not obligated under EMTALA and can simply refer patients to a nearby emergency department for care.

An emergency medical condition (EMC) is defined as &quot;a condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity (including severe pain) such that the absence of immediate medical attention could reasonably be expected to result in placing the individual&#x27;s health [or the health of an unborn child] in serious jeopardy, serious impairment to bodily functions, or serious dysfunction of bodily organs.&quot; For example, a pregnant woman with an emergency condition and/or currently in labor must be treated until delivery is complete, until the woman and the fetus are stabilized, or until a qualified personnel identifies the labor as a &quot;false labor&quot; or Braxton Hicks contractions, unless a transfer under the statute is appropriate.

Patients treated under EMTALA may not be able to pay or have insurance or other programs pay for the associated costs but are legally responsible for any costs incurred as a result of their care under civil law.

===Non-covered medical conditions===
Not all medical conditions qualify for uncompensated mandated services imposed by EMTALA, which is contrary to the misperception that many individuals assume: that if they are ill, they will be treated regardless of their ability to pay.

The sole purpose of the EMTALA-mandated MSE is to require emergency departments to make a determination about whether an emergency medical condition does or does not exist, using their normal assessment and diagnostic protocols. Because the MSE is a mandated EMTALA service, health insurers are required to cover benefits for their subscribers. They are also required to cover EMTALA mandated services necessary to stabilize individuals determined to have an EMC.

EMTALA intentionally omitted requirements that hospitals provide uncompensated stabilizing treatment for individuals with medical conditions determined not to be EMCs. Therefore, such individuals are not eligible for further uncompensated examination and treatment beyond the MSE.

A significant portion of emergency department visits are considered not to be EMCs as defined by EMTALA. The medical profession refers to such cases as &quot;non-emergent&quot;. Regardless, the term is not recognized by law as a condition defined by the EMTALA statute. A term more relevant for compliance with EMTALA is &quot;non-emergency medical condition&quot;. If the &quot;non-emergent&quot; term is used in the context of EMTALA, it must be defined as a medical condition that fails to pass the criteria for determination of being a true EMC as defined by EMTALA statute.

Admitted patients who experience a medical emergency while at a hospital are normally not covered by EMTALA but are instead protected by varying state laws and quality assurance under the deemed status of the facility.

==Hospital obligations==
Hospitals have three obligations under EMTALA:
# An individual requesting emergency care or one for whom a representative has made a request if the patient is unable to do so must receive a medical screening examination (MSE) to determine whether an emergency medical condition (EMC) exists. The participating hospital cannot delay examination and treatment to inquire about methods of payment, insurance coverage, or a patient&#x27;s citizenship or legal status. The hospital may start the process of payment inquiry and billing only once it has ensured that doing so will not interfere with or otherwise compromise patient care.
# When an emergency department determines that an individual has an EMC, the hospital must provide further treatment and examination until the EMC is resolved or stabilized and the patient can provide self-care after discharge or, if unable to do so, can receive needed continual care. Inpatient care provided must be at an equal level for all patients regardless of ability to pay. Hospitals cannot discharge a patient prior to stabilization if the patient&#x27;s insurance is canceled or if the patient otherwise discontinues payment during the course of stay.
# If the hospital does not have the capability to treat the condition, the hospital must make an &quot;appropriate&quot; transfer of the patient to another hospital with such capability. That includes long-term-care or rehabilitation facilities for patients unable to provide self-care. Hospitals with specialized capabilities must accept such transfers and may not discharge a patient until the condition is resolved and the patient is able to provide self-care or is transferred to another facility. A hospital has no obligation under EMTALA to provide uncompensated services beyond the screening exam unless it determines that the patient has an EMC.

==Amendments==

Since the act&#x27;s original passage, the Congress has passed several amendments to the act. Additionally, state and local laws in some places have imposed further requirements on hospitals. The amendments include the following:
* A patient is defined as &quot;stable&quot;, therefore ending a hospital&#x27;s EMTALA obligations, if:
** The patient is conscious, alert, and oriented.
** The cause of all symptoms reported by the patient or representative and all potentially life-threatening, limb-threatening, or organ-threatening symptoms discovered by hospital staff have been ascertained to the best of the hospital&#x27;s ability.
** Any conditions that are immediately life-threatening, limb-threatening, or organ-threatening have been treated to the best of the hospital&#x27;s ability to ensure the patient does not need further, inpatient care.
** The patient is able to care for himself or herself with or without special equipment, which, if needed, must be provided. The required abilities are:
*** Breathing
*** Feeding
*** Mobility
*** Dressing
*** Personal hygiene
*** Toileting
*** Medicating
*** Communication
*** Another competent person is available and able to meet the patient&#x27;s needs after discharge.
* All patients have EMTALA rights equally regardless of age, race, religion, nationality, ethnicity, residence, citizenship, or legal status. If a patient&#x27;s status is found to be illegal, hospitals may not discharge the patient prior to completion of care, but law enforcement and hospital security may take necessary actions to prevent a patient from escaping or harming others. Treatment may be delayed as needed only to prevent patients from harming themselves or others.
* Overloaded hospitals may not discharge a patient unable to pay so they can make room for a patient who is able to pay or is otherwise viewed by society as a more-valued citizen. If the emergency department is overloaded, patients must be treated in an order based on their determined medical needs, not their ability to pay.
* Hospitals may not deny or provide substandard services for a patient who already has outstanding debt to the hospital and may not withhold the patient&#x27;s belongings, records, or other required services until the patient pays.
* Hospitals and related services cannot receive a judgment against the patient in court filings made more than 36 months after the date the patient was discharged or the last partial payment the patient made to the hospital, contractor, or agent. After that period, the patient may not be threatened with legal action if payment is not made and may not be denied future outpatient services from the same company or agency that a patient is able to pay.
* If a patient has been awarded monetary damages against a hospital or any related or affiliated services by a court of law or has settled out of court on damages, the hospital and related or affiliated services may neither withhold money for lack of payment nor count the money toward the bill in lieu of making payment to the patient. Voluntary consent for such an arrangement is permitted only if initiated by the patient. A hospital may not threaten or coerce a patient into such a settlement or mislead the patient into believing such an arrangement is required or recommended.
* Patients cannot face criminal prosecution for failure to pay even if the patients become aware of inability to pay the hospital. Hospitals and third-party agents may not threaten patients with prosecution as a means of scaring patients into making payment. Patients can be prosecuted under existing federal, state, or local laws for providing false names, addresses, or other information to avoid payment, to avoid receiving bills, or to hide fugitive status.
* A hospital cannot delay treatment while determining whether a patient can pay or is insured, but that does not mean the hospital is completely forbidden from asking for or running a credit check. If a patient fails to pay the bill, the hospital can sue the patient, and the unsatisfied judgment will likely appear on the patient&#x27;s credit report. A third-party collector for a hospital bill would be covered under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act.
* Hospitals are prohibited from discriminating against or providing substandard care for patients who appear impoverished or homeless, are not well-dressed or well-groomed, or exhibit signs of mental illness or intoxication. If the hospital fears that a patient may be a threat to others, the hospital may delay care only as necessary to protect others.
* Hospitals are required to sufficiently feed patients unable to pay at a level equal to those able to pay and must meet all physician-ordered dietary restrictions.
* Hospitals are not required to provide premium services for a patient that are not related to medical care (such as television) when failure to provide that service does not compromise patient care.
* Hospitals and affiliated clinics may avoid providing continued outpatient care, drugs, or other supplies after discharge. If such services are recommended but a patient is unable to pay, the hospital is required to refer the patient to a clinic or tax-funded or private program that enables the patient to pay for such services and to which the patient has reasonable access. Hospitals must reasonably assist a patient as necessary to obtain such services by providing information as the patient requests.

==Effects==

===Improved health services for uninsured patients===
The most significant effect is that regardless of insurance status, participating hospitals are prohibited from denying an MSE of individuals seeking treatment for medical conditions. Currently, EMTALA requires only that hospitals stabilize the EMC. According to some analyses of the U.S. health care social safety net, EMTALA is an incomplete and strained program.

===Cost pressures on hospitals===
According to the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services, 55% of U.S. emergency care now goes uncompensated. When medical bills go unpaid, health care providers must either shift the costs onto those who can pay or go uncompensated. In the first decade of EMTALA, such cost shifting amounted to a hidden tax levied by providers. For example, it has been estimated that cost shifting has amounted to $455 per individual, or $1,186 per family, in California annually.

However, because of the recent influence of managed care and other cost control initiatives by insurance companies, hospitals are less able to shift costs, and they end up writing off more and more in uncompensated care. The amount of uncompensated care delivered by nonfederal community hospitals grew from $6.1 billion in 1983 to $40.7 billion in 2004, according to a 2004 report from the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, but it is unclear what percentage of the amount was emergency care and therefore attributable to EMTALA.

Financial pressures on hospitals in the 20 years since EMTALA&#x27;s passage have caused hospitals to consolidate or close facilities, thereby contributing to emergency department overcrowding. According to the Institute of Medicine, from 1993 to 2003, emergency department visits in the United States grew by 26 percent, while in the same period, the number of emergency departments declined by 425. Ambulances frequently get diverted from overcrowded emergency departments to other hospitals that may be farther away. In 2003, ambulances got diverted more than half a million times—not necessarily due to patients&#x27; inability to pay.

===Emergency abortions===
After &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot; (1973) was overturned in June 2022, transforming the legal landscape for abortion in the United States, the HHS issued guidance on EMTALA protections for clinicians that apply regardless of state laws. According to the guidance, which does not change policy, EMTALA, as a federal law, supersedes state laws that ban abortion. So, doctors who perform emergency abortions to stabilize a patient are protected by EMTALA. Hospitals that fail to do so could face fines or be booted from Medicare. The guidance also says EMTALA does not prevent a doctor from being sued, though EMTALA may be used in defense of the doctor in state court actions.

The Biden administration filed a motion in federal court to block Idaho&#x27;s enforcement of that state&#x27;s abortion ban in cases in which EMTALA applied. The judge ruled against the state and ordered Idaho&#x27;s law suspended in emergency cases. Idaho appealed the ruling, arguing that the federal government “cannot use EMTALA to override in the emergency room state laws about abortion any more than it can use it to override state law on organ transplants or marijuana use.” The Supreme Court agreed to hear Idaho&#x27;s challenge to that interpretation of the law in &quot;Moyle v. United States&quot; (2024), which was argued that April.

Texas sued the federal government, winning in federal court. A 5th Circuit judge preliminarily enjoined the Biden administration&#x27;s EMTALA guidance in Texas.

In June 2024, the Supreme Court issued a 63 ruling in &quot;Moyle&quot; which reinstated the lower court ruling requiring EMTALA&#x27;s emergency abortion provision to be enforced in Idaho. However, the issue remains unresolved, with the ruling only seen as delaying the Idaho state law banning emergency abortions rather than striking it down altogether. However, the Supreme Court ruling did allow for the case to return to a lower court which was previously favorable to upholding EMTALA&#x27;s emergency abortion provision.

==See also==
* Health care in the United States

== Notes and references ==
==External links==
* CMS EMTALA overview from hhs.gov
* State Operations Manual from hhs.gov
* EMTALA: Its Application to Newborn Infants, by Thaddeus M. Pope, &quot;ABA Health eSource&quot;, Vol. 4, No. 7 (March 2008)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5370620" start="4" end="52" title="Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act" label="Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370620" start="54" end="60" title="Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act" label="EMTALA"/>
<link wikidata="Q476068" start="68" end="71" title="act of Congress" label="act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="79" end="101" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163290" start="133" end="179" title="Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act" label="Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="258" end="266" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="408" end="419" title="Citizenship in the United States" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q185367" start="421" end="433" title="Illegal immigration to the United States" label="legal status"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691094" start="438" end="452" title="Health insurance coverage in the United States" label="ability to pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q764527" start="561" end="577" title="informed consent" label="informed consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="862" end="901" title="Department of Health and Human Services" label="Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060058" start="909" end="951" title="Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services" label="Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="968" end="976" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="1456" end="1474" title="federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884426" start="1511" end="1527" title="unfunded mandate" label="unfunded mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764253" start="1655" end="1670" title="Hill-Burton Act" label="Hill-Burton Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984737" start="2385" end="2400" title="patient dumping" label="patient dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117286" start="3935" end="3961" title="Braxton Hicks contractions" label="Braxton Hicks contractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="4563" end="4584" title="emergency departments" label="emergency departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q836575" start="5992" end="6009" title="quality assurance" label="quality assurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q20639025" start="6020" end="6033" title="deemed status" label="deemed status"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861470" start="6151" end="6165" title="emergency care" label="emergency care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="6718" end="6738" title="emergency department" label="emergency department"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="7985" end="7993" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q162297" start="9006" end="9022" title="Personal hygiene" label="Personal hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429777" start="12132" end="12166" title="Fair Debt Collection Practices Act" label="Fair Debt Collection Practices Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551358" start="13764" end="13781" title="social safety net" label="social safety net"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="14314" end="14324" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416012" start="14380" end="14392" title="managed care" label="managed care"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352382" start="15093" end="15114" title="Institute of Medicine" label="Institute of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180481" start="15283" end="15293" title="Ambulances" label="Ambulances"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="15561" end="15572" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q107058269" start="15590" end="15600" title="Dobbs v. Jackson Women&amp;#x27;s Health Organization" label="overturned"/>
<link wikidata="Q283681" start="15652" end="15681" title="abortion in the United States" label="abortion in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="15687" end="15690" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services" label="HHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="16708" end="16721" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q124322995" start="16803" end="16825" title="Moyle v. United States" label="Moyle v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358017" start="17577" end="17609" title="Health care in the United States" label="Health care in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44794" wikidata="Q925672" url="?curid=44794" title="Naburimannu">
<text>Nabu-[[ri (cuneiform)|ri]]-man-nu (also spelled &quot;Nabu-rimanni&quot;; Greek sources called him Ναβουριανός, &quot;Nabourianos&quot;, Latin &quot;Naburianus&quot;) (fl. c. 6th – 3rd century BC) was a Chaldean astronomer and mathematician.

Classical and ancient cuneiform sources mention an astronomer with this name:

* The Greek geographer Strabo of Amaseia, in &quot;Geography&quot; 16.1–.6, writes: &quot;In Babylon a settlement is set apart for the local philosophers, the Chaldaeans, as they are called, who are concerned mostly with astronomy; but some of these, who are not approved of by the others, profess to be writers of horoscopes. (There is also a tribe of the Chaldaeans, and a territory inhabited by them, in the neighborhood of the Arabs and of the Persian Gulf, as it is called.) There are also several tribes of the Chaldaean astronomers. For example, some are called Orcheni [those from Uruk], others Borsippeni [those from Borsippa], and several others by different names, as though divided into different sects which hold to various dogmas about the same subjects. And the mathematicians make mention of some of these men; as, for example, Kidenas, Nabourianos and Soudines&quot;.
* The damaged colophon of a cuneiform clay tablet (VAT 209; see ACT 18) with a Babylonian System A lunar ephemeris for the years 49–48 BC states that it is the [tersit]u of Nabu-[ri]-man-nu. This is similar to the colophons of two System B clay tablets that say that they are the &quot;tersitu&quot; of Kidinnu.

The following is an excerpt of a century of scholarship discussed in the sources referenced below.
The meaning of &quot;tersitu&quot; is not known definitively. Already Franz Xaver Kugler proposed that &quot;tersitu&quot; can be interpreted as &quot;table&quot; here; in another context it seems to mean something like &quot;tool&quot;, but in yet another the word refers to a blue enamel paste. P. Schnabel, in a series of papers (1923–1927), interpreted the phrase as an assignment of authorship. Based on this, he argued that Naburimannu developed the Babylonian System A of calculating Solar System ephemerides, and that Kidinnu later developed Babylonian System B. Otto E. Neugebauer has remained reserved to this conclusion and disputed Schnabel&#x27;s further inferences about Naburimannu&#x27;s life and work. The mathematician B.L. van der Waerden later (1963, 1968, 1974) concluded that System A was developed during the reign of Darius I (521–485 BC). System A, which uses step functions, appears to be somewhat more primitive than System B, which uses zigzag linear functions, although System A is more consistent than System B. While it thus appears that System A preceded System B, both systems remained in use at least until the 1st century BC.

The earliest preserved System A clay tablets (BM 36651, 36719, 37032, 37053) calculate an ephemeris for the planet Mercury from 424 to 401 BC. The oldest preserved lunar tablets date from 306 BC in the Hellenistic period. If Naburimannu was the originator of System A, then we can on that basis place him in Babylonia sometime between the Persian and Macedonian conquests.

==References==
*Otto E. Neugebauer: &quot;A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy&quot; Part Two IV A 4, 4A (p. 611). Springer, Heidelberg 1975 (reprinted 2004).
*Otto E. Neugebauer: &quot;Astronomical Cuneiform Texts&quot;. 3 volumes. London: 1956; 2nd edition, New York: Springer, 1983. (Commonly abbreviated as &quot;ACT&quot;): Vol.I pp. 12,13
*Herman Hunger and David Pingree: &quot;Astral Sciences in Mesopotamia&quot; pp. 215–217, 224, 258, 264. Brill, Leiden 1999.

==External links==
* A. Braeken, V. Nikov, and S. Nikova, &quot;Zigzag Functions and Related Objects in New Metric&quot;
* Luboš Motl&#x27;s Reference Frame: Maldacena in the Lineland (defines and discusses zig-zag functions)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q925672" start="0" end="33" title="Naburimannu" label="Nabu-[[ri (cuneiform)|ri]]-man-nu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36424" start="168" end="171" title="floruit" label="fl."/>
<link wikidata="Q787929" start="203" end="222" title="Babylonian astronomy" label="Chaldean astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q787931" start="227" end="240" title="Babylonian mathematics" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="265" end="274" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="345" end="351" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q170532" start="355" end="362" title="Amaseia" label="Amaseia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="415" end="422" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="463" end="474" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="481" end="491" title="Chaldea" label="Chaldaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="543" end="552" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188518" start="637" end="646" title="horoscope" label="horoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="753" end="758" title="Arabia" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="770" end="782" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="911" end="915" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q625134" start="948" end="956" title="Borsippa" label="Borsippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q741999" start="1166" end="1173" title="Kidinnu" label="Kidenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q925672" start="1175" end="1186" title="Naburimannu" label="Nabourianos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491488" start="1191" end="1199" title="Soudines" label="Soudines"/>
<link wikidata="Q372474" start="1221" end="1229" title="colophon (publishing)" label="colophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="1306" end="1311" title="moon" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q120200" start="1312" end="1321" title="ephemeris" label="ephemeris"/>
<link wikidata="Q741999" start="1510" end="1517" title="Kidinnu" label="Kidinnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q71313" start="1689" end="1707" title="Franz Xaver Kugler" label="Franz Xaver Kugler"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="2110" end="2122" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q111996" start="2190" end="2208" title="Otto E. Neugebauer" label="Otto E. Neugebauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q287097" start="2356" end="2376" title="Bartel Leendert van der Waerden" label="B.L. van der Waerden"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="2460" end="2468" title="Darius I" label="Darius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q917657" start="2504" end="2517" title="step function" label="step function"/>
<link wikidata="Q198438" start="2584" end="2590" title="zigzag" label="zigzag"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854269" start="2591" end="2606" title="linear function" label="linear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="2889" end="2895" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="2896" end="2903" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="2983" end="2994" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029283" start="3526" end="3539" title="David Pingree" label="David Pingree"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44796" wikidata="Q207073" url="?curid=44796" title="Giovanni Falcone">
<text>Giovanni Falcone (; 18 May 1939 – 23 May 1992) was an Italian judge and prosecuting magistrate. From his office in the Palace of Justice in Palermo, Sicily, he spent most of his professional life trying to overthrow the power of the Sicilian Mafia. After a long and distinguished career, culminating in the Maxi Trial in 1986–1987, on 23 May 1992, Falcone was assassinated by the Corleonesi Mafia in the Capaci bombing, on the A29 motorway near the town of Capaci.

His life parallels that of his close friend Paolo Borsellino. They both spent their early years in the same neighbourhood in Palermo. Though many of their childhood friends grew up in an environment in which the Mafia had a strong presence, both men fought against organised crime as prosecuting magistrates. They were both killed in 1992, a few weeks apart. In recognition of their tireless effort and sacrifice during the anti-mafia trials, they were both awarded the Gold Medal for Civil Valor and were acknowledged as martyrs of the Catholic Church. They were also named as heroes of the last 60 years in the 13 November 2006 issue of &quot;Time&quot;.

== Early life ==

Falcone was born in 1939 to a middle-class family in the Via Castrofilippo near the seaport district La Kalsa, a neighbourhood of central Palermo that suffered extensive destruction by aerial attacks during the Allied invasion of Sicily in 1943. His father, Arturo Falcone, the director of a provincial chemical laboratory, was married to Luisa Bentivegna. Giovanni had two older sisters, Anna and Maria. Falcone&#x27;s parents emphasised the importance of hard work, bravery and patriotism; he later said they &#x27;expected the maximum&#x27; from him. At school Falcone would get into fights with larger children if he thought his friends were being picked on.

The Mafia was present in the area but quiescent; Tommaso Spadaro, a boy with whom he played ping-pong in the neighbourhood Catholic Action recreation centre, would later become a notorious Mafia smuggler and killer, but mafiosi were not a major presence in his childhood. As boys, Falcone and Borsellino, who were born in the same neighbourhood, played soccer together on the Piazza Magione. Both had classmates who ended up as mafiosi. Falcone grew up at a time when Sicilians did not acknowledge the existence of the Mafia as a coherent organised group; assertions to the contrary by other Italians were often seen as &#x27;attacks from the north&#x27;.

After a classical education, Falcone studied law at the University of Palermo following a brief period of study at Livorno&#x27;s naval academy. Falcone and Borsellino met again at Palermo University. While Falcone drifted away from his parents&#x27; middle-class conservative Catholicism towards communism, Borsellino was religious and conservative; in his youth, he had been a member of the &quot;&quot; (FUAN), a right-wing university organisation affiliated with the neo-fascist MSI (Movimento Sociale Italiano). However, neither ever joined a political party, and although the ideologies of their political movements were diametrically opposed, they shared a history of opposing the Mafia. Their different political leanings did not thwart their friendship. Falcone wanted a naval career but his father thought him too independent-minded for the armed forces, and sent him to study law.

After graduating in 1961, Falcone began to practice law before being appointed a judge in 1964. Falcone eventually gravitated toward penal law after serving as a district magistrate. He was assigned to the prosecutor&#x27;s office in Trapani and Marsala, and then in 1978 to the bankruptcy court in Palermo.

== First trial against the Mafia ==
In early 1980, Falcone joined the ‘Office of Instruction’ (Ufficio istruzione), the investigative branch of the Prosecution Office of Palermo. He started to work at a particularly tense moment. Judge Cesare Terranova, a former parliamentary deputy and Antimafia reformer who had been the main prosecutor of the Mafia in the 1960s, was to have headed this office, but he was killed on 25 September 1979. Only two months earlier, on 21 July 1979, Boris Giuliano had been assassinated; he headed the police investigation squad investigating heroin trafficking by the Mafia headed by Rosario Spatola and Salvatore Inzerillo. Taking Terranova&#x27;s place was Rocco Chinnici, who was murdered by the Mafia in July 1983.

On 5 May 1980, Giuliano&#x27;s successor in investigating the heroin network, Carabinieri captain Emanuele Basile, was killed. The next day, the prosecuting judge Gaetano Costa signed 55 arrest warrants against the heroin-trafficking network of the Spatola-Inzerillo-Gambino clan. From Sicily, heroin was moved to the Gambino crime family in New York, who were related to the Inzerillos. Chinnici appointed Falcone to investigate the case, one of the biggest Antimafia operations in more than a decade. Costa signed the indictments after virtually all of the other prosecutors in his office had declined to do so – a fact that leaked out of the office and eventually cost him his life: he was murdered on 6 August 1980, on the orders of Inzerillo. Falcone was given bodyguards the next day.

In this tense atmosphere, Falcone introduced an innovative investigative technique in the Spatola investigation, seizing bank records to follow &quot;the money trail&quot; created by heroin deals to build his case, applying the skills he had learned unravelling bankruptcies. He was probably among the first Sicilian magistrates to establish working relationships with colleagues from other countries, thus developing an early understanding of the global dimensions of heroin trafficking, while enhancing the meagre investigative resources of his office. A colleague was astonished to discover that Falcone, who had no computers at his disposal, was personally recording the details listed on printouts of transactions that he had requisitioned from every bank in Palermo province.

He learned that the chemists of the French Connection had moved clandestine labs for refining heroin from Marseille to Sicily. At the end of 1980, he visited the United States and started to work with the U.S. Justice Department, resulting in &quot;some of the biggest international law enforcement operations in history&quot;, such as the Pizza Connection. The inquiries extended to Turkey, an important stopover on the route of morphine base; to Switzerland, where bank secrecy laws facilitated money laundering; and to Naples, where cigarette smuggling rings were being reconfigured as heroin operations. At the end of 1981, Falcone finalised the Spatola case for trial, which enabled the prosecution to win 74 convictions, based on Falcone&#x27;s &quot;web of solid evidence, bank and travel records, seized heroin shipments, fingerprint and handwriting analyses, wiretapped conversations and firsthand testimony&quot; that proved that &quot;Sicily had replaced France as the principal gateway for refining and exporting heroin to the United States&quot;.

== Antimafia pool ==


Falcone was plagued by a chronic lack of resources in his capacity as magistrate. A law to create a new offence of Mafia conspiracy and to confiscate Mafia assets was introduced by Pio La Torre, but it had been stalled in parliament for two years before La Torre was murdered on 30 April 1982. In May 1982, the Italian government sent Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa, a general of the Italian Carabinieri, to Sicily with orders to crush the Mafia. However, not long after arriving, on 3 September 1982, the General was gunned down in the city centre, his young wife by his side. Sicilians rose up in outrage. Outside the church, the politicians who attended were jeered and spat on, and blamed by Sicilians for tolerating the Mafia for so long. In response, the Italian government finally offered investigators the backing they needed, and Pio La Torre&#x27;s law was passed 10 days later.

Falcone&#x27;s responsibilities as a magistrate put tremendous strain on his personal life. In May 1986, he married his fiancée, Francesca Morvillo; Falcone had Mayor Leoluca Orlando himself conduct the private ceremony.

He became part of Palermo&#x27;s informal Antimafia Pool, created by Judge Rocco Chinnici. This was a group of investigating magistrates who closely worked together sharing information and developing new investigative and prosecutorial strategies. Most important, they assumed collective responsibility for carrying Mafia prosecutions forward: all the members of the pool signed prosecutorial orders to avoid exposing any one of them to particular risk, such as the one that had cost judge Gaetano Costa his life. Along with Falcone, the group included Paolo Borsellino, and .

== Maxi Trial ==

The Antimafia pool laid the groundwork for the Maxi Trial against the Sicilian Mafia at the preliminary investigative phase. Following Chinnici&#x27;s murder in July 1983, Antonino Caponnetto headed the pool. Falcone&#x27;s friend Antonio Cassara (who headed the police squad hunting fugitives) was murdered in 1985. Falcone led the prosecution for the trial, which began 10 February 1986, and ended on 16 December 1987. Of the 475 defendants—both those present and those tried &quot;in absentia&quot;—338 were convicted. A total of 2,665 years of prison sentences was shared out between the guilty, not including the life sentences handed to the 19 leading Mafia bosses and killers, including Michele Greco, Giuseppe Marchese and—&quot;in absentia&quot;—Salvatore Riina, Giuseppe Lucchese and Bernardo Provenzano.

One of the most important factors in the trial was the testimony of Tommaso Buscetta, the first-ever Sicilian Mafiosi boss to become an informant (pentito). His assertion that the Mafia was not a collection of separate gangs but a single organisation led some magistrates and detectives to question his credibility. After an interview, Falcone became convinced that Buscetta was genuine and treated him with respect. Buscetta&#x27;s key revelation was that a governing council, known as the Commission or &quot;Cupula&quot; headed a collective structure, thereby establishing that the top tier of Mafia members were complicit in all the organisation&#x27;s crimes. This premise became known as the Buscetta theorem.

== Setback ==

When Falcone&#x27;s record of success and high profile led to resentment from some quarters, he was not given the job he coveted as chief prosecutor in Palermo. The new incumbent did not accept that the hierarchical Mafia structure revealed by the Maxi Trial actually existed, and he attempted to force Falcone to work on cases of wife beating and car theft. Falcone became so frustrated that he spoke of resigning. During 1988 Falcone collaborated with Rudolph Giuliani, at the time U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, in operations against the Gambino and Inzerillo families. Rumours impugning his integrity deeply troubled Falcone during this period.

On 20 June 1989, a sack filled with dynamite sticks was discovered near a beach house Falcone had rented in the town of Addaura by policeman Nino Agostino. Although Falcone had been threatened before, this failed attempt bothered him to the extreme because it had all the signs of an inside job. At the time, he was meeting Swiss prosecutors Carla Del Ponte and Claudio Lehman from Lugano who were helping to investigate the Mafia&#x27;s financial holdings in Switzerland. Falcone believed that the assassination attempt not only involved the Mafia but some people in government as well. During the investigations into the money laundering networks of the Mafia, it became clear that former Palermo police chief Bruno Contrada, who had moved to the intelligence service SISDE, had warned a suspect about his impending arrest so that he could escape in time.

Falcone received an effusive congratulatory phone call from Giulio Andreotti after the narrow escape. Falcone privately thought it odd that Andreotti, who he had never spoken to, would suddenly contact him, and he mused about the significance of the incident to a friend. Unknown to Falcone the efforts to kill him were suspended while the Maxi trial verdicts went through the appeals process that had often set convicted Mafia members free. Later investigations into the murders of two police officers, Antonino Agostino and Emanuele Piazza, who worked for the secret service, revealed that they had secretly defused the bombs that had been placed by a Mafia commando aided by other secret service men. Agostino and his wife were killed on 5 August 1989 outside their home, and Piazza on 15 March 1990.

== Transfer to Rome ==

Exhausted and frustrated by the antagonism in Palermo, Falcone accepted a post in the Ministry of Justice in Rome offered to him by Claudio Martelli, the new minister of Justice in a new government of Giulio Andreotti in March 1991. The transfer was initially seen as a capitulation by Falcone, but he himself thought of it as a tactical move to better fight the Mafia. His first action was to prepare a decree to repair the disastrous sentence by Supreme Court judge Corrado Carnevale, known as the “sentence-killer”, that allowed most of the remaining defendants of the Maxi Trial to walk free from prison. The Martelli decree led to the immediate re-arrest of the Mafia bosses.

While in Rome he started to restructure the Italian prosecution system, creating district offices to fight the Mafia and a national office to fight organised crime. Next was his move to prevent Carnevale from reviewing the sentence of the Maxi Trial. In a blow to the Mafia, the Maxi Trial convictions were upheld by the Supreme Court in January 1992. To the surprise of many, Falcone&#x27;s move to Rome was very successful. He achieved a genuine revolution in the judiciary. The Mafia began to realize that Falcone was even more dangerous in Rome than he had been in Palermo.

== Death ==

The Maxi trial sentences being upheld by the Supreme Court were a blow to the Mafia&#x27;s prestige. The council of top bosses headed by Riina reacted by ordering the assassination of Salvatore Lima (on the grounds that he was an ally of Giulio Andreotti), and Falcone. Lima was shot dead on 12 March 1992.

Giovanni Brusca was tasked with killing Falcone. Riina wanted the murder carried out in Sicily in a demonstration of Mafia power; he instructed that the attack should be on Highway A29, which Falcone had to use to get from the airport to his home on his weekly visits. Four hundred kilograms (881 lbs.) of explosives were placed in a culvert under the highway between Palermo International Airport and the city of Palermo, near the town of Capaci. Brusca&#x27;s men carried out test drives, using flashbulbs to simulate detonating the blast on a speeding car, and a concrete structure was specially created and destroyed in an experimental explosion to see if the bomb would be powerful enough. Leoluca Bagarella assisted at the scene during preparations.

Brusca detonated the device by remote control from a small outbuilding on a hill to the right of the highway on 23 May 1992. Giovanni Falcone, his wife Francesca Morvillo and police officers Rocco Dicillo, Antonio Montinaro and Vito Schifani were killed in the blast. The explosion was so powerful that it registered on local earthquake monitors. Riina reportedly threw a party, toasting Falcone&#x27;s death with champagne, according to the pentito Salvatore Cancemi.

Thousands gathered at the Church of Saint Dominic for the funerals which were broadcast live on national TV. All regular television programs were suspended. Parliament declared a day of mourning. His colleague Paolo Borsellino was killed in another bombing 57 days later, along with five police officers: Agostino Catalano, Walter Cosina, Emanuela Loi, Vincenzo Li Muli, and Claudio Traina.

In the major crackdown against the Mafia following Falcone and Borsellino&#x27;s deaths, Riina was arrested on 15 January 1993, and was serving a life sentence, until his death in 2017, for sanctioning the murders of both magistrates as well as many other crimes. Brusca, also known as &quot;lo scannacristiani&quot; (the people slaughterer), was convicted of Falcone&#x27;s murder. He was one of Riina&#x27;s associates and admitted to detonating the explosives. Dozens of mafiosi were sentenced to life imprisonment for their involvement in Falcone&#x27;s murder.

Reports in May 2019 indicated that a Cosa Nostra insider revealed that John Gotti of the Gambino crime family had sent one of their explosives experts to Sicily to work with the Corleonesi Mafia clan to help plan the bombing that would kill Falcone.

=== Legacy ===

Palermo International Airport has been named &quot;Falcone-Borsellino Airport&quot; in honour of the two judges and hosts a memorial of the pair by the local sculptor Tommaso Geraci. Monuments commemorating Falcone and the other victims of the Capaci bombing were placed around Italy, including in Peschiera del Garda. Falcone was posthumously awarded the Train Foundation&#x27;s Civil Courage Prize, which recognises &quot;extraordinary heroes of conscience&quot;. A monument to Falcone stands also at the FBI&#x27;s National Academy in Virginia to honour his contributions to the &quot;Pizza Connection&quot; case.

== In popular culture ==
* &quot;Giovanni Falcone&quot; (1993), starring Michele Placido as Falcone;
* &quot;Excellent Cadavers&quot; (1999), with Chazz Palminteri in the role of Falcone;
* &quot;Il Capo dei Capi&quot; (2007), with Andrea Tidona in the role of Falcone;
* &quot;Vi perdono ma inginocchiatevi&quot;, a 2012 TV movie that tells the story of the men of the escort of Giovanni Falcone;
* &quot;Era d&#x27;estate&quot; (2016), starring Massimo Popolizio in the role of Falcone;
* &quot;The Traitor&quot; (2019), with Fausto Russo Alesi in the role of Falcone.

== See also ==
* Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa
* List of victims of the Sicilian Mafia
* Mani pulite
* Rovshan Aliyev

== References ==
== Sources ==

* Dickie, John (2004). &quot;Cosa Nostra. A history of the Sicilian Mafia&quot;, London: Coronet, (Review in the Observer, 15 February 2004)
* Follain, John (2012). &quot;Vendetta: The Mafia, Judge Falcone and the Quest for Justice&quot;, London: Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 
* Jamieson, Alison (2000). &quot;The Antimafia: Italy’s fight against organized crime&quot;, London: Macmillan, .
* La Licata, Francesco (1993), &quot;Storia di Giovanni Falcone&quot;, Milan: Rizzoli
* Lodato, Saverio (1999), &quot;Ho ucciso Giovanni Falcone: la confessione di Giovanni Brusca&quot;, Milan: Mondadori
* Schneider, Jane T. &amp; Peter T. Schneider (2003). &quot;Reversible Destiny: Mafia, Antimafia, and the Struggle for Palermo&quot;, Berkeley: University of California Press 
* Stille, Alexander (1995). &quot;Excellent Cadavers: The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic&quot;, New York: Vintage 

== External links ==
* Giovanni and Francesca Falcone Foundation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q207073" start="0" end="16" title="Giovanni Falcone" label="Giovanni Falcone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="84" end="94" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="140" end="147" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="149" end="155" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="233" end="247" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q600131" start="307" end="317" title="Maxi Trial" label="Maxi Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280643" start="380" end="396" title="Corleonesi Mafia clan" label="Corleonesi Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975713" start="404" end="418" title="Capaci bombing" label="Capaci bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q789096" start="427" end="439" title="Autostrada A29 (Italy)" label="A29 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q496878" start="457" end="463" title="Capaci" label="Capaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q312302" start="510" end="526" title="Paolo Borsellino" label="Paolo Borsellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q48624307" start="936" end="962" title="Gold Medal for Civil Valor" label="Gold Medal for Civil Valor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1003" end="1018" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="1111" end="1115" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282338" start="1243" end="1251" title="Kalsa" label="La Kalsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="1353" end="1378" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Allied invasion of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1855" end="1870" title="Tommaso Spadaro" label="Tommaso Spadaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q482027" start="1929" end="1944" title="Catholic Action" label="Catholic Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q40554819" start="2274" end="2283" title="Sicilians" label="Sicilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641504" start="2519" end="2540" title="University of Palermo" label="University of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q497499" start="2578" end="2606" title="Accademia Navale di Livorno" label="Livorno&amp;#x27;s naval academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201891" start="2727" end="2751" title="Catholic Church in Italy" label="conservative Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2760" end="2769" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126102" start="2951" end="2977" title="Movimento Sociale Italiano" label="Movimento Sociale Italiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q833040" start="3243" end="3255" title="Italian Navy" label="naval career"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="3489" end="3498" title="penal law" label="penal law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3562" end="3586" title="Prosecutor#Italy" label="prosecutor&amp;#x27;s office"/>
<link wikidata="Q13664" start="3590" end="3597" title="Trapani" label="Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q481514" start="3602" end="3609" title="Marsala" label="Marsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q266655" start="3901" end="3917" title="Cesare Terranova" label="Cesare Terranova"/>
<link wikidata="Q642428" start="4146" end="4160" title="Boris Giuliano" label="Boris Giuliano"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4281" end="4296" title=":it:Rosario Spatola (1940)" label="Rosario Spatola"/>
<link wikidata="Q730697" start="4301" end="4320" title="Salvatore Inzerillo" label="Salvatore Inzerillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445557" start="4356" end="4370" title="Rocco Chinnici" label="Rocco Chinnici"/>
<link wikidata="Q3723888" start="4515" end="4530" title="Emanuele Basile" label="Emanuele Basile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756947" start="4580" end="4593" title="Gaetano Costa" label="Gaetano Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419745" start="4735" end="4755" title="Gambino crime family" label="Gambino crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083386" start="6028" end="6045" title="French Connection" label="French Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="6098" end="6107" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="6197" end="6220" title="U.S. Justice Department" label="U.S. Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q26883251" start="6332" end="6348" title="Pizza Connection Trial" label="Pizza Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="6422" end="6430" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="6489" end="6505" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q15116027" start="6528" end="6547" title="cigarette smuggling" label="cigarette smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696807" start="7257" end="7269" title="Pio La Torre" label="Pio La Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q723595" start="7411" end="7437" title="Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa" label="Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="7464" end="7475" title="Carabinieri" label="Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696807" start="7911" end="7923" title="Pio La Torre" label="Pio La Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082053" start="8091" end="8109" title="Francesca Morvillo" label="Francesca Morvillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q703503" start="8129" end="8144" title="Leoluca Orlando" label="Leoluca Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774913" start="8226" end="8240" title="Antimafia Pool" label="Antimafia Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445557" start="8259" end="8273" title="Rocco Chinnici" label="Rocco Chinnici"/>
<link wikidata="Q312302" start="8737" end="8753" title="Paolo Borsellino" label="Paolo Borsellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q600131" start="8827" end="8837" title="Maxi Trial" label="Maxi Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="8850" end="8864" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Sicilian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q599185" start="8952" end="8971" title="Antonino Caponnetto" label="Antonino Caponnetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="9398" end="9412" title="life imprisonment" label="life sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706794" start="9474" end="9487" title="Michele Greco" label="Michele Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q633748" start="9489" end="9506" title="Giuseppe Marchese" label="Giuseppe Marchese"/>
<link wikidata="Q312308" start="9535" end="9550" title="Salvatore Riina" label="Salvatore Riina"/>
<link wikidata="Q373363" start="9552" end="9569" title="Giuseppe Lucchese" label="Giuseppe Lucchese"/>
<link wikidata="Q316315" start="9574" end="9593" title="Bernardo Provenzano" label="Bernardo Provenzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q212496" start="9664" end="9680" title="Tommaso Buscetta" label="Tommaso Buscetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032656" start="9743" end="9750" title="pentito" label="pentito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541491" start="10087" end="10097" title="Sicilian Mafia Commission" label="Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q212648" start="10782" end="10798" title="Rudolph Giuliani" label="Rudolph Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889567" start="10812" end="10863" title="U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York" label="U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419745" start="10891" end="10898" title="Gambino crime family" label="Gambino"/>
<link wikidata="Q730697" start="10903" end="10912" title="Salvatore Inzerillo" label="Inzerillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3605077" start="11120" end="11127" title="Addaura" label="Addaura"/>
<link wikidata="Q122285" start="11342" end="11357" title="Carla Del Ponte" label="Carla Del Ponte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11362" end="11376" title="Claudio Lehman" label="Claudio Lehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645704" start="11712" end="11726" title="Bruno Contrada" label="Bruno Contrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428135" start="11770" end="11775" title="SISDE" label="SISDE"/>
<link wikidata="Q50005" start="11919" end="11935" title="Giulio Andreotti" label="Giulio Andreotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098092" start="12820" end="12836" title="Claudio Martelli" label="Claudio Martelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q50005" start="12889" end="12905" title="Giulio Andreotti" label="Giulio Andreotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694203" start="13156" end="13173" title="Corrado Carnevale" label="Corrado Carnevale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970552" start="14146" end="14160" title="Salvatore Lima" label="Salvatore Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q50005" start="14200" end="14216" title="Giulio Andreotti" label="Giulio Andreotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525995" start="14270" end="14285" title="Giovanni Brusca" label="Giovanni Brusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q789096" start="14443" end="14454" title="Autostrada A29 (Italy)" label="Highway A29"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="14604" end="14611" title="culvert" label="culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q630645" start="14638" end="14667" title="Palermo International Airport" label="Palermo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="14684" end="14691" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q496878" start="14710" end="14716" title="Capaci" label="Capaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065148" start="14965" end="14982" title="Leoluca Bagarella" label="Leoluca Bagarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082053" start="15179" end="15197" title="Francesca Morvillo" label="Francesca Morvillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="15441" end="15450" title="champagne" label="champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032656" start="15469" end="15476" title="pentito" label="pentito"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945990" start="15477" end="15494" title="Salvatore Cancemi" label="Salvatore Cancemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772789" start="15523" end="15546" title="San Domenico, Palermo" label="Church of Saint Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312302" start="15707" end="15723" title="Paolo Borsellino" label="Paolo Borsellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975763" start="15738" end="15753" title="Massacre of Via D&amp;#x27;Amelio" label="another bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q301646" start="16527" end="16537" title="John Gotti" label="John Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419745" start="16545" end="16565" title="Gambino crime family" label="Gambino crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280643" start="16634" end="16655" title="Corleonesi Mafia clan" label="Corleonesi Mafia clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q630645" start="16723" end="16752" title="Palermo Airport" label="Palermo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="16881" end="16889" title="sculpture" label="sculptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992771" start="16890" end="16904" title="Tommaso Geraci" label="Tommaso Geraci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975713" start="16967" end="16981" title="Capaci bombing" label="Capaci bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47649" start="17021" end="17040" title="Peschiera del Garda" label="Peschiera del Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261127" start="17079" end="17095" title="Train Foundation" label="Train Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q31310" start="17103" end="17122" title="Civil Courage Prize" label="Civil Courage Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3767191" start="17374" end="17390" title="Giovanni Falcone (film)" label="Giovanni Falcone"/>
<link wikidata="Q380685" start="17414" end="17429" title="Michele Placido" label="Michele Placido"/>
<link wikidata="Q3790884" start="17450" end="17468" title="Excellent Cadavers (film)" label="Excellent Cadavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q338812" start="17488" end="17504" title="Chazz Palminteri" label="Chazz Palminteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997402" start="17537" end="17553" title="Il Capo dei Capi" label="Il Capo dei Capi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616068" start="17573" end="17586" title="Andrea Tidona" label="Andrea Tidona"/>
<link wikidata="Q24263059" start="17747" end="17764" title="Era d&amp;#x27;estate" label="Era d&amp;#x27;estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851411" start="17788" end="17805" title="Massimo Popolizio" label="Massimo Popolizio"/>
<link wikidata="Q63213307" start="17838" end="17849" title="The Traitor (2019 film)" label="The Traitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q723595" start="17930" end="17956" title="Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa" label="Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4015168" start="17959" end="17996" title="List of victims of the Sicilian Mafia" label="List of victims of the Sicilian Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q921474" start="17999" end="18010" title="Mani pulite" label="Mani pulite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502726" start="18013" end="18027" title="Rovshan Aliyev" label="Rovshan Aliyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562866" start="18063" end="18075" title="John Dickie (historian)" label="Dickie, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q659946" start="18829" end="18846" title="Alexander Stille" label="Stille, Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419433" start="18861" end="18934" title="Excellent Cadavers" label="Excellent Cadavers: The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44797" wikidata="Q27000" url="?curid=44797" title="Bagheria">
<text>Bagheria (; ) is a city and &quot;comune&quot; in the Metropolitan City of Palermo in Sicily, located approximately 10km to the east of the city centre.

==Etymology==
According to some sources, the name &quot;Bagheria&quot; (by way of old Sicilian &quot;Baarìa&quot;) originates from the Phoenician term &quot;Bayharia&quot; meaning &quot;land that descends toward the sea.&quot; 

==History==
Since its founding, the town has gone by the names of &quot;Bayharia&quot;, &quot;Baharia&quot;, and &quot;Baarìa&quot;. In 1658 Giuseppe Branciforti, Prince of Butera and former Viceroy of Sicily, built a large villa and established the region as the preferred location for the vacation homes of Palermo&#x27;s elites. Villas like the fortified Villa San Marco (designed by Andrea Cirrincione) with angled bastions and a drawbridge soon followed. The area experienced a boom in villa building roughly coinciding with the period of Savoyard (1713–21) and Habsburg (1721–30) rule and continuing for several decades thereafter. The two most striking baroque residences, Villa Valguarnera and Villa Palagonia were designed by the architect Tommaso Napoli in 1712 and 1715 respectively. Both were completed only decades later. Napoli had been influenced by his experiences in Rome and Vienna and this is reflected in his designs. Other architects and clients like Giuseppe Mariani and the Prince of Aragona also looked to prints of Roman exemplars when constructing the Villa Aragona (now Cutò) in 1714.

By 1763, tastes were changing. The Villa Villarosa, supervised by the young G. V. Marvuglia, was directly modeled on more neoclassical plans published by Jean-François de Neufforge in 1760. In 1769, one of the descendants of the original Prince of Butera redesigned his estate into a well-planned town, allowing him to collect rents from the inhabitants. Bagheria was a preferred stopping point for Europeans pursuing the Grand Tour in Sicily including Patrick Brydone, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, John Soane, Karl Friedrich Schinkel and many others.

In the 20th and 21st centuries, the Baroque and Neoclassical architecture of Bagheria was largely obscured by unregulated building.

==Main sights==

* Villa Palagonia, renowned for its complex external staircase, curved façades, and marble. Designed by Tommaso Maria Napoli, it is today open to the public.
* Other notable building include Villa Butera, Villa Valguarnera, Villa Trabia, Villa Spedalotto, Villa San Cataldo, Villa Villarosa, Villa San Marco, Villa Filangeri, Villa Sant&#x27;Isidoro, Villa Ramacca, Villa Serradifalco, Villa Larderia, Villa Campofranco.
* The Museum of the painter Renato Guttuso with a permanent exhibition of his work is placed in Villa Cattolica. A famous collection of old sicilian toys, il Museo del Giocattolo di Pietro Piraino, is placed in Villa Cuto.

==Religion==
Although the official feast day of Saint Joseph, the town&#x27;s patron saint, is March 19, it is celebrated in Bagheria the first Sunday of August; religious celebrations are held throughout the week leading up to Sunday, when more solemn ceremonies are initiated; the following Monday evening festivities conclude with a fireworks display.

==Culture and notable people==
Bagheria was the birthplace of many well-known 20th century figures: poet Ignazio Buttitta, politician Michelangelo Galioto, photographer Ferdinando Scianna, artists Renato Guttuso and Nino Garajo (1918—1977, Rome), gangster Joe Aiello, and film director Giuseppe Tornatore.
Tornatore portrayed his love for his town in the multiple award-winning film Nuovo Cinema Paradiso in 1989 and the 2009 film &quot;Baarìa&quot;, featuring the history of the town from the 1930s to the 1980s through the life of a local family.

The town is also depicted in the 1990 film &quot;The Godfather Part III&quot;.

Bagheria is the setting of Dacia Maraini&#x27;s eponymous autobiographical work.

Diego D&#x27;Amico (1893-1947), who represented the Christian Democrats in the Constituent Assembly of Italy from 1946 to 1947, was from Bagheria.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27000" start="0" end="8" title="Bagheria" label="Bagheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="34" end="40" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q20795016" start="54" end="82" title="Metropolitan City of Palermo" label="Metropolitan City of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="86" end="92" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="240" end="248" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="289" end="299" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="524" end="544" title="Giuseppe Branciforti" label="Giuseppe Branciforti"/>
<link wikidata="Q477405" start="556" end="562" title="Butera" label="Butera"/>
<link wikidata="Q637556" start="574" end="591" title="Viceroy of Sicily" label="Viceroy of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950" start="607" end="612" title="villa" label="villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856909" start="1132" end="1146" title="Tommaso Napoli" label="Tommaso Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q323231" start="1390" end="1397" title="Aragona" label="Aragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063780" start="1650" end="1676" title="Jean-François de Neufforge" label="Jean-François de Neufforge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057041" start="1949" end="1964" title="Patrick Brydone" label="Patrick Brydone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="1966" end="1992" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q549786" start="1994" end="2004" title="John Soane" label="John Soane"/>
<link wikidata="Q151759" start="2006" end="2029" title="Karl Friedrich Schinkel" label="Karl Friedrich Schinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="2084" end="2091" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="2096" end="2121" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241262" start="2200" end="2215" title="Villa Palagonia" label="Villa Palagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183061" start="2269" end="2275" title="Facade (Architecture)" label="façade"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="2282" end="2288" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856909" start="2302" end="2322" title="Tommaso Napoli" label="Tommaso Maria Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q653506" start="2436" end="2452" title="Villa Spedalotto" label="Villa Spedalotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q381277" start="2647" end="2661" title="Renato Guttuso" label="Renato Guttuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="2878" end="2887" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="2891" end="2903" title="Saint Joseph" label="Saint Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="2921" end="2933" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="3179" end="3196" title="fireworks display" label="fireworks display"/>
<link wikidata="Q703549" start="3304" end="3320" title="Ignazio Buttitta" label="Ignazio Buttitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856440" start="3333" end="3353" title="Michelangelo Galioto" label="Michelangelo Galioto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068737" start="3368" end="3386" title="Ferdinando Scianna" label="Ferdinando Scianna"/>
<link wikidata="Q381277" start="3396" end="3410" title="Renato Guttuso" label="Renato Guttuso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3415" end="3426" title="Nino Garajo" label="Nino Garajo"/>
<link wikidata="Q749097" start="3455" end="3465" title="Joe Aiello" label="Joe Aiello"/>
<link wikidata="Q53045" start="3485" end="3503" title="Giuseppe Tornatore" label="Giuseppe Tornatore"/>
<link wikidata="Q464032" start="3582" end="3603" title="Nuovo Cinema Paradiso" label="Nuovo Cinema Paradiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q797510" start="3636" end="3642" title="Baarìa (film)" label="Baarìa"/>
<link wikidata="Q202326" start="3798" end="3820" title="The Godfather Part III" label="The Godfather Part III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707165" start="3911" end="3929" title="Diego D&amp;#x27;Amico" label="Diego D&amp;#x27;Amico"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44798" wikidata="Q487929" url="?curid=44798" title="Milazzo">
<text>Milazzo (; ; ) is a municipality () in the Metropolitan City of Messina, Sicily, southern Italy; it is the largest commune in the Metropolitan City after Messina and Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto. The town has a population of around 31,500 inhabitants.

==History==
Several civilizations settled in Milazzo and left signs of their presence from the Neolithic age. In Homer&#x27;s &quot;Odyssey&quot; Milazzo is presumably the place where Ulysses is shipwrecked and meets Polyphemus.

Historically, the town originated as the ancient Greek &quot;Mylae&quot; () in Magna Graecia, an outpost of Zancle, occupied before 648 BC, perhaps as early as 716 BC.
It was taken by the Athenians in 426 BC. The people of Rhegium planted the exiles from Naxos and Catana in 395 BC as a counterpoise to Dionysius the Elder&#x27;s foundation of Tyndaris; but Dionysius soon took it. In the bay Gaius Duilius won the first Roman naval victory over the Carthaginians (260 BC).

In 36 BC the naval Battle of Mylae was fought offshore. The fleet of Octavian, commanded by Marcus Agrippa, engaged that of Sextus Pompey. While the battle was nearly a draw, Sextus could not replace his losses, and was thus weaker at the following Battle of Naulochus (36 BC), where he was utterly defeated.

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, under the Byzantines, the town became one of the first episcopal seats of Sicily. In the 9th century Milazzo was conquered by the Arabs, who built the first nucleus of the castle here.
Frederick II of Hohenstaufen further fortified the town and created a personal hunting park. The castle was later mostly rebuilt in the age of Charles V of Spain.

Milazzo was also the seat of a battle in 1718 between Spain and Austria, and of another fought by Giuseppe Garibaldi against the Kingdom of Two Sicilies during his Expedition of the Thousand.

==Geography==
Milazzo borders with the municipalities of Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto, Merì and San Filippo del Mela.

Milazzo is the point of reference of a vast territory, from Villafranca Tirrena to Patti (over 200,000 inhabitants). Is also, an important centre of the Strait of Messina Metropolitan Area (who also includes areas of Reggio Calabria), with the nearby town Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto. Located at the base of a peninsula that juts into the Tyrrhenian Sea with a small promontory, the town is from the city of Messina.

==Main sights==
*Castle of Milazzo. Begun by the Arabs, enlarged by the Normans, restored and strengthened by Frederick II, it is surrounded by walls with round towers built under Alfonso V of Aragon, with a Gothic portal dating from the 14th century. Near the castle are the ruins of the fourteenth-century palace of the grand jury and the old cathedral (1603) probably built on a design by architect Camillo Camillians.

Other sights include:
*the Church of Our Lady of Mount Carmel
*the Baroque Church of the Holy Crucifix (1629), housing a wooden canopy from the 18th century and a wooden crucifix from the early 17th century.
*Rock church of St. Anthony of Padua
*Sanctuary of St. Francis of Paola

==Economy==
Over time, the town is moving forward towards the sea by recording a continuous development of agriculture and fishing activities, commercial and industrial.

==Transportation==

The port of Milazzo is a departure point for ferries to the Aeolian Islands and Naples.

==See also==
*S.S. Milazzo
*Taberna Mylaensis

==References==

== External links ==

* Milazzo official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q487929" start="0" end="7" title="Milazzo" label="Milazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991250" start="43" end="71" title="Metropolitan City of Messina" label="Metropolitan City of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="73" end="79" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="154" end="161" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q42495" start="166" end="191" title="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto" label="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q193567" start="467" end="477" title="Polyphemus" label="Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="559" end="572" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="588" end="594" title="Zancle" label="Zancle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="703" end="710" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Rhegium"/>
<link wikidata="Q188527" start="735" end="740" title="Naxos" label="Naxos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="745" end="751" title="Catana" label="Catana"/>
<link wikidata="Q332750" start="783" end="802" title="Dionysius the Elder" label="Dionysius the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q671481" start="824" end="832" title="Tyndaris" label="Tyndaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q435408" start="873" end="886" title="Gaius Duilius" label="Gaius Duilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q277345" start="891" end="920" title="battle of Mylae" label="the first Roman naval victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="930" end="943" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q277345" start="974" end="989" title="Battle of Mylae" label="Battle of Mylae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="1024" end="1032" title="Octavian" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="1047" end="1061" title="Marcus Agrippa" label="Marcus Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q295228" start="1079" end="1092" title="Sextus Pompey" label="Sextus Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q676692" start="1204" end="1223" title="Battle of Naulochus" label="Battle of Naulochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="1287" end="1307" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1319" end="1328" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="1494" end="1522" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II of Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="1637" end="1655" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053203" start="1687" end="1703" title="Battle of Milazzo (1718)" label="a battle in 1718"/>
<link wikidata="Q531702" start="1738" end="1752" title="Battle of Milazzo (1860)" label="another fought"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="1756" end="1774" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="1787" end="1810" title="Kingdom of Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q228284" start="1822" end="1848" title="Expedition of the Thousand" label="Expedition of the Thousand"/>
<link wikidata="Q42495" start="1908" end="1933" title="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto" label="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q490416" start="1935" end="1939" title="Merì" label="Merì"/>
<link wikidata="Q491440" start="1944" end="1964" title="San Filippo del Mela" label="San Filippo del Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q494805" start="2027" end="2046" title="Villafranca Tirrena" label="Villafranca Tirrena"/>
<link wikidata="Q489948" start="2050" end="2055" title="Patti, Sicily" label="Patti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="2184" end="2199" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42495" start="2223" end="2248" title="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto" label="Barcellona Pozzo di Gotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="2373" end="2380" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3662697" start="2400" end="2417" title="Castle of Milazzo" label="Castle of Milazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="2493" end="2505" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q312304" start="2563" end="2582" title="Alfonso V of Aragon" label="Alfonso V of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="3194" end="3205" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="3230" end="3240" title="Commerce" label="commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="3245" end="3255" title="Industry (manufacturing)" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q179883" start="3338" end="3353" title="Aeolian Islands" label="Aeolian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="3358" end="3364" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487463" start="3381" end="3393" title="S.S. Milazzo" label="S.S. Milazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3979949" start="3395" end="3412" title="Taberna Mylaensis" label="Taberna Mylaensis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44800" wikidata="Q490851" url="?curid=44800" title="Termini Imerese">
<text>Termini Imerese (; ) is a town of the Metropolitan City of Palermo on the northern coast of Sicily, in Italy.
It is one of the most important towns of the Metropolitan City of Palermo, from which it is 33 km away. The town is easily reachable through its well developed infrastructures: there are three highway exits along the A19, its station is the meeting point between all of the Sicilian railway lines and its seaport links the town with other important maritime Italian cities. It has a judicial district. It is culturally interesting for the close Greek ruins of Himera, its numerous churches, Roman ruins, prehistorical finds and the annual celebration of the Carnival, one of the oldest in Italy. In the heart of the old town, at its lower level, there are the thermal baths of the Grand Hotel delle Terme, where precious hot waters have flowed since Roman age. In the areas of Termini and the near Sciara and Caccamo is the Oriented Nature Reserve of Mount St. Calogero, located between the coast of Termini Imerese Gulf and the surrounding fertile flat territory. In the east zone of the town, there is a large industrial area, especially known for the former factory which was owned by FIAT and for the ENEL power plant &quot;Ettore Majorana&quot;.

==History==

===Ancient history===
The site of the town has been populated since prehistoric times, as many archaeological excavations have shown through the years. Its documented history begins in 409 BC after the second Battle of Himera when its more ancient neighbour, Himera (now completely within the &quot;comune&quot;″s borders), was completely destroyed by the Carthaginian army under Hannibal Mago. Those who survived the devastation moved to a site then called &quot;Thermae&quot; which is today known as Termini and became the successor to Himera. The new town of Thermae or Therma, called for the sake of distinction Thermae Himerenses, obviously derived its name from the hot springs for which it was celebrated, and the discovery of which was connected by legends with the wanderings of Hercules. It appears to have quickly become a considerable town, though it continued to be subject to Carthaginian rule.

In the First Punic War its name is repeatedly mentioned. In 260 BC, a body of Roman troops was encamped in the neighbourhood when they were attacked by Hamilcar and defeated with heavy loss.

====Roman age====
Before the close of the First Punic War (241 BC), Thermae was besieged and taken by the Romans but the city seems to have been treated with unusual favour by its conquerors. Cicero tells us that the Romans allowed the Thermitani to govern their city and territory with their own laws as a reward for their steady fidelity. As they were on hostile terms with Rome during the First Punic War, it can only be to the subsequent period that this &quot;fidelity&quot; applies.

In the time of Cicero (80-40 BC), Thermae appears to have been a flourishing place, carrying on a considerable amount of trade, though he speaks of it as &quot;oppidum non maximum&quot;. He attested the magnificence of the ancient city and the taste of its citizens for the encouragement of art, calling it &quot;in primis Siciliae clarum et ornatum&quot; as statues were preserved by the Thermitani to whom they had been restored by Scipio after the conquest of Carthage.

It seems to have become a colony in the time of Augustus (27 BC – 14 AD), whence we find mention in inscriptions of the &quot;Ordo et Populus splendidissimae Coloniae Augustae Himeraeorum Thermitanorum&quot;. Thermae &quot;colonia&quot; is mentioned by Pliny and must refer to this town, though he seems to confuse it with Thermae Selinuntiae (modern Sciacca) on the south coast which was not a &quot;colony&quot;.

There are few subsequent accounts of Thermae; but, as its name is found in Ptolemy and the Itineraries, and from the impressive aqueduct and some other remains it appears to have continued in existence throughout the period of the Roman Empire, and probably never ceased to be inhabited, as the modern town of Termini Imerese retains the ancient site as well as name.

===Medieval and modern eras===
Following the fall of the Roman Empire, the city entered a period of decline. Termini continued to exist as a bishopric until the 12th century, though the list of bishops contains various gaps and uncertainties. Under Norman rule, the city was at first a royal city; it subsequently became one of 42 &quot;città demaniali&quot;, cities administered directly by the crown rather than local nobility. Above all, from the Middle Ages through the beginning of the 19th century, Termini served as a major centre for the collection and shipping of grain and other foodstuffs stored and subjected to duty in a special government warehouse complex (the &quot;caricatore regio&quot;). The presence of the &quot;caricatore&quot; improved the fortunes of the city, turning it into one of the major ports of Sicily and strengthening its commercial relationships with the maritime republics of Genoa, Pisa and Venice as well as the major Mediterranean ports (Marseille, Barcelona, etc.) and, during the 16th century, those of the Atlantic. Towards the end of the 18th century, Termini became the site of the Ereina Imerese branch of the Ereina di Palermo academy, followed soon thereafter by the establishment of the Accademia Euracea, later the Accademia Mediterranea Euracea. In the 19th century, however, the closing of the &quot;caricatore&quot; precipitated a profound economic crisis that lasted until the end of the 20th century, when artisanal and proto-industrial activity began to replace the traditional agricultural base of the city&#x27;s economy. A period of population decline, linked primarily to emigration to the Americas, was balanced at the beginning of the 20th century by immigration from Agrigento, Messina and Ragusa.

Between 1970 and 2011, Termini was home to a large Fiat automobile manufacturing facility, where small cars such as the 126, the original Panda, and the Punto have been manufactured. The plant was the sole assembly site for the second generation Lancia Ypsilon built between 2005 and 2011. In 2006 the plant celebrated its four millionth car produced. At the end of 2011, Fiat sold the plant to Chinese car manufacturer Chery. From January 2015, it was owned by Blutec, until its owner was arrested by the Guardia di Finanza in 2020. The plant was subsequently put up for sale again in 2023.

There is also a power station operated by Enel with a generation capacity of 454 MW.

==Main sights==

*Roman aqueduct bridge with two tiers of arches and other parts of the aqueduct of Cornelius
*Roman amphitheatre probably from the Augustan age built into houses between Via Garibaldi and Via San Marco. It has a double ambulatory, a remarkable for such a small building (around 98 x 75 m). The cavea was partly excavated and partly built up: a part of the lower order of the arches remains visible high on the western part (in via Anfiteatro).
*Temple of Victory at Himera
*Cathedral of St. Nicholas of Bari (1604). It houses a statue by Giorgio da Milano (1487) and several works by Ignazio Marabitti.
*Church of St. Catherine of Alexandria (1?th-16th centuries). It is home to a series of frescoes depicting the life of the namesake saint.
*Church of Santa Maria di Gesù (late 15th century). Works inside include a sculpture attributed to Giorgio da Milano and a high-relief by Domenico Gagini (c. 1480)

===Aqueduct===

The Roman aqueduct bridge is the largest and best preserved of the island.

The source was located 5 km east of the city, at the foot of Monte San Calogero where the remains of the two settling tanks can still be seen in the locality of Brucato.

The aqueduct needed to cross the Barratina stream and the earliest the crossing was made at Fontana Superiore with a siphon about 600 m long, of which the well preserved hexagonal compression tower remains, 16 m high and resting on a square plinth of 6 m sides. On five of the sides were windows and from the east side the conduit started. On this tower was once a large inscription, now disappeared: &quot;aquae Cornealiae ductus p. XX&quot;. The last letters (&quot;twenty feet&quot;) perhaps corresponds to the sides of the building.

Later it seems that the aqueduct passed further downstream: in Figurella a double-order bridge of arches is still visible (originally nine in the lower, fifteen in the upper: two arches for each order collapsed), 14 m high. The structure with facing blocks is the same as that of the amphitheatre and the curia and shows that it belongs to the same building project of the Augustan colony.

==Sister cities==
* Elk Grove Village, United States, since 2002
* La Valletta, Malta, since 2014
* Zihuatanejo, Mexico, since 2014 
* Vilnius, Lithuania, since 2014
* Maranello, Italy, since 2016

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

==External links==
* Selected Civil Records</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q490851" start="0" end="15" title="Termini Imerese" label="Termini Imerese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="38" end="66" title="Palermo" label="Metropolitan City of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="92" end="98" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q789060" start="327" end="330" title="Autostrada A19 (Italy)" label="A19"/>
<link wikidata="Q34966562" start="415" end="422" title="Port of Termini Imerese" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111219" start="570" end="576" title="Himera" label="Himera"/>
<link wikidata="Q496936" start="908" end="914" title="Sciara, Sicily" label="Sciara"/>
<link wikidata="Q490974" start="919" end="926" title="Caccamo" label="Caccamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287213" start="1477" end="1500" title="Battle of Himera (409 BC)" label="second Battle of Himera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111219" start="1534" end="1540" title="Himera" label="Himera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="1631" end="1643" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q685976" start="1655" end="1668" title="Hannibal Mago" label="Hannibal Mago"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="2063" end="2071" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="2192" end="2207" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="2263" end="2268" title="ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796115" start="2337" end="2345" title="Hamilcar" label="Hamilcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2569" end="2575" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="3367" end="3373" title="Colonia (Roman)" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="3389" end="3397" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="3594" end="3599" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q432681" start="3692" end="3699" title="Sciacca" label="Sciacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="3832" end="3839" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3988" end="4000" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884809" start="4375" end="4386" title="Normans of Sicily" label="Norman rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="5038" end="5043" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365493" start="5045" end="5049" title="Republic of Pisa" label="Pisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="5054" end="5060" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q974693" start="5757" end="5783" title="Italian American" label="emigration to the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13678" start="5855" end="5864" title="Agrigento" label="Agrigento"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="5866" end="5873" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13674" start="5878" end="5884" title="Ragusa, Sicily" label="Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27597" start="5938" end="5942" title="Fiat" label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q933646" start="6007" end="6010" title="Fiat 126" label="126"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744464" start="6025" end="6030" title="Fiat Panda" label="Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q223864" start="6040" end="6045" title="Fiat Punto" label="Punto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801874" start="6133" end="6147" title="Lancia Ypsilon" label="Lancia Ypsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28912884" start="6349" end="6355" title="Blutec" label="Blutec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552861" start="6393" end="6411" title="Guardia di Finanza" label="Guardia di Finanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983217" start="7028" end="7055" title="Temple of Victory (Himera)" label="Temple of Victory at Himera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7121" end="7138" title="Giorgio da Milano" label="Giorgio da Milano"/>
<link wikidata="Q470547" start="7167" end="7184" title="Ignazio Marabitti" label="Ignazio Marabitti"/>
<link wikidata="Q736442" start="7463" end="7478" title="Domenico Gagini" label="Domenico Gagini"/>
<link wikidata="Q328455" start="8702" end="8719" title="Elk Grove Village" label="Elk Grove Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q23800" start="8749" end="8760" title="La Valletta" label="La Valletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q202831" start="8782" end="8793" title="Zihuatanejo" label="Zihuatanejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="8817" end="8824" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q100060" start="8850" end="8859" title="Maranello" label="Maranello"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44802" wikidata="Q2032656" url="?curid=44802" title="Pentito">
<text>Pentito (; lit. &quot;repentant&quot;; plural: &quot;pentiti&quot;) is used colloquially to designate collaborators of justice in Italian criminal procedure terminology who were formerly part of criminal organizations and decided to collaborate with a public prosecutor. The judicial category of &quot;pentiti&quot; was originally created in 1970s to combat violence and terrorism during the period of left-wing and right-wing terrorism known as the Years of Lead. During the 1986–87 Maxi Trial and after the testimony of Tommaso Buscetta, the term was increasingly applied to former members of organized crime in Italy who had abandoned their organization and started helping investigators.

== Role and benefits ==
In exchange for the information they deliver, &quot;pentiti&quot; receive shorter sentences for their crimes, in some cases even freedom. In the Italian judicial system, &quot;pentiti&quot; can obtain personal protection, a new name, and some money to start a new life in another place, possibly abroad.

This practice is common in other countries as well. In the United States, criminals testifying against their former associates can enter the Witness Protection Program, and be given new identities with supporting paperwork. The Italian Mafia bosses Buscetta and Francesco Marino Mannoia were allowed to live in the U.S. under new identities in the Witness Protection Program when Italy did not yet have such a program.

==Cases==
Among the most famous Mafia &quot;pentiti&quot; is Tommaso Buscetta, the first important &quot;pentito&quot;. He was helpful to judge Giovanni Falcone in describing the Sicilian Mafia Commission or &quot;Cupola&quot;, the leadership of the Sicilian Mafia in the 1980s, and identifying the main operational channels that the Mafia used for its business.

In Italy, important successes were achieved with the cooperation of &quot;pentiti&quot; in the fight against terrorism (especially against the Red Brigades), by Carabinieri general Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa (who was later killed by the Mafia).

In the period until the 1990s, there were few, albeit significant, &quot;pentiti&quot; such as Tommaso Buscetta, Salvatore Contorno, Antonino Calderone, etc. However, this changed during the early 1990s. From 1992, over a thousand &quot;mafiosi&quot; have agreed to collaborate with Italian justice.
In some cases, &quot;pentiti&quot; have invented stories to obtain reductions in jail time. A famous case regarded the popular TV anchorman Enzo Tortora, who was falsely accused of cocaine trafficking and Camorra membership by a &quot;pentito&quot; named Giovanni Melluso. Tortora was detained for years before being cleared; he developed cancer and died soon after the case was finally solved, some say because of the emotional stress of his imprisonment.

===Important &quot;pentiti&quot; of the Sicilian Mafia===

*Leonardo Vitale (1941–1984) was the first to become a &quot;pentito&quot; in 1973, although originally his confessions were not taken seriously.
*Tommaso Buscetta (1928–2000) was the first high-profile &quot;pentito&quot; against the Sicilian Mafia. He started to collaborate with the anti-Mafia prosecutor Giovanni Falcone in 1984. His testimony was of crucial importance in the landmark Maxi Trial of 1986–87.
*Salvatore Contorno (born 1946) started to collaborate in October 1984, following the example of Buscetta.
* Leonardo Messina (born 1955), member of the San Cataldo clan, who became an informant in 1992. He was the greater accuser of Giulio Andreotti.
* Antonino Giuffrè (born 1945), boss of Caccamo and member of Corleonesi, turned informant in 2002, after his arrest.
*Antonino Calderone (1935–2013) started to collaborate in April 1987.
*Francesco Marino Mannoia (born 1951) started to collaborate in October 1989 because his brother had been murdered. He was the first &quot;pentito&quot; who used to belong to the winning faction of the Second Mafia War (1981–83).
*Giovanni Brusca (born 1957), the murderer of anti-Mafia prosecutor Falcone, began to collaborate in 1996.
* Santino Di Matteo (born 1954), became an informant in 1993 after his arrest; offered information relating to the Capaci bombing, for this reason his son Giuseppe was kidnapped, murdered and dissolved in acid.
*Salvatore Cancemi (1942–2011), another of Falcone&#x27;s assassins, turned himself to the Carabinieri in July 1993 and immediately began collaborating.
*Giuseppe Marchese (1963), Filippo Marchese&#x27;s nephew and who became an informant in 1992.
*Gaspare Mutolo (born 1940), started to collaborate in prison in May 1992 and was the first mafioso who spoke about the connections between the Cosa Nostra and Italian politicians.

===Other important &quot;pentiti&quot;===
*Pasquale Barra (1942–2015), the first &quot;pentito&quot; and high-ranking member of Raffaele Cutolo&#x27;s Nuova Camorra Organizzata.
*Pasquale Galasso (born 1955), former high-ranking member of the Nuova Famiglia faction of the Camorra.
*Carmine Alfieri (born 1943), former &quot;Boss of Bosses&quot; of the Nuova Famiglia.
*Carmine Schiavone (1943–2015), former high-ranking member of the Casalesi clan.
*Maurizio Abbatino, former boss of the Banda della Magliana.
*Felice Maniero (born 1954), former boss of the Mala del Brenta.

== Cultural acceptance ==
In some southern Italian communities, the Mafia has a significant presence, and in these areas becoming a &quot;pentito&quot; is tantamount to a death sentence. Indeed, the Mafia family of Totò Riina based in the town of Corleone habitually extended the death sentence of the &quot;pentiti&quot; over to their relatives. For example, several of Tommaso Buscetta&#x27;s close family members were killed in a long series of murders.

== Commentary on the term ==
It is often pointed out that the correct term should be &quot;collaboratori di giustizia&quot;, or &quot;collaborators with justice&quot;. The word &quot;pentito&quot; implies a moral judgment that is considered inappropriate for the courts of justice to make.

== Criticism ==
In Italy, &quot;pentiti&quot; have come under criticism because of the favours they receive and because they would invent stories to receive benefits; they would invent stories to persecute people they do not like; their employment is seen as a reward for criminals, instead of a punishment; and they would be unreliable since they come from a criminal organization. Criticism comes most often from politicians, especially when they or an associate of theirs is under investigation for connections to the Mafia. It is therefore interpreted by some as an attempt to discredit one&#x27;s own accusers, instead of a genuine preoccupation of the common citizen&#x27;s civil rights. Luciano Violante, a politician and former president of the Italian Antimafia Commission, countered that &quot;We do not find information about the Mafia among nuns.&quot;

Laws have been passed that bar &quot;pentiti&quot; from obtaining substantial benefits unless their revelations are later deemed new material, and lead to concrete results. The State can collect revelations only for six months after the initial intention to collaborate, after which they cannot be used in court. This has had the effect of reducing the appeal of becoming a &quot;pentito&quot; since a single mafia associate does not know whether his knowledge will be useful to the prosecutors at the time of defection. Defection from the mafia in Italy have subsequently sharply reduced from the height reached in the early nineties, and results in the fight against mafia have reduced accordingly.

== See also ==

* :Category:Pentiti
* Informant
* Turn state&#x27;s evidence

==References==

==Bibliography==
*Stille, Alexander (1995). &quot;Excellent Cadavers. The Mafia and the Death of the First Italian Republic&quot;, New York: Vintage </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146071" start="138" end="156" title="criminal procedure" label="criminal procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="252" end="269" title="public prosecutor" label="public prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="371" end="380" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850939" start="450" end="463" title="Years of Lead (Italy)" label="Years of Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q600131" start="484" end="494" title="Maxi Trial" label="Maxi Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q212496" start="522" end="538" title="Tommaso Buscetta" label="Tommaso Buscetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102072" start="595" end="619" title="organized crime in Italy" label="organized crime in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640069" start="1106" end="1148" title="Turn state&amp;#x27;s evidence" label="testifying against their former associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q13584039" start="1163" end="1189" title="United States Federal Witness Protection Program" label="Witness Protection Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114987" start="1284" end="1308" title="Francesco Marino Mannoia" label="Francesco Marino Mannoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212496" start="1503" end="1519" title="Tommaso Buscetta" label="Tommaso Buscetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q207073" start="1586" end="1602" title="Giovanni Falcone" label="Giovanni Falcone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541491" start="1621" end="1646" title="Sicilian Mafia Commission" label="Sicilian Mafia Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="1674" end="1684" title="leadership" label="leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="1915" end="1924" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194019" start="1949" end="1961" title="Red Brigades" label="Red Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="1967" end="1978" title="Carabinieri" label="Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q723595" start="1987" end="2013" title="Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa" label="Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q270389" start="2482" end="2491" title="anchorman" label="anchorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726658" start="2492" end="2504" title="Enzo Tortora" label="Enzo Tortora"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="2533" end="2540" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q468804" start="2557" end="2564" title="Camorra" label="Camorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563917" start="2607" end="2623" title="Giovanni Melluso" label="Giovanni Melluso"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="2781" end="2787" title="stress (medicine)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083607" start="2870" end="2885" title="Leonardo Vitale" label="Leonardo Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q212496" start="3016" end="3032" title="Tommaso Buscetta" label="Tommaso Buscetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q207073" start="3177" end="3193" title="Giovanni Falcone" label="Giovanni Falcone"/>
<link wikidata="Q600131" start="3259" end="3269" title="Maxi Trial" label="Maxi Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083570" start="3283" end="3301" title="Salvatore Contorno" label="Salvatore Contorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3830407" start="3391" end="3407" title="Leonardo Messina" label="Leonardo Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q477744" start="3435" end="3446" title="San Cataldo, Sicily" label="San Cataldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q50005" start="3516" end="3532" title="Giulio Andreotti" label="Giulio Andreotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089131" start="3536" end="3552" title="Antonino Giuffrè" label="Antonino Giuffrè"/>
<link wikidata="Q490974" start="3574" end="3581" title="Caccamo" label="Caccamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280643" start="3596" end="3606" title="Corleonesi" label="Corleonesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986746" start="3653" end="3671" title="Antonino Calderone" label="Antonino Calderone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114987" start="3723" end="3747" title="Francesco Marino Mannoia" label="Francesco Marino Mannoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258636" start="3924" end="3940" title="Second Mafia War" label="Second Mafia War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525995" start="3953" end="3968" title="Giovanni Brusca" label="Giovanni Brusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q767466" start="4061" end="4078" title="Santino Di Matteo" label="Santino Di Matteo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3975713" start="4174" end="4188" title="Capaci bombing" label="Capaci bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945990" start="4271" end="4288" title="Salvatore Cancemi" label="Salvatore Cancemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="4361" end="4372" title="Carabinieri" label="Carabinieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q633748" start="4424" end="4441" title="Giuseppe Marchese" label="Giuseppe Marchese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495283" start="4519" end="4533" title="Gaspare Mutolo" label="Gaspare Mutolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="4662" end="4673" title="Cosa Nostra" label="Cosa Nostra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897001" start="4743" end="4757" title="Pasquale Barra" label="Pasquale Barra"/>
<link wikidata="Q922080" start="4828" end="4843" title="Raffaele Cutolo" label="Raffaele Cutolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879768" start="4851" end="4876" title="Nuova Camorra Organizzata" label="Nuova Camorra Organizzata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897060" start="4879" end="4895" title="Pasquale Galasso" label="Pasquale Galasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879779" start="4943" end="4957" title="Nuova Famiglia" label="Nuova Famiglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660351" start="4983" end="4998" title="Carmine Alfieri" label="Carmine Alfieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879779" start="5053" end="5067" title="Nuova Famiglia" label="Nuova Famiglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043710" start="5070" end="5087" title="Carmine Schiavone" label="Carmine Schiavone"/>
<link wikidata="Q969514" start="5135" end="5148" title="Casalesi clan" label="Casalesi clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852491" start="5151" end="5168" title="Maurizio Abbatino" label="Maurizio Abbatino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511362" start="5189" end="5209" title="Banda della Magliana" label="Banda della Magliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742174" start="5212" end="5226" title="Felice Maniero" label="Felice Maniero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843729" start="5259" end="5274" title="Mala del Brenta" label="Mala del Brenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q312308" start="5492" end="5502" title="Totò Riina" label="Totò Riina"/>
<link wikidata="Q485724" start="5524" end="5532" title="Corleone" label="Corleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q212496" start="5648" end="5664" title="Tommaso Buscetta" label="Tommaso Buscetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="6543" end="6552" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="the Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="6706" end="6717" title="civil right" label="civil right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635569" start="6720" end="6736" title="Luciano Violante" label="Luciano Violante"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684778" start="6787" end="6807" title="Antimafia Commission" label="Antimafia Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="6879" end="6882" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7612" end="7629" title=":Category:Pentiti" label=":Category:Pentiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="7632" end="7641" title="Informant" label="Informant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640069" start="7644" end="7670" title="Turn state&amp;#x27;s evidence" label="Turn state&amp;#x27;s evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q659946" start="7706" end="7723" title="Alexander Stille" label="Stille, Alexander"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44805" wikidata="Q144786" url="?curid=44805" title="Zakopane">
<text>Zakopane (Podhale Goral: &quot;Zokopane&quot;) is a town in the south of Poland, in the southern part of the Podhale region at the foot of the Tatra Mountains. From 1975 to 1998, it was part of Nowy Sącz Voivodeship; since 1999, it has been part of Lesser Poland Voivodeship. its population was 27,266. Zakopane is a centre of Goral culture and is often referred to as &quot;the winter capital of Poland&quot;. It is a popular destination for mountaineering, skiing, and tourism.

Zakopane lies near Poland&#x27;s border with Slovakia, in a valley between the Tatra Mountains and Gubałówka Hill. It is connected by rail and road to the provincial capital, Kraków. Zakopane lies above sea level and centres on the intersection of its Krupówki and Kościuszko Streets.

== History ==
The earliest documents mentioning Zakopane date to the 17th century, describing a glade called &quot;Zakopisko&quot;. In 1676, it was a village of 43 inhabitants. In 1818, Zakopane was a small town that was still being developed. There were only 340 homes that held 445 families. The population of Zakopane at that time was 1,805: 934 women and 871 men. The first church was built in 1847, by Józef Stolarczyk.

Zakopane became a center for the region&#x27;s mining and metallurgy industries; by the 19th century, it was the largest center for metallurgy in the region of Galicia. It expanded during the 19th century as the climate attracted more inhabitants. By 1889, it had developed from a small village into a climatic health resort. Rail services to Zakopane began on October 1, 1899. In the late 1800s, Zakopane constructed a road that went to the town of Nowy Targ and had railways that came from Chabówka. Because of easier transportation, the population of Zakopane had increased to about 3,000 people by the end of the 1800s. In the 19th century, Krupówki Street was just a narrow beaten path that was meant for people to get from the central part of town to the village of Kuźnice.

The ski jump on Wielka Krokiew was opened in 1925.
The cable car to Kasprowy Wierch was completed in 1936.
The funicular connected Zakopane and the top of Gubałówka in 1938.

Because of Zakopane&#x27;s popular ski mountains, the town gained popularity which made the number of tourists increase to about 60,000 people by 1930.

During the joint German-Soviet invasion of Poland, which started World War II in September 1939, the town was invaded by Germany, and the &quot;Einsatzgruppe I&quot; entered the town on September 4, 1939, to commit various crimes against Poles. In March 1940, representatives of the Soviet NKVD and the Nazi Gestapo met for one week in Zakopane&#x27;s Villa Tadeusz, to coordinate the pacification of resistance in Poland. Throughout World War II, Zakopane served as an underground staging point between Poland and Hungary.

From 1942 to 1943, 1,000 prisoners from the German Kraków-Płaszów concentration camp were set to work in a stone quarry. In 1944, during the Warsaw Uprising, the Germans deported thousands of Varsovians from the Dulag 121 camp in Pruszków, where they were initially imprisoned, to Zakopane. Those Poles were mainly old people, ill people and women with children. In mid-October 1944, there were 3,800 registered Poles, who were expelled from Warsaw, and probably another 3,800 unregistered expellees. In January 1945, the Germans retreated from Zakopane and the German occupation ended.

Immediately after the war, a children&#x27;s Home for Holocaust Survivors was established in Zakopane.

==Climate==
Zakopane has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Dfb&quot;), with the main factor behind its relative coldness compared to the rest of Poland is its altitude. In general, the temperature tends to fall with altitude, therefore Zakopane is almost colder than northern Kraków, which is more than lower than Zakopane. With higher altitudes, the climate gets even colder, therefore, on the top of Kasprowy Wierch ( above sea level), the climate is tundra-like (Köppen: &quot;ET&quot;). The tree line is located at about above sea level in the Tatra Mountains.

Winters are typically frosty but are relatively sunny for Poland - in fact, Zakopane receives among the most sun in winter in the country. Snow is normally abundant, particularly in the higher altitudes, which makes Zakopane among the most popular ski resorts in Poland. Summers are cool to warm but rarely get hot.

The defining feature of the local climate is the location on the northern slope of the Tatra mountains. Zakopane receives significantly more precipitation than cities on the lowlands to the north of the Carpathians, and just like in the mountains in general, there might be sudden weather changes from sunny to rainy, and vice versa. Occasionally, a very warm foehn wind locally known as halny may dramatically increase the temperatures, sometimes beyond in winter.

Extreme temperatures range from on February 1, 1956 up to on August 8, 2013; the record cold daily maximum is , set on February 1, 1956, while, conversely, the record warm daily minimum is on August 29, 1992.

==Architecture==
The Zakopane Style of Architecture is an architectural mode inspired by the regional art of Poland&#x27;s highland region known as Podhale. Drawing on the motifs and traditions in the buildings of the Carpathian Mountains, the style was pioneered by Stanisław Witkiewicz and is now considered a core tradition of the Goral people.

The most prominent examples of the style are:

* Villa Koliba - built in 1892–93 by Stanisław Witkiewicz
* Villa Oksza - built in 1894–95 by Stanisław Witkiewicz
* Villa Pod Jedlami - built in 1897 by Stanisław Witkiewicz
* Chapel in Jaszczurówka - built in 1904–07 by Stanisław Witkiewicz
* Tatra Museum - built in 1913–24 by Stanisław Witkiewicz
* Grand Hotel Stamary - built in 1903-05 by Eugeniusz Wesołowski

Other important sights in Zakopane include:

* Holy Family Church - Romanesque Revival church built in 1879–96 by Józef Pius Dziekoński
* Church of Our Lady of Częstochowa - wooden church built in 1847, located next to the Old Cemetery in Pęksowy Brzyzek
* Old Cemetery in Pęksowy Brzyzek - burial place of many artists, architects, writers, sculptors and mountaineer, among them Stanisław Witkiewicz, Kazimierz Przerwa-Tetmajer, Władysław Hasior and Sabała. There is also a cenotaph of Witkacy.
* Modernist stations of the Kasprowy Wierch cable railway (1935–36) and the Gubałówka Hill funicular (1938)

==Culture==

Since the end of the 19th century Zakopane was an important place for many artists, who frequently visited, worked or lived here, especially during the Young Poland period.

Today the city hosts many museums and galleries:
* Tatra Museum
* Museum of Tatra National Park
* Museum of Zakopane Style at Villa Koliba
* Villa Oksza Art Gallery
* Karol Szymanowski Museum in Villa Atma
* Jan Kasprowicz Museum in Villa Harenda
* Kornel Makuszyński Museum
* Władysław Hasior Gallery
* Kamil Stoch Museum Galeria Kamiland
* Museum of the Armed Resistance in the former Hotel Palace

== Sports ==
The Tatras are a popular destination among hikers, skiers, ski-tourers and climbers.

===Mountaineering===
There is a network of well-marked hiking trails in the Tatras and according to the national park regulations the hikers must stick to them. Most of these trails are overcrowded, especially in the summer season.

The High Tatras offer excellent opportunities for climbing (up to X UIAA grade).

In summer, lightning and snow are both potential hazards for climbers, and the weather can change quickly. Thunderstorms are common in the afternoons. In winter the snow can be up to several meters deep.

===Skiing===
In the winter, thousands arrive in Zakopane to ski, especially around Christmas and in February. The most popular skiing areas are Kasprowy Wierch and Gubałówka. There are a number of cross country skiing trails in the forests surrounding the town.

Zakopane hosted the Nordic World Ski Championships in 1929, 1939, and 1962; the winter Universiades in 1956, 1993, and 2001; the biathlon World Championship; several ski jumping world cups; and several Nordic combined, Nordic and Alpine European Cups. It hosted the second Alpine World Ski Championships in 1939, the first outside the Alps and the last official world championships prior to World War II.

Zakopane made unsuccessful bids to host the 2006 Winter Olympics and the 2011 and 2013 Alpine World Ski Championships.

=== Football ===
In Zakopane, there are two football clubs – one of them is KS Zakopane, which was established in 2007 as a result of the merger of ZKP Zakopane and Jutrzenka Zakopane. It currently competes in the B-class league, in the Podhale II group. Its matches are played at the facility located at Orkana Street 6.

In the 2015/2016 season, the Football Club Zakopane was reactivated. After a successful 2015/16 season, in which the ZKP players managed to secure a promotion-eligible spot in the Podhale C-class, they are now playing in the Podhale B-class league.

== Tourism ==

Zakopane is visited by over 2,500,000 tourists a year. In the winter, Zakopane&#x27;s tourists are interested in winter sports activities such as skiing, snowboarding, ski jumping, snowmobiling, sleigh rides, snowshoe walks, and Ice skating. During the summer, Tourists come to do activities like hiking, climbing, bike and horse ride the Tatras mountain, there are many trails in the Tatras. Tourists ride quads and dirt bikes that you can rent. Swimming and boat rides on the Dunajec river are popular. Many come to experience Goral culture, which is rich in its unique styles of food, speech, architecture, music, and costume. Zakopane is especially popular during the winter holidays, which are celebrated in traditional style, with dances, decorated horse-pulled sleighs called kuligs and roast lamb.

A popular tourist activity is taking a stroll along the town&#x27;s most popular street: Krupówki. It is lined with stores, restaurants, carnival rides, and performers.

During the winter and summer seasons, Krupówki Street is crowded with tourists visiting the shops and restaurants. In the summer, a local market along Krupówki Street offers traditional Goral apparel, leather jackets, fur coats, shoes, and purses. Venders also sell foods like the famous &quot;oscypek&quot; smoked sheep cheese, fruit, vegetables, and meats. There are also many stands with Zakopane souvenirs.

Zakopane is popular for its nightlife. At night there are always people walking around town checking out the different bars and dance clubs. Most of these bars and dance clubs are located on Krupowki street.

Other activities include also Zakopane&#x27;s Thermal Baths - a modern aquapark with outside swimming pools with thermal water.

A scene in Andrzej Wajda&#x27;s film &quot;Man of Marble&quot; (&quot;Człowiek z marmuru&quot;) was filmed in Zakopane, introducing the town to a worldwide audience.

The mountain scenes from the Bollywood film &quot;Fanaa&quot; were filmed around Zakopane.

==International relations==

Zakopane participates in town twinning to foster international links.
* Bansko, Bulgaria
* San Carlos de Bariloche (Argentina)
* Bavel (Netherlands)
* Polonezköy, Turkey
* Poprad, Slovakia
* Saint-Dié-des-Vosges (France)
* Sopot, Poland
* Stryi, Ukraine
* Vysoké Tatry, Slovakia
* Siegen, Germany

== Notable structures ==
*COS Zakopane speed-skating rink
*Gubałówka Hill Funicular
*Kasprowy Wierch cable car
*Wielka Krokiew ski jumping ramp

== Notable residents ==


* Tytus Chałubiński (1820 – 1889 in Zakopane), Polish physician and co-founder of the Polish Tatra Society
* Klemens Bachleda (1851–1910), Polish mountain guide and mountain rescuer, worked from Zakopane
* Stanisław Witkiewicz, (1851 – 1915) Polish painter, architect, writer and art theoretician
* Jan Kasprowicz, (1860 – 1926) poet, playwright, critic and translator; a foremost representative of Young Poland
* Mariusz Zaruski, (1867–1941) Polish Brigadier-General, a pioneer of Polish sports yachting, a climber of the Tatra Mountains, a photographer, painter, poet, a seaman, a conspirator, a social activist and teacher
* Jerzy Żuławski, (1874 – 1915) Polish literary figure, philosopher, translator, alpinist and nationalist
* Władysław Orkan, (1875 – 1930) Polish writer from the Young Poland period
* Mieczysław Karłowicz, (1876 – 1909) Polish composer, conductor, mountaineer and photographer of the Tatra Mountains
* Karol Szymanowski, (1882 – 1937) Polish composer and pianist, member of the modernist movement Young Poland; his house in Zakopane, the Villa Atma, is now a museum 
* Kornel Makuszyński, (1884 – 1953) Polish writer of children&#x27;s and youth literature, elected member of the Polish Academy of Literature in interwar Poland
* Stanisław Ignacy Witkiewicz (1885 – 1939), &quot;Witkacy&quot;, a painter, philosopher, playwright, novelist and photographer
* Olga Drahonowska-Małkowska, (1888 – 1979 in Zakopane), with her husband, founded scouting in Poland
* Count Edward Bernard Raczyński (1891 – 1993) Polish diplomat, writer, politician and President of Poland in exile
* Aniela Chałubińska (1902–1998), Polish geographer, geologist and university professor
* Anna Zofia Krygowska (1904–1988) Polish mathematician, known for her work in mathematics education
* Wawrzyniec Żuławski (1916 in Zakopane – 1957) &quot;Wawa&quot; Polish alpinist, educator, composer, music critic, and musicologist
* Władysław Hasior, (1928 – 1999) Polish contemporary sculptor from Podhale region, a painter and theatre set designer
* Teresa Bogucka (born 1945 in Zakopane), journalist, writer, a democratic opposition activist in Communist Poland
* Andrzej Gąsienica-Makowski (born 1952 in Zakopane) politician, led the Nonpartisan Bloc for Support of Reforms
* Janusz Waluś (born 1953 in Zakopane) assassinated Chris Hani, General Secretary of the South African Communist Party
* Liz Glazowski, (born 1957 in Zakopane) Polish-American model, Playboy magazine&#x27;s Playmate of the Month in April 1980
* Sergiusz Pinkwart, (born 1973) Polish journalist, writer, classical musician and traveler, Magellan Award winner
* Małgorzata Mirga-Tas (born 1978), Polish-Romani visual artist
* Małgorzata Babiarz, (born 1984 in Zakopane) professionally known as &quot;Megitza&quot; is a singer, double bass player and composer

=== Sport ===
* Stanisław Marusarz (1913 in Zakopane – 1993 in Zakopane) Polish Nordic skiing competitor in the 1930s
* Jan Wojciech Bachleda-Curuś (1951 in Zakopane – 2009) Polish alpine skier who competed in the 1976 Winter Olympics
* Wojciech Fortuna (born 1952 in Zakopane), ski jumper, Olympic gold medallist
* Kamil Stoch, (born 1987 in Zakopane) Polish ski jumper, world champion and three-time Olympic gold medalist
* Oskar Kwiatkowski, (born 1996 in Zakopane), Polish snowboarder

== Notable visitors ==
* Henryk Sienkiewicz (1846–1916) 
* Bolesław Prus (1847 – 1912)
* Joseph Conrad (1857 – 1924)
* Stefan Żeromski (1864 – 1925)
* Bronisława Dłuska, (1865 – 1939) Polish physician, older sister of physicist Marie Curie
* Marie Curie (1867 – 1934)
* Józef Piłsudski (1867 – 1935)
* Vladimir Lenin (1870 – 1924)
*Alfred Döblin (1878 – 1957)
* Aniela Zagórska (1881 – 1943) niece of Joseph Conrad
* Rudolf Weigl (1883 – 1957)
* Edward Rydz-Śmigły (1886 – 1941), Marshal of Poland, who painted some Zakopane sights
* Artur Rubinstein (1887 – 1982)
* Julian Tuwim (1894 – 1953), died in Zakopane
* Krystyna Skarbek (1908 – 1952)
* Stanisław Lem (1921 – 2006)
* Charles III (born 1948)

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
==Notes==
==Bibliography==
*Stanisław Kasztelowicz and Stanisław Eile, &quot;Stefan Żeromski: kalendarz życia i twórczości&quot; (Stefan Żeromski: A Calendar of His Life and Work), Kraków, Wydawnictwo Literackie, 1961.
*Zdzisław Najder, &quot;Joseph Conrad: A Life&quot;, translated by Halina Najder, Rochester, New York, Camden House, 2007, .
*Krystyna Tokarzówna and Stanisław Fita, &quot;Bolesław Prus, 1847–1912: Kalendarz życia i twórczości&quot; (Bolesław Prus, 1847–1912: A Calendar of His Life and Work), edited by Zygmunt Szweykowski, Warsaw, Państwowy Instytut Wydawniczy, 1969.

== External links ==
* Official website
* Zakopane 
* Jewish Community in Zakopane on Virtual Shtetl
* General information
* An English guide to Zakopane
* Twin towns</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q144786" start="0" end="8" title="Zakopane" label="Zakopane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10" end="23" title="Gorals#Language" label="Podhale Goral"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="73" end="79" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q115155" start="109" end="116" title="Podhale" label="Podhale"/>
<link wikidata="Q194263" start="143" end="158" title="Tatra Mountains" label="Tatra Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q735891" start="194" end="215" title="Nowy Sącz Voivodeship" label="Nowy Sącz Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q54159" start="249" end="274" title="Lesser Poland Voivodeship" label="Lesser Poland Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q498700" start="327" end="332" title="Gorals" label="Goral"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="443" end="457" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="459" end="465" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="471" end="478" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="526" end="534" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="541" end="547" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q913060" start="580" end="594" title="Gubałówka Hill" label="Gubałówka Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="656" end="662" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="678" end="693" title="above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358873" start="863" end="868" title="Glade (geography)" label="glade"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="1240" end="1246" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="1251" end="1261" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="1353" end="1360" title="Galicia (Central Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="1405" end="1412" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528116" start="1504" end="1517" title="health resort" label="health resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q231593" start="1643" end="1652" title="Nowy Targ" label="Nowy Targ"/>
<link wikidata="Q762394" start="1685" end="1693" title="Chabówka" label="Chabówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636036" start="1991" end="2005" title="Wielka Krokiew" label="Wielka Krokiew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735189" start="2043" end="2058" title="Kasprowy Wierch" label="Kasprowy Wierch"/>
<link wikidata="Q913060" start="2130" end="2139" title="Gubałówka" label="Gubałówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="2334" end="2352" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2368" end="2380" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="2447" end="2462" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppe I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983410" start="2526" end="2546" title="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation" label="crimes against Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2586" end="2592" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="2593" end="2597" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="2606" end="2610" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="2611" end="2618" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231784" start="2673" end="2724" title="Gestapo-NKVD Conferences" label="coordinate the pacification of resistance in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2737" end="2749" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2818" end="2825" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641617" start="2879" end="2912" title="List of subcamps of Kraków-Płaszów" label="Kraków-Płaszów concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="2969" end="2984" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212886" start="3040" end="3054" title="Dulag 121 camp in Pruszków" label="Dulag 121 camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q721937" start="3058" end="3066" title="Pruszków" label="Pruszków"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836025" start="3256" end="3264" title="Expulsion of Poles by Nazi Germany" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="3270" end="3276" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="3390" end="3407" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="German occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409870" start="3470" end="3489" title="Holocaust Survivors" label="Holocaust Survivors"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="3547" end="3572" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3574" end="3603" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q66900467" start="3749" end="3776" title="Lapse rate" label="tends to fall with altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="3828" end="3834" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735189" start="3954" end="3969" title="Kasprowy Wierch" label="Kasprowy Wierch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43262" start="4005" end="4011" title="tundra" label="tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="4638" end="4649" title="Carpathians" label="Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12314" start="4795" end="4805" title="foehn wind" label="foehn wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392915" start="4823" end="4828" title="halny" label="halny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477607" start="5133" end="5163" title="Zakopane Style of Architecture" label="Zakopane Style of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q115155" start="5260" end="5267" title="Podhale" label="Podhale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921926" start="5313" end="5350" title="Vernacular architecture of the Carpathians" label="buildings of the Carpathian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q684591" start="5379" end="5399" title="Stanisław Witkiewicz" label="Stanisław Witkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q498700" start="5446" end="5458" title="Goral people" label="Goral people"/>
<link wikidata="Q9374700" start="5510" end="5522" title="Museum of Zakopane Style at Villa Koliba" label="Villa Koliba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5568" end="5579" title="Villa Oksza" label="Villa Oksza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5625" end="5642" title="Villa Pod Jedlami" label="Villa Pod Jedlami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619380" start="5753" end="5765" title="The Tatra Museum in Zakopane" label="Tatra Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5811" end="5830" title="Grand Hotel Stamary" label="Grand Hotel Stamary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5922" end="5940" title="Holy Family Church in Zakopane" label="Holy Family Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715104" start="5989" end="6010" title="Józef Pius Dziekoński" label="Józef Pius Dziekoński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6098" end="6129" title="Old Cemetery in Pęksowy Brzyzek" label="Old Cemetery in Pęksowy Brzyzek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6132" end="6163" title="Old Cemetery in Pęksowy Brzyzek" label="Old Cemetery in Pęksowy Brzyzek"/>
<link wikidata="Q684591" start="6255" end="6275" title="Stanisław Witkiewicz" label="Stanisław Witkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q473139" start="6277" end="6303" title="Kazimierz Przerwa-Tetmajer" label="Kazimierz Przerwa-Tetmajer"/>
<link wikidata="Q508938" start="6305" end="6321" title="Władysław Hasior" label="Władysław Hasior"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619411" start="6326" end="6332" title="Sabała" label="Sabała"/>
<link wikidata="Q381238" start="6362" end="6369" title="Stanisław Ignacy Witkiewicz" label="Witkacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6399" end="6428" title="Kasprowy Wierch cable railway" label="Kasprowy Wierch cable railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614426" start="6447" end="6471" title="Gubałówka Hill funicular" label="Gubałówka Hill funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133329" start="6645" end="6657" title="Young Poland" label="Young Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619380" start="6718" end="6730" title="The Tatra Museum in Zakopane" label="Tatra Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q609353" start="6743" end="6762" title="Tatra National Park, Poland" label="Tatra National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9374700" start="6765" end="6805" title="Museum of Zakopane Style at Villa Koliba" label="Museum of Zakopane Style at Villa Koliba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6808" end="6819" title="Villa Oksza" label="Villa Oksza"/>
<link wikidata="Q295400" start="6834" end="6851" title="Karol Szymanowski" label="Karol Szymanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734162" start="6862" end="6872" title="Villa Atma" label="Villa Atma"/>
<link wikidata="Q962432" start="6875" end="6889" title="Jan Kasprowicz" label="Jan Kasprowicz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6900" end="6913" title="Villa Harenda" label="Villa Harenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028469" start="6916" end="6934" title="Kornel Makuszyński" label="Kornel Makuszyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q508938" start="6944" end="6960" title="Władysław Hasior" label="Władysław Hasior"/>
<link wikidata="Q467758" start="6971" end="6982" title="Kamil Stoch" label="Kamil Stoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q690323" start="7404" end="7415" title="High Tatras" label="High Tatras"/>
<link wikidata="Q609276" start="7468" end="7478" title="UIAA grade" label="UIAA grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735189" start="7831" end="7846" title="Kasprowy Wierch" label="Kasprowy Wierch"/>
<link wikidata="Q913060" start="7851" end="7860" title="Gubałówka" label="Gubałówka"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="7884" end="7904" title="cross country skiing" label="cross country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q937571" start="7970" end="8000" title="FIS Nordic World Ski Championships" label="Nordic World Ski Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q188158" start="8037" end="8048" title="Universiade" label="Universiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q166788" start="8079" end="8087" title="biathlon" label="biathlon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8116" end="8138" title="Ski jump#Ski jumping World Cup" label="ski jumping world cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q216613" start="8152" end="8158" title="Nordic skiing" label="Nordic"/>
<link wikidata="Q943691" start="8223" end="8253" title="FIS Alpine World Ski Championships" label="Alpine World Ski Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="8285" end="8289" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8341" end="8353" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9672" start="8400" end="8420" title="2006 Winter Olympics" label="2006 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159672" start="8429" end="8433" title="FIS Alpine World Ski Championships 2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q701225" start="8438" end="8442" title="FIS Alpine World Ski Championships 2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q498700" start="9593" end="9598" title="Gorals" label="Goral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509633" start="9847" end="9852" title="kulig" label="kulig"/>
<link wikidata="Q72447" start="10335" end="10342" title="oscypek" label="oscypek"/>
<link wikidata="Q106685" start="10802" end="10815" title="Andrzej Wajda" label="Andrzej Wajda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195506" start="10834" end="10847" title="Man of Marble" label="Man of Marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="10987" end="10996" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q657943" start="11008" end="11013" title="Fanaa (2006 film)" label="Fanaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="11104" end="11117" title="town twinning" label="town twinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q391159" start="11151" end="11157" title="Bansko" label="Bansko"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="11159" end="11167" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47772" start="11170" end="11193" title="Bariloche" label="San Carlos de Bariloche"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="11195" end="11204" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990493" start="11208" end="11213" title="Bavel (Netherlands)" label="Bavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="11215" end="11226" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q225632" start="11230" end="11240" title="Polonezköy" label="Polonezköy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11242" end="11248" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26393" start="11251" end="11257" title="Poprad" label="Poprad"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="11259" end="11267" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34427" start="11270" end="11290" title="Saint-Dié-des-Vosges" label="Saint-Dié-des-Vosges"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11292" end="11298" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q92689" start="11302" end="11307" title="Sopot" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="11309" end="11315" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q158923" start="11318" end="11323" title="Stryi" label="Stryi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="11325" end="11332" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q612516" start="11335" end="11347" title="Vysoké Tatry" label="Vysoké Tatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="11349" end="11357" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3167" start="11360" end="11366" title="Siegen" label="Siegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="11368" end="11375" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11403" end="11415" title=":pl:COS Zakopane (tor łyżwiarski)" label="COS Zakopane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617766" start="11416" end="11434" title="speed skating rink" label="speed-skating rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614426" start="11436" end="11460" title="Gubałówka Hill Funicular" label="Gubałówka Hill Funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735189" start="11462" end="11477" title="Kasprowy Wierch" label="Kasprowy Wierch"/>
<link wikidata="Q498002" start="11478" end="11487" title="Aerial tramway" label="cable car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636036" start="11489" end="11503" title="Wielka Krokiew" label="Wielka Krokiew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718" start="11504" end="11515" title="ski jumping" label="ski jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580661" start="11550" end="11567" title="Tytus Chałubiński" label="Tytus Chałubiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994123" start="11634" end="11654" title="PTTK" label="Polish Tatra Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739954" start="11657" end="11673" title="Klemens Bachleda" label="Klemens Bachleda"/>
<link wikidata="Q684591" start="11754" end="11774" title="Stanisław Witkiewicz" label="Stanisław Witkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="11828" end="11844" title="Aesthetics" label="art theoretician"/>
<link wikidata="Q962432" start="11847" end="11861" title="Jan Kasprowicz" label="Jan Kasprowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133329" start="11947" end="11959" title="Young Poland" label="Young Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345943" start="11962" end="11977" title="Mariusz Zaruski" label="Mariusz Zaruski"/>
<link wikidata="Q194263" start="12071" end="12086" title="Tatra Mountains" label="Tatra Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373117" start="12176" end="12190" title="Jerzy Żuławski" label="Jerzy Żuławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436828" start="12282" end="12297" title="Władysław Orkan" label="Władysław Orkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133329" start="12336" end="12348" title="Young Poland" label="Young Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q508891" start="12358" end="12378" title="Mieczysław Karłowicz" label="Mieczysław Karłowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q194263" start="12458" end="12473" title="Tatra Mountains" label="Tatra Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q295400" start="12476" end="12493" title="Karol Szymanowski" label="Karol Szymanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133329" start="12571" end="12583" title="Young Poland" label="Young Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734162" start="12612" end="12622" title="Villa Atma" label="Villa Atma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028469" start="12643" end="12661" title="Kornel Makuszyński" label="Kornel Makuszyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q744698" start="12754" end="12782" title="Polish Academy of Literature" label="Polish Academy of Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q381238" start="12804" end="12831" title="Stanisław Ignacy Witkiewicz" label="Stanisław Ignacy Witkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086564" start="12932" end="12958" title="Olga Drahonowska-Małkowska" label="Olga Drahonowska-Małkowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q55841" start="13040" end="13064" title="Edward Bernard Raczyński" label="Edward Bernard Raczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q9154668" start="13150" end="13168" title="Aniela Chałubińska" label="Aniela Chałubińska"/>
<link wikidata="Q9155842" start="13238" end="13258" title="Anna Zofia Krygowska" label="Anna Zofia Krygowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713080" start="13339" end="13358" title="Wawrzyniec Żuławski" label="Wawrzyniec Żuławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q508938" start="13472" end="13488" title="Władysław Hasior" label="Władysław Hasior"/>
<link wikidata="Q9357261" start="13591" end="13605" title="Teresa Bogucka" label="Teresa Bogucka"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="13687" end="13703" title="Communist Poland" label="Communist Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759610" start="13706" end="13732" title="Andrzej Gąsienica-Makowski" label="Andrzej Gąsienica-Makowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q854452" start="13777" end="13816" title="Nonpartisan Bloc for Support of Reforms" label="Nonpartisan Bloc for Support of Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643390" start="13819" end="13831" title="Janusz Waluś" label="Janusz Waluś"/>
<link wikidata="Q547988" start="13869" end="13879" title="Chris Hani" label="Chris Hani"/>
<link wikidata="Q305317" start="13906" end="13935" title="South African Communist Party" label="South African Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237884" start="13938" end="13951" title="Liz Glazowski" label="Liz Glazowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q728711" start="14024" end="14045" title="Playmate of the Month" label="Playmate of the Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q86724561" start="14062" end="14079" title="Sergiusz Pinkwart" label="Sergiusz Pinkwart"/>
<link wikidata="Q104715127" start="14177" end="14197" title="Małgorzata Mirga-Tas" label="Małgorzata Mirga-Tas"/>
<link wikidata="Q95809" start="14241" end="14259" title="Megitza" label="Małgorzata Babiarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345386" start="14391" end="14409" title="Stanisław Marusarz" label="Stanisław Marusarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q783280" start="14495" end="14522" title="Jan Bachleda" label="Jan Wojciech Bachleda-Curuś"/>
<link wikidata="Q9651" start="14589" end="14609" title="1976 Winter Olympics" label="1976 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q958694" start="14612" end="14628" title="Wojciech Fortuna" label="Wojciech Fortuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q467758" start="14691" end="14702" title="Kamil Stoch" label="Kamil Stoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718" start="14735" end="14745" title="Ski jumping" label="ski jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q915373" start="14777" end="14798" title="Olympic gold medalist" label="Olympic gold medalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q50097965" start="14801" end="14818" title="Oskar Kwiatkowski" label="Oskar Kwiatkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q41502" start="14890" end="14908" title="Henryk Sienkiewicz" label="Henryk Sienkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q144439" start="14924" end="14937" title="Bolesław Prus" label="Bolesław Prus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14954" end="14967" title="Joseph Conrad#Romance and marriage" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q366040" start="14984" end="14999" title="Stefan Żeromski" label="Stefan Żeromski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8861061" start="15016" end="15033" title="Bronisława Dłuska" label="Bronisława Dłuska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="15093" end="15104" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="15107" end="15118" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="15135" end="15150" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="15167" end="15181" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q57389" start="15197" end="15210" title="Alfred Döblin" label="Alfred Döblin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11686186" start="15227" end="15242" title="Aniela Zagórska" label="Aniela Zagórska"/>
<link wikidata="Q82925" start="15266" end="15279" title="Joseph Conrad" label="Joseph Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q577522" start="15282" end="15294" title="Rudolf Weigl" label="Rudolf Weigl"/>
<link wikidata="Q295688" start="15311" end="15329" title="Edward Rydz-Śmigły" label="Edward Rydz-Śmigły"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454304" start="15345" end="15362" title="Marshal of Poland" label="Marshal of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15368" end="15396" title="Edward Rydz-Śmigły#Works" label="painted some Zakopane sights"/>
<link wikidata="Q183182" start="15399" end="15415" title="Artur Rubinstein" label="Artur Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q376278" start="15432" end="15444" title="Julian Tuwim" label="Julian Tuwim"/>
<link wikidata="Q717294" start="15479" end="15495" title="Krystyna Skarbek" label="Krystyna Skarbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530" start="15512" end="15525" title="Stanisław Lem" label="Stanisław Lem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="15542" end="15553" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q366040" start="15726" end="15741" title="Stefan Żeromski" label="Stefan Żeromski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849327" start="15816" end="15831" title="Zdzisław Najder" label="Zdzisław Najder"/>
<link wikidata="Q144439" start="16049" end="16062" title="Bolesław Prus" label="Bolesław Prus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075814" start="16119" end="16138" title="Zygmunt Szweykowski (historian)" label="Zygmunt Szweykowski"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44806" wikidata="Q5253026" url="?curid=44806" title="Syntactic category">
<text>A syntactic category is a syntactic unit that theories of syntax assume. Word classes, largely corresponding to traditional parts of speech (e.g. noun, verb, preposition, etc.), are syntactic categories. In phrase structure grammars, the &quot;phrasal categories&quot; (e.g. noun phrase, verb phrase, prepositional phrase, etc.) are also syntactic categories. Dependency grammars, however, do not acknowledge phrasal categories (at least not in the traditional sense).

Word classes considered as syntactic categories may be called &quot;lexical categories&quot;, as distinct from phrasal categories. The terminology is somewhat inconsistent between the theoretical models of different linguists. However, many grammars also draw a distinction between &quot;lexical categories&quot; (which tend to consist of content words, or phrases headed by them) and &quot;functional categories&quot; (which tend to consist of function words or abstract functional elements, or phrases headed by them). The term &quot;lexical category&quot; therefore has two distinct meanings. Moreover, syntactic categories should not be confused with grammatical categories (also known as grammatical features), which are properties such as tense, gender, etc.

==Defining criteria==
At least three criteria are used in defining syntactic categories:

::#The type of meaning it expresses
::#The type of affixes it takes
::#The structure in which it occurs

For instance, many nouns in English denote concrete entities, they are pluralized with the suffix &quot;-s&quot;, and they occur as subjects and objects in clauses. Many verbs denote actions or states, they are conjugated with agreement suffixes (e.g. &quot;-s&quot; of the third person singular in English), and in English they tend to show up in medial positions of the clauses in which they appear.

The third criterion is also known as &quot;distribution&quot;. The distribution of a given syntactic unit determines the syntactic category to which it belongs. The distributional behavior of syntactic units is identified by substitution. Like syntactic units can be substituted for each other.

Additionally, there are also informal criteria one can use in order to determine syntactic categories. For example, one informal means of determining if an item is lexical, as opposed to functional, is to see if it is left behind in &quot;telegraphic speech&quot; (that is, the way a telegram would be written; e.g., &quot;Pants fire. Bring water, need help.&quot;)

==Lexical categories vs. phrasal categories==
The traditional parts of speech are lexical categories, in one meaning of that term. Traditional grammars tend to acknowledge approximately eight to twelve lexical categories, e.g.

::Lexical categories
::adjective (A), adposition (preposition, postposition, circumposition) (P), adverb (Adv), coordinate conjunction (C), determiner (D), interjection (I), noun (N), particle (Par), pronoun (Pr), subordinate conjunction (Sub), verb (V), etc.

The lexical categories that a given grammar assumes will likely vary from this list. Certainly numerous subcategories can be acknowledged. For instance, one can view pronouns as a subtype of noun, and verbs can be divided into finite verbs and non-finite verbs (e.g. gerund, infinitive, participle, etc.). The central lexical categories give rise to corresponding phrasal categories:

::Phrasal categories
::Adjective phrase (AP), adverb phrase (AdvP), adposition phrase (PP), noun phrase (NP), verb phrase (VP), etc.

In terms of phrase structure rules, phrasal categories can occur to the left of the arrow while lexical categories cannot, e.g. NP → D N. Traditionally, a phrasal category should consist of two or more words, although conventions vary in this area. X-bar theory, for instance, often sees individual words corresponding to phrasal categories. Phrasal categories are illustrated with the following trees:

The lexical and phrasal categories are identified according to the node labels, phrasal categories receiving the &quot;P&quot; designation.

==Lexical categories only==
Dependency grammars do not acknowledge phrasal categories in the way that phrase structure grammars do. What this means is that the interaction between lexical and phrasal categories disappears, the result being that only the lexical categories are acknowledged. The tree representations are simpler because the number of nodes and categories is reduced, e.g.

The distinction between lexical and phrasal categories is absent here. The number of nodes is reduced by removing all nodes marked with &quot;P&quot;. Note, however, that phrases can still be acknowledged insofar as any subtree that contains two or more words will qualify as a phrase.

==Lexical categories vs. functional categories==
Many grammars draw a distinction between &quot;lexical categories&quot; and &quot;functional categories&quot;. This distinction is orthogonal to the distinction between lexical categories and phrasal categories. In this context, the term &quot;lexical category&quot; applies only to those parts of speech and their phrasal counterparts that form open classes and have full semantic content. The parts of speech that form closed classes and have mainly just functional content are called &quot;functional categories&quot;:

::Lexical categories
::Adjective (A) and adjective phrase (AP), adverb (Adv) and adverb phrase (AdvP), noun (N) and noun phrase (NP), verb and verb phrase (VP), preposition and prepositional phrase (PP)

::Functional categories
::Coordinate conjunction (C), determiner (D), negation (Neg), particle (Par), preposition (P) and prepositional phrase (PP), subordinate conjunction (Sub), etc.

There is disagreement in certain areas, for instance concerning the status of prepositions. The distinction between lexical and functional categories plays a big role in Chomskyan grammars (Transformational Grammar, Government and Binding Theory, Minimalist Program), where the role of the functional categories is large. Many phrasal categories are assumed that do not correspond directly to a specific part of speech, e.g. inflection phrase (IP), tense phrase (TP), agreement phrase (AgrP), focus phrase (FP), etc. (see also Phrase → Functional categories). In order to acknowledge such functional categories, one has to assume that the constellation is a primitive of the theory and that it exists separately from the words that appear. As a consequence, many grammar frameworks do not acknowledge such functional categories, e.g. Head Driven Phrase Structure Grammar, Dependency Grammar, etc.

:&quot;Note: The abbreviations for these categories vary across systems; see .&quot;

==Labels in the Minimalist Program==
Early research suggested shifting away from the use of labelling, as they were considered to be non-optimal for the analysis of syntactic structure, and should therefore be eliminated. Collins (2002) argued that, although labels such as Noun, Pronoun, Adjective and the like were unavoidable and undoubtedly useful for categorizing syntactic items, providing labels for the projections of those items, was not useful and was, in fact, detrimental to structural analysis, since there were disagreements and discussions about how exactly to label these projections. The labeling of projections such as Noun Phrases (NP), Verb Phrases (VP), and others have since been a topic of discussion amongst syntacticians, who have since then been working on labelling algorithms to solve the very problem brought up by Collins. 

In line with both Phrase Structure Rules and X-bar theory, syntactic labelling plays an important role within Chomsky&#x27;s Minimalist Program (MP). Chomsky first developed the MP by means of creating a theoretical framework for generative grammar that can be applied universally among all languages. In contrast to Phrase Structure Rules and X-bar theory, many of the research and proposed theories done on labels are fairly recent and still ongoing.

==See also==
* Dependency grammar
* Empty category
* Grammatical category
* Lexical category (part of speech)
* Merge (linguistics)
* Phrase
* Phrase structure grammar
* Syntax

==Notes==
==References==

*Bach, E. 1974. Syntactic theory. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
*Brinton, L. 2000. The structure of modern English. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
*Brown, K. and J. Miller. 1991. Syntax: A linguistic introduction to sentence structure, 2nd edition. London: UK: HarperCollins &quot;Academic&quot;.
*Carnie, A. 2007. Syntax: A generative introduction, 2nd edition. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
*Cowper, E. 2009. A concise introduction to syntactic theory: The government-binding approach. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
*Culicover, P. 1982. Syntax, 2nd edition. New York: Academic Press.
*Culicover, P. 1997. Principles and Parameters: An introduction to syntactic theory. Oxford University Press.
*Emonds, J. 1976. A transformational approach to English syntax: Root, structure-preserving, and local-transformations. New York: Academic-Press.
*Falk, Y. 2001. Lexical-Functional Grammar: An introduction to parallel constraint-based syntax. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
*Fowler, R. 1971. An introduction to transformational syntax. New York: Barnes and Noblles Inc.
*Haegeman, L. 1994. Introduction to government and binding theory, 2nd edition. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
*Haegeman, L. and J. Guéron. 1999. English grammar: A generative perspective. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5253026" start="2" end="20" title="Syntactic category" label="syntactic category"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="58" end="64" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="124" end="139" title="parts of speech" label="parts of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134367" start="207" end="231" title="phrase structure grammar" label="phrase structure grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401131" start="275" end="286" title="noun phrase" label="noun phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778442" start="288" end="299" title="verb phrase" label="verb phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816188" start="301" end="321" title="prepositional phrase" label="prepositional phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q674834" start="360" end="378" title="Dependency grammar" label="Dependency grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q789016" start="809" end="821" title="content word" label="content word"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277394" start="835" end="841" title="head (linguistics)" label="headed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120608" start="915" end="928" title="function word" label="function word"/>
<link wikidata="Q980357" start="1125" end="1147" title="grammatical category" label="grammatical categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q12050496" start="1175" end="1182" title="feature (linguistics)" label="feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="1215" end="1220" title="grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="1222" end="1228" title="grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q62155" start="1377" end="1382" title="affix" label="affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="2559" end="2574" title="parts of speech" label="parts of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="2748" end="2757" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="2763" end="2773" title="adposition" label="adposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q380057" start="2823" end="2829" title="adverb" label="adverb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2837" end="2847" title="Conjunction (grammar)#Coordinating conjunctions" label="coordinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36484" start="2848" end="2859" title="conjunction (grammar)" label="conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q576271" start="2865" end="2875" title="Determiner (linguistics)" label="determiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q83034" start="2881" end="2893" title="interjection" label="interjection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="2899" end="2903" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="2909" end="2917" title="Grammatical particle" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="2925" end="2932" title="pronoun" label="pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2939" end="2950" title="Conjunction (grammar)#Subordinating conjunctions" label="subordinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36484" start="2951" end="2962" title="conjunction (grammar)" label="conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="2970" end="2974" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166170" start="3213" end="3224" title="finite verb" label="finite verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050494" start="3230" end="3245" title="non-finite verb" label="non-finite verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q357760" start="3394" end="3410" title="Adjective phrase" label="Adjective phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734650" start="3417" end="3430" title="adverb phrase" label="adverb phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816188" start="3439" end="3456" title="Prepositional phrase" label="adposition phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401131" start="3463" end="3474" title="noun phrase" label="noun phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778442" start="3481" end="3492" title="verb phrase" label="verb phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188074" start="3517" end="3539" title="phrase structure rules" label="phrase structure rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861110" start="3754" end="3766" title="X-bar theory" label="X-bar theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q674834" start="4078" end="4096" title="Dependency grammar" label="Dependency grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134367" start="4152" end="4176" title="phrase structure grammar" label="phrase structure grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570153" start="5766" end="5778" title="Prepositions in English" label="prepositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861110" start="6113" end="6130" title="inflection phrase" label="inflection phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435289" start="6181" end="6186" title="focus (linguistics)" label="focus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6215" end="6245" title="Phrase#Functional categories" label="Phrase → Functional categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134367" start="7545" end="7567" title="Phrase structure grammar" label="Phrase Structure Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861110" start="7572" end="7584" title="X-bar theory" label="X-bar theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q177724" start="7652" end="7675" title="Minimalist program" label="Minimalist Program (MP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q674834" start="7996" end="8014" title="Dependency grammar" label="Dependency grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374730" start="8017" end="8031" title="Empty category" label="Empty category"/>
<link wikidata="Q980357" start="8034" end="8054" title="Grammatical category" label="Grammatical category"/>
<link wikidata="Q82042" start="8057" end="8073" title="Lexical category" label="Lexical category"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819100" start="8093" end="8112" title="Merge (linguistics)" label="Merge (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q187931" start="8115" end="8121" title="Phrase" label="Phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134367" start="8124" end="8148" title="Phrase structure grammar" label="Phrase structure grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="8151" end="8157" title="Syntax" label="Syntax"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44807" wikidata="Q485724" url="?curid=44807" title="Corleone">
<text>Corleone (; or ) is an Italian town and &quot;comune&quot; of roughly 11,158 inhabitants in the Metropolitan City of Palermo, in Sicily.

Many Mafia bosses both in Sicily and the United States have come from the town of Corleone, including Tommy Gagliano, Gaetano Reina, Jack Dragna, Giuseppe Morello, Michele Navarra, Luciano Leggio, Leoluca Bagarella, Salvatore Riina and Bernardo Provenzano. It is also the birthplace of several fictional characters in Mario Puzo&#x27;s 1969 novel &quot;The Godfather&quot;, including the eponymous Don Vito (Andolini) Corleone.

The local mafia clan, the Corleonesi, led the Mafia in the 1980s and 1990s, and were the most violent and ruthless group ever to take control of the organization.

Corleone municipality has an area of with a population density of 49 inhabitants per square kilometer. It is located in an inland area of the mountain, in the valley between the Rocca di Maschi, the Castello Soprano and the Castello Sottano. Corleone is located at above sea level.

==History==
===Etymology===
The etymology of the name is uncertain, undergoing various modifications from the Ancient Greek &quot;Kouroullounè&quot; to the Siculo-Arabic &quot;Qurlayun&quot; of the Emirate of Sicily, from Latin &quot;Curilionum&quot; to the Norman &quot;Coraigliòn&quot;, from the Aragonese &quot;Conillon&quot;, &quot;Coniglione&quot; from which the Sicilian &quot;Cunigghiuni&quot; originated. The modern name originates from 1556.

Another belief is that the name derives from an Arab fighter named Kurliyun (cf. &quot;Coeur Leon&quot;, &quot;Lionheart&quot;), who conquered it for the Aghlabids in 840.

===Antiquity===
The territory of Corleone has been inhabited since prehistoric times. Recent research has identified several settlements distributed around two main areas: Pietralunga and The Old One (&quot;La Vecchia&quot;). This name refers to a mountain that rises to about , and is about from today&#x27;s town. The site of Pietralunga was occupied from the final Neolithic Period to the Bronze Age (the presence of a glass bell decorated in pointillé) while the site of The Old One has been inhabited since the Middle Ages (the presence of an imposing castle with towers has recently been identified). However, the biggest part of the settlement was built in the archaic and classical period. &quot;A few materials relating to the Hellenistic period found at the site have supported the identification of the ancient town situated on the Old One with the ancient town of Schera, cited by Cicero, Cluverio and Ptolemy, although the archaeological remains on which this theory is based are still too unstable. (D&#x27;Angelo - Spatafora).

===Middle Ages===
In 840, Corleone was conquered by the North African Aghlabids during the Muslim conquest of Sicily. It was during the Muslim occupation that it gained economic, military and strategic importance. In 1080 the city was conquered by the Normans, and in 1095 it was annexed to the Diocese of Palermo. Even in the 1170s it was recorded that over 80% of the population of the area was Muslim
and that many bore Arabo-Islamic names derived from Greek.
There was also a mosque, called Masgid al-Barid, within the town. Following the large-scale anti-Muslim attacks by Lombard settlers in eastern Sicily in 1161 led by future King of Sicily, Tancred, the town became a refuge for many fleeing Muslims. In 1208, a Muslim uprising succeeded in retaking the town from Christian rule. In 1222, while speaking with the pope, Frederick II of Sicily cited the need to fight the Muslims of Corleone as a reason for his inability to send a large crusader army to Jerusalem. To this day the rock formation &quot;Castello Soprano&quot;, has a Saracen lookout tower on top of it. While the town&#x27;s other rock formation, &quot;Castello Sottano&quot;, did not preserve its own Saracen fortification, it is still also known as &quot;Castello di Saraceni&quot;.

Nearly a century later, in 1180, it was enfeoffed (deeded) to the new diocese of Monreale. In this period, Corleone was largely repopulated by Ghibellines from Alessandria (modern Piedmont), Brescia and elsewhere—&quot;Lombards&quot; led by Oddone de Camerana. The migrations were encouraged by Emperor Frederick II of Sicily, to strengthen his position against the Guelphs. In 1249, however, he revoked the privilege and gave the city to the royal property, though the migration of the inhabitants from the Po Valley continued until the beginning of the Sicilian Vespers in 1282. Another Camerana, named Boniface, distinguished himself in the revolution of the Sicilian Vespers. He led the insurrection against the Angevins with three thousand people from Corleone, in alliance with the city of Palermo. In recognition, the Senate of Palermo called Corleone &quot;soror mea&quot; (my sister).

During the reign of Frederick IV of Sicily, called The Simple, the city successfully rebelled against the crown but was recaptured in 1355. Corleone was besieged from Ventimiglia in 1358. During the reign of the four vicars, Corleone became the property of the powerful Chiaramonte family, but in 1391 was donated by Mary Queen of Sicily to Berardo Queralt, canon of Lerida, but he never took possession. Instead, it was occupied by Nicholas Peralta, vicar William&#x27;s son, but King Martin the Younger returned it to the royal property, confirming its privileges in 1397 and giving it some tax relief.

===Medieval history===
In March 1434, King Alfonso the Magnanimous went to Corleone and conceded some tolls to the city with the aim of restoring the walls and meeting other needs, promising also the inalienability of the city to which he gave the title of &quot;Animosa Civitas&quot; (brave city). However, in 1440 Corleone was sold to Federico Ventimiglia for 19,000 florins. This concession was revoked in May 1447 by King Alfonso, to be resold in the same year to a certain John of Bologna. In 1452 the city was finally granted to attorney James Pilaya. In 1516, Corleone joined the revolutionary movements of Palermo against the Viceroy Moncada. The revolt of Corleone, led by Fabio La Porta, received popular support as its purpose was the request for tax relief. However, the revolt was violently repressed by the viceroy&#x27;s troops led by the Vicar General Gerardo Bonanno. Towards the end of the same century, social conditions in the city worsened further because of the plague of 1575–77 and the famine of 1592. On June 3, 1625, Corleone was sold, with other cities, to some Genoese merchants from whom Corleone redeemed itself upon payment of 15,200 florins. The terms of sale were, however, very serious. In 1648, the city was sold to the jurist Joseph Sgarlata, who then accepted the redemption upon payment.

Remarkable demographic growth was reported in the 15th and 16th centuries, following the arrival of several religious orders.

===Contemporary history===
Corleone contributed to the events of the Unification of Italy through Francesco Bentivegna who, after participating in the riots of 1848, captained an insurrection against the Bourbons in the surrounding cities until he was arrested and then shot in Mezzojuso on December 20, 1856. On May 27, 1860, the city was the scene of a fierce battle between followers of Giuseppe Garibaldi, led by Colonel Vincenzo Giordano Orsini, and the bulk of the Bourbon army led by General Von Meckel, which had been diverted from Palermo via a ploy hatched by the same Garibaldi. On that occasion, a team of volunteers (&quot;Picciotti&quot;, Sicilian for &quot;boys&quot;), led by Ferdinando Firmaturi, joined the march of Garibaldi in Palermo. 

The nineteenth century ended with the social action by Bernardino Verro, a leader of the social movement &quot;Fasci Siciliani&quot;. After founding the Fascio of Corleone on April 3, 1893, he founded the new Farm Lease that was entered into between farmers and agricultural Sicilian &quot;gabelloti&quot; in Congress on July 30, 1893, held in Corleone—so much so that the city began to assume the title of &quot;peasant capital&quot;. Corleone contributed to World War I with 105 deaths and numerous injuries on the field. After World War II, a peasant movement occupied vacant lands, led by trade unionist Placido Rizzotto, who was killed by the Mafia.

In 1943, the Duke of Aosta created the title of Count of Corleone, awarded to Arturo Faini for his valour during the Italian occupation of Ethiopia.

Since World War II, Corleone has become notorious for being home to several dangerous bandits and mobsters (including: Michele Navarra, Luciano Leggio, Bernardo Provenzano, Salvatore Riina and his brothers-in-law Calogero and Leoluca Bagarella) who became the protagonists of a violent and bloody mafia power struggle. The mayor of Palermo, Vito Ciancimino, was also born in Corleone and linked to the Corleone clan.

==Geography==
Located in the southwestern area of its province, the municipality of Corleone has an area of 229.46 square kilometers (88.60 sq mi) and is located in a basin in a mountainous inland area, approximately above sea level, south of the prominent Rocca Busambra. It borders the municipalities of Bisacquino, Campofelice di Fitalia, Campofiorito, Contessa Entellina, Chiusa Sclafani, Godrano, Mezzojuso, Monreale, Palazzo Adriano, Prizzi and Roccamena. Its only hamlet () is the village of Ficuzza, an enclave in the municipal territory of Monreale.

==Main sights==
===Mother Church===
Work on the &quot;Chiesa Madre&quot; (&quot;Mother Church&quot;), dedicated to the 4th-century French bishop Saint Martin of Tours, started in the late 14th century. Its appearance today has been influenced by numerous changes and renovations. The interior has a nave and aisles divided into various chapels containing artwork, including a wooden statue representing San Filippo d&#x27;Agira from the 17th century, a 16th-century statue representing San Biagio (Saint Blaise) and a fine marble panel depicting the &quot;Baptism of Christ&quot; (also from this period).

===Addolorata Church===
The &quot;Chiesa dell&#x27;Addolorata&quot; is from the 18th century, dedicated to the Basilian abbot and patron saint San Leoluca

==== Other Churches ====

The &quot;Chiesa di Santa Rosalia&quot;, and the small &quot;Sant&#x27;Andrea&quot; (the latter two from the 17th century), all with important frescoes and paintings, are notable landmarks. The &quot;Santuario della Madonna del Rosario di Tagliavia&quot;, a religious building from the 19th century, is now a destination for pilgrims on Ascension Day.

=== Mafia and anti-Mafia Museum of Corleone ===
The CIDMA museum (&quot;Centro Internazionale di Documentazione sulla Mafia e del Movimento Antimafia&quot;) was inaugurated on 12 December 2000, in the presence of the highest authorities of the Republic, including the President of the Republic Carlo Azeglio Ciampi and the deputy Secretary-General of the United Nations Pino Arlacchi, on behalf of Secretary-General Kofi Annan. The CIDMA intends to pursue &quot;Culture, Progress and Legality&quot; as its objectives.

CIDMA has several rooms for visitors: Room of the Folders of the Maxi Trial (), the Room of the Messages, the Room of Pain and the final room dedicated to Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa, an Italian general who campaigned against terrorism and was assassinated by the Mafia. The first room contains Maxi-Trial documents which marked a milestone in the fight against Cosa Nostra.

The documents, given to Corleone by the Criminal Chamber of the Court of Palermo, are a testimony to the work of magistrates like Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino who paid with their lives for their commitment to the fight against the Mafia. Among the folders there are the confessions of the famous &quot;pentito&quot; (&quot;repentant&quot;) Tommaso Buscetta to Judge Falcone.

In the Room of the Messages, visitors may see the photos of the well-known, Sicilian photographer Letizia Battaglia who had the courage to go on site to capture tragic photographs of Mafia murders. She was able to capture significant details that made her shots documents detailing the murder methods used by the Mafia in the 1970s–1980s. The different positions of the bodies allow visitors to reconstruct the Mafia&#x27;s strategy.

The Room of Pain houses a permanent exhibition of Shobha, Letizia Battaglia&#x27;s daughter, who followed in her mother&#x27;s footsteps, taking photos of the dismay, helplessness, and despair felt by those who have lost someone at the hands of the Mafia. In the room there are also photos of Letizia Battaglia documenting Mafia crimes. This approach allows visitors to understand the cause-effect relationships that exist between the crimes and the consequences they produce in the lives of affected families and the entire community.

The room Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa is dedicated to General Dalla Chiesa. It contains photos of some of the main bosses of the Mafia placed side by side with those in the legal system who fought organized crime.

Local guides also offer tours through the CIDMA.

===Gorges of the Dragon===

Along the road that connects Corleone with Ficuzza, following the old railway line connecting Palermo to San Carlo (a hamlet of Chiusa Sclafani) (now the bike path), is an old bridge where the Frattina River streams between the limestone rocks. The erosive action of water has produced karst topography over time forming chasms, reels and small waterfalls where the abundant water first disappears and then reappears in the boulders and lush vegetation. Of considerable size are the &quot;pots of the Giants&quot;, i.e. cylindrical and deep holes where the water takes on a swirling pattern. Old mulberry trees, oranges, pomegranates, and figs are living testimony of the site where a mill once stood. In the section where the slope is gentler, clear water pools have formed allowing visitors to bathe surrounded by bracken, maidenhair ferns, willows and elms, in the company of tortoise, fish, and colorful dragonflies. The walls that enclose the slopes are clad in rock plants of great botanical interest such as wood spurge, cabbage mountain, the carnation, and capers. Among the crevices of the rock shelter are pigeons, jackdaws, and birds of prey such as kestrels and the peregrine falcon. Tours take visitors up to the top of the gorge where the Frattina River continues to flow, in a more gentle manner, down to the Belice.

===Due Rocche Waterfall===
Within the territory of Corleone, a short walk from the historic center of the city, is the &quot;Natural Park of the cascade of the two fortresses.&quot; After going through a series of narrow streets in the district of San Giuliano visitors come to the front of a small church dedicated to Our Lady of the Two Fortresses. To the left of this church winds a path that leads between the poplars, willows, and elms to the falls. Seated on the ancient square blocks in the shade of mulberry, walnut and ash trees, visitors have an unimpeded view of the waterfall. The flow of the water in the river has formed a large pool among rocks through its erosive action. The canyon contains eroded, yellow-green glauconitic rocks occupied by vegetation.

==Corleone in literature and film==
The name of the town was used as the adopted surname of the title character in Mario Puzo&#x27;s book and Francis Ford Coppola&#x27;s film &quot;The Godfather&quot;. In the novel, Vito Andolini emigrates from the village of Corleone and adopts his birthplace&#x27;s name as his own surname. In the cinematic release of &quot;The Godfather Part II&quot;, young Vito, shy and unable to speak English, cannot respond when asked for his proper name, and is given the surname Corleone by an immigration official at Ellis Island. Throughout the film series, various members of the Corleone family visit the town. In the films, the towns of Savoca and Forza d&#x27;Agrò were used as locations for those scenes set in Corleone. Michael Corleone is played by Al Pacino, whose real-life maternal grandparents were Corleonese.

The adaptation of the town&#x27;s name into the name of a criminal gang leader in &quot;The Godfather&quot; is, however, predated by Graham Greene&#x27;s 1938 novel &quot;Brighton Rock&quot;, which was made into a popular film in 1947. The leading character crosses the rival gang leader &quot;Colleoni&quot; in the English seaside town of Brighton.

== Notable people ==

* Al Pacino&#x27;s grandparents migrated to the US from Corleone.
* Placido Rizzotto (1914–1948)
* Bernandino Verro (1866–1915)
* Richard Nicastro, NYC Chief of Detectives 1984–1986, had parents who migrated to the US from Corleone.
* Gangster Tommaso Gagliano (1883–1951)
* Gangster Ignazio Dragna (1891–1956)
* Gangster Tom Dragna (1888–1977)
* Gangster Giuseppe &quot;the Clutch Hand&quot; Morello (1867–1930)
* Gangster Michele Navarra (1905–1958)
* Gangster Luciano Leggio (1925–1993)
* Gangster Leoluca Bagarella (b. 1942)
* Gangster Salvatore Riina (1930–2017)
* Gangster Bernardo Provenzano (1933–2016)
* Gangster Gaetano Reina (1889–1930)
* Gangster Ciro Terranova (1888–1938)
* Saint Bernard of Corleone

==See also==
*Mafia members from Corleone
*Royal Palace of Ficuzza

==References==
==External links==

* Corleone official website 
* Corleone on comuni-italiani.it </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q485724" start="0" end="8" title="Corleone" label="Corleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="46" end="52" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q20795016" start="96" end="124" title="Metropolitan City of Palermo" label="Metropolitan City of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="129" end="135" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="143" end="148" title="Sicilian Mafia" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q922816" start="240" end="254" title="Tommy Gagliano" label="Tommy Gagliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q925546" start="256" end="269" title="Gaetano Reina" label="Gaetano Reina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677023" start="271" end="282" title="Jack Dragna" label="Jack Dragna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370325" start="284" end="300" title="Giuseppe Morello" label="Giuseppe Morello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052063" start="302" end="317" title="Michele Navarra" label="Michele Navarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q83383" start="319" end="333" title="Luciano Leggio" label="Luciano Leggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065148" start="335" end="352" title="Leoluca Bagarella" label="Leoluca Bagarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q312308" start="354" end="369" title="Salvatore Riina" label="Salvatore Riina"/>
<link wikidata="Q316315" start="374" end="393" title="Bernardo Provenzano" label="Bernardo Provenzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q182870" start="456" end="466" title="Mario Puzo" label="Mario Puzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q243556" start="491" end="504" title="The Godfather (novel)" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q745077" start="540" end="564" title="Vito Corleone" label="Vito (Andolini) Corleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280643" start="593" end="603" title="Corleonesi" label="Corleonesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1124" end="1137" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069489" start="1170" end="1183" title="Siculo-Arabic" label="Siculo-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="1212" end="1229" title="Emirate of Sicily" label="Emirate of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1236" end="1241" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="1272" end="1278" title="Norman language" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8765" start="1312" end="1321" title="Aragonese language" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1382" end="1390" title="Sicily" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="1620" end="1629" title="Aghlabids" label="Aghlabids"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="2007" end="2023" title="Neolithic Period" label="Neolithic Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2031" end="2041" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2155" end="2166" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="2375" end="2386" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2532" end="2538" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2540" end="2548" title="Cluverio" label="Cluverio"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="2553" end="2560" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="2752" end="2761" title="Aghlabids" label="Aghlabids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687154" start="2773" end="2798" title="Muslim conquest of Sicily" label="Muslim conquest of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="2988" end="2995" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="3162" end="3168" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q468653" start="3333" end="3340" title="Tancred, King of Sicily" label="Tancred"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="3511" end="3533" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="3723" end="3730" title="Saracen" label="Saracen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197216" start="3982" end="3991" title="Feoffment" label="enfeoffed"/>
<link wikidata="Q207448" start="4023" end="4031" title="Monreale" label="Monreale"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="4085" end="4096" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Ghibellines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6088" start="4102" end="4113" title="Alessandria" label="Alessandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258835" start="4155" end="4175" title="Lombards of Sicily" label="&amp;quot;Lombards&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="4245" end="4267" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="4308" end="4315" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207327" start="4497" end="4513" title="Sicilian Vespers" label="Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207327" start="4604" end="4620" title="Sicilian Vespers" label="Sicilian Vespers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="4738" end="4745" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="4777" end="4784" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191759" start="5004" end="5015" title="Ventimiglia" label="Ventimiglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071658" start="5107" end="5118" title="Chiaramonte" label="Chiaramonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="5168" end="5174" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q312304" start="5486" end="5509" title="Alfonso the Magnanimous" label="Alfonso the Magnanimous"/>
<link wikidata="Q191759" start="5789" end="5800" title="Ventimiglia" label="Ventimiglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="5929" end="5936" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="6057" end="6064" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q426024" start="6085" end="6092" title="Hugo of Moncada" label="Moncada"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="6966" end="6986" title="Unification of Italy" label="Unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080913" start="6995" end="7015" title="Francesco Bentivegna" label="Francesco Bentivegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="7287" end="7305" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7322" end="7346" title="Vincenzo Giordano Orsini" label="Vincenzo Giordano Orsini"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="7550" end="7558" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7589" end="7609" title="Ferdinando Firmaturi" label="Ferdinando Firmaturi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638738" start="7710" end="7726" title="Bernardino Verro" label="Bernardino Verro"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8115" end="8126" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8185" end="8197" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754984" start="8263" end="8279" title="Placido Rizzotto" label="Placido Rizzotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q169902" start="8324" end="8337" title="Prince Aimone, Duke of Aosta" label="Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8428" end="8435" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="8450" end="8458" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8467" end="8479" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052063" start="8580" end="8595" title="Michele Navarra" label="Michele Navarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q83383" start="8597" end="8611" title="Luciano Leggio" label="Luciano Leggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q316315" start="8613" end="8632" title="Bernardo Provenzano" label="Bernardo Provenzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q312308" start="8634" end="8649" title="Salvatore Riina" label="Salvatore Riina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758498" start="8674" end="8682" title="Calogero Bagarella" label="Calogero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065148" start="8687" end="8704" title="Leoluca Bagarella" label="Leoluca Bagarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561279" start="8802" end="8817" title="Vito Ciancimino" label="Vito Ciancimino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772490" start="9136" end="9150" title="Rocca Busambra" label="Rocca Busambra"/>
<link wikidata="Q496914" start="9185" end="9195" title="Bisacquino" label="Bisacquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q490963" start="9197" end="9219" title="Campofelice di Fitalia" label="Campofelice di Fitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q490943" start="9221" end="9233" title="Campofiorito" label="Campofiorito"/>
<link wikidata="Q490808" start="9235" end="9253" title="Contessa Entellina" label="Contessa Entellina"/>
<link wikidata="Q496943" start="9255" end="9270" title="Chiusa Sclafani" label="Chiusa Sclafani"/>
<link wikidata="Q490817" start="9272" end="9279" title="Godrano" label="Godrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q490509" start="9281" end="9290" title="Mezzojuso" label="Mezzojuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q207448" start="9292" end="9300" title="Monreale" label="Monreale"/>
<link wikidata="Q489688" start="9302" end="9317" title="Palazzo Adriano" label="Palazzo Adriano"/>
<link wikidata="Q264940" start="9319" end="9325" title="Prizzi" label="Prizzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q496951" start="9330" end="9339" title="Roccamena" label="Roccamena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744536" start="9378" end="9385" title="Ficuzza" label="Ficuzza"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="9390" end="9397" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q133704" start="9590" end="9605" title="Martin of Tours" label="Martin of Tours"/>
<link wikidata="Q151967" start="9937" end="9949" title="Saint Blaise" label="Saint Blaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132902" start="10188" end="10199" title="Leoluca" label="San Leoluca"/>
<link wikidata="Q51638" start="10564" end="10577" title="Ascension Day" label="Ascension Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224" start="10874" end="10894" title="Carlo Azeglio Ciampi" label="Carlo Azeglio Ciampi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334761" start="10950" end="10963" title="Pino Arlacchi" label="Pino Arlacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="10996" end="11006" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q600131" start="11164" end="11174" title="Maxi Trial" label="Maxi Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q723595" start="11254" end="11280" title="Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa" label="Carlo Alberto Dalla Chiesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458155" start="11460" end="11471" title="Cosa Nostra" label="Cosa Nostra"/>
<link wikidata="Q207073" start="11604" end="11620" title="Giovanni Falcone" label="Giovanni Falcone"/>
<link wikidata="Q312302" start="11625" end="11641" title="Paolo Borsellino" label="Paolo Borsellino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032656" start="11785" end="11792" title="pentito" label="pentito"/>
<link wikidata="Q212496" start="11823" end="11839" title="Tommaso Buscetta" label="Tommaso Buscetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q467911" start="11957" end="11974" title="Letizia Battaglia" label="Letizia Battaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744536" start="13165" end="13172" title="Ficuzza" label="Ficuzza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13227" end="13236" title="San Carlo (Chiusa Sclafani)" label="San Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q496943" start="13250" end="13265" title="Chiusa Sclafani" label="Chiusa Sclafani"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="13408" end="13413" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q423034" start="15184" end="15195" title="glauconite" label="glauconitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182870" start="15342" end="15352" title="Mario Puzo" label="Mario Puzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q56094" start="15369" end="15389" title="Francis Ford Coppola" label="Francis Ford Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="15408" end="15421" title="The Godfather" label="The Godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q745077" start="15443" end="15456" title="Vito Corleone" label="Vito Andolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q184768" start="15588" end="15609" title="The Godfather Part II" label="The Godfather Part II"/>
<link wikidata="Q202175" start="15773" end="15785" title="Ellis Island" label="Ellis Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q47703" start="15802" end="15813" title="The Godfather" label="film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341640" start="15838" end="15853" title="Corleone family" label="Corleone family"/>
<link wikidata="Q498997" start="15897" end="15903" title="Savoca" label="Savoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q496120" start="15908" end="15925" title="Forza d&amp;#x27;Agrò" label="Forza d&amp;#x27;Agrò"/>
<link wikidata="Q835154" start="15983" end="15999" title="Michael Corleone" label="Michael Corleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="16013" end="16022" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="16213" end="16226" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056663" start="16251" end="16264" title="Brighton Rock (novel)" label="Brighton Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41163" start="16455" end="16464" title="Al Pacino" label="Al Pacino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754984" start="16521" end="16537" title="Placido Rizzotto" label="Placido Rizzotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638738" start="16552" end="16568" title="Bernardino Verro" label="Bernandino Verro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16583" end="16599" title="Richard Nicastro" label="Richard Nicastro"/>
<link wikidata="Q922816" start="16697" end="16713" title="Tommy Gagliano" label="Tommaso Gagliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677023" start="16737" end="16751" title="Jack Dragna" label="Ignazio Dragna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815646" start="16775" end="16785" title="Tom Dragna" label="Tom Dragna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370325" start="16809" end="16853" title="Giuseppe Morello" label="Giuseppe &amp;quot;the Clutch Hand&amp;quot; Morello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052063" start="16877" end="16892" title="Michele Navarra" label="Michele Navarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q83383" start="16916" end="16930" title="Luciano Leggio" label="Luciano Leggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065148" start="16954" end="16971" title="Leoluca Bagarella" label="Leoluca Bagarella"/>
<link wikidata="Q312308" start="16993" end="17008" title="Salvatore Riina" label="Salvatore Riina"/>
<link wikidata="Q316315" start="17032" end="17051" title="Bernardo Provenzano" label="Bernardo Provenzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q925546" start="17075" end="17088" title="Gaetano Reina" label="Gaetano Reina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093080" start="17112" end="17126" title="Ciro Terranova" label="Ciro Terranova"/>
<link wikidata="Q733329" start="17147" end="17166" title="Bernard of Corleone" label="Bernard of Corleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729492" start="17182" end="17209" title="Mafia members from Corleone" label="Mafia members from Corleone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164805" start="17211" end="17234" title="Royal Palace of Ficuzza" label="Royal Palace of Ficuzza"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44808" wikidata="Q1859351" url="?curid=44808" title="Sicilian cuisine">
<text>Sicilian cuisine is the style of cooking on the island of Sicily. It shows traces of all cultures that have existed on the island of Sicily over the last two millennia. Although its cuisine has much in common with Italian cuisine, Sicilian food also has Greek, Spanish, Jewish, Maghrebi, and Arab influences.

The Sicilian cook Mithaecus, born during 5th century BC, is credited with having brought knowledge of Sicilian gastronomy to Greece: his cookbook was the first in Greek, therefore he was the earliest cookbook author in any language whose name is known.

==History==
Much of the island was initially settled by Greek colonists, who left a preference for fish, wheat, olives, grapes, broad beans, chickpeas, lentils, almonds, pistachios, and fresh vegetables.
Arab influences on Sicilian cuisine trace to the Arab domination of Sicily in the 10th and early 11th centuries, and include the use of sugar, citrus, rice, raisins, pine nuts and spices such as saffron, nutmeg, and cinnamon. Norman influences are also found, such as in the fondness for meat dishes. The Jewish community, who lived in the island, also left their mark on the Sicilian cuisine, they were responsible for introducing garlic fried in olive oil into the sauce. Later, the Spanish introduced numerous items from the New World, including cocoa, maize, peppers, zucchini, potatoes, and tomatoes, along with other produce. Much of the island&#x27;s cuisine encourages the use of fresh vegetables such as eggplant, artichoke, and tomatoes, and fish such as tuna, sea bream, sea bass, cuttlefish, and swordfish. In Trapani in the extreme western corner of the island, North African influences are clear in the use of couscous.

==Dishes==
===Starters===
The starters (called antipasti) are an important aspect of Sicilian cuisine. Common Sicilian starters include caponata and &quot;gatò di patate&quot; (a kind of potato and cheese pie).

===Soups===
&quot;Maccu&quot; is a Sicilian soup and foodstuff prepared with fava beans as a primary ingredient. It is a peasant food and staple that dates back to ancient history. &quot;Maccu di San Giuseppe&quot; () is a traditional Sicilian dish that consists of various ingredients and &quot;maccu&quot;. The dish may be prepared on Saint Joseph&#x27;s Day in Sicily, to clear out pantries and allow room for the spring&#x27;s new crops of vegetables.

===Pasta===
Sicily is the oldest Italian and Western location on record where pasta worked into long and thin form was part of the local cuisine. This dates back to around the 12th century, as attested by the Tabula Rogeriana of Muhammad al-Idrisi, reporting some traditions about the Kingdom of Sicily.

&quot;Spaghetti ai ricci di mare&quot; (spaghetti prepared with sea urchin), &quot;pasta&quot; &quot;con le sarde&quot; (with sardines) and &quot;pasta alla Norma&quot; (with eggplant and a specialty that originated in Catania) are the most popular pasta dishes that are typically Sicilian. Cannelloni is another common dish. Another popular dish in eastern Sicily is pasta with &quot;capuliato&quot;.

===Main dish===
After the pasta, the typical Sicilian menu includes a second or main dish (&quot;secondi&quot;) based on meat or fish. Main dishes based on seafood are &quot;couscous&quot; &quot;al pesce&quot; and &quot;pesce spada alla ghiotta&quot; (swordfish).

===Desserts and sweets===

Sweets are another specialty. Examples include: &quot;frutta martorana&quot;, &quot;pignolata of Messina&quot;, &quot;buccellato&quot;, cannoli, granita, &quot;cassata&quot; &quot;siciliana&quot; and the &quot;crocetta di Caltanissetta&quot;, a sweet that disappeared and was rediscovered in 2014.

Candy in Sicily was heavily influenced by the Arab candymakers in the 9th century, and Sicilian candy has preserved more of that influence than almost any other place in Europe. Marzipan fruits may have been invented at the Convent of Eloise at Martorana in the 14th century. In the 17th and 18th centuries, many Sicilian monasteries produced candies and pastries, some with fertility themes. The only surviving convent to follow this tradition is the Monastery of the Virgins of Palermo, which makes breast-shaped cakes in honor of Saint Agatha of Sicily.

Traditional sugar statues, called &quot;pupa di cena&quot;, are still made, although now featuring modern celebrities or culture figures.

Granita is particularly famous and well known. It is a semi-frozen dessert of sugar, water, and flavourings originally from the island, and is commonly associated with Messina or Catania, even though there is no evident proof that it hails from any particular Sicilian city. Related to sorbet and Italian ice, in most of Sicily it has a coarser, more crystalline texture. Food writer Jeffrey Steingarten says that &quot;the desired texture seems to vary from city to city&quot; on the island; on the west coast and in Palermo, it is at its chunkiest, and in the east it is nearly as smooth as sorbet. This is largely the result of different freezing techniques: the smoother types are produced in a gelato machine, while the coarser varieties are frozen with only occasional agitation, then scraped or shaved to produce separated crystals.

===Fruits===

Citrus fruits are a popular ingredient in Sicilian cuisine. Many were first introduced by the Arabs from the 9th to 11th centuries, but some, such as the Washington navel from Brazil, have been brought to the island more recently. Examples of citrus fruits found in Sicily are:
* &quot;Biondo comune&quot; – the &quot;common blonde&quot; orange
* &quot;Ovale&quot; – ripens between April and May, with a compact flesh
* &quot;Sanguigno comune&quot; – common blood orange harvested between January and April
* Washington navel – introduced from Brazil during the 1940s–1950s, grown chiefly near Ribera and Sciacca and harvested from November to January
* &quot;Sanguinella&quot; – bitter orange of the blood orange variety, found in Paternò Santa Maria di Licodia, Palagonia, Scordia and Francofonte during January until April
* &quot;Tarocco&quot; – high quality blood orange found in Catania, Siracusa and Francofonte from November to January
* &quot;Tarocco dal muso&quot; - bell shaped orange found in Francofonte
* &quot;Valencia&quot; – similar to the Ovale and used often in confectionery items
* &quot;Moro&quot; – crimson colored flesh found in Lentini, Scordia, and Francofonte from mid-January until the end of April
* &quot;Comune&quot; – common variety of the mandarin orange
* &quot;&quot; – a second variety of the mandarin orange found in Sicily
* &quot;Femminello&quot;, Siracusa lemon – the lemon that makes up 80% of Sicily&#x27;s lemon crop, found in Catania, Syracuse, Messina and Palermo
* &quot;Monachello&quot; – &quot;little monk&quot; lemon harvested from October from March and able to withstand drought better that the &quot;Femminello&quot;
* &quot;Verdello&quot; – a lime that grows particularly well and is harvested from May to September

===Wines and drinks===
The drink most often served with the main meal in Sicily is wine. The soil and climate in Sicily are ideal for growing grapes, mainly due to Mount Etna, and a wine-making tradition on the island has existed since at least 4000 BC. Today, all Sicilian provinces produce wine and Sicilian wine produced by modern methods has established itself on the European wine market.

Sicilian red wines have an alcoholic content of 12.5 to 13.5% and are usually drunk in the evening with roast or grilled meat. Well-known red wines include the Cerasuolo di Vittoria and the Nero d&#x27;Avola, mainly those produced around Noto (Siracusa). The dry and white wines and rosés usually have an alcoholic content from 11.5 to 12.5% and are mainly consumed with fish, poultry and pasta dishes. Sicily is also known for producing dessert wines, such as Marsala and the Malvasia delle Lipari.

Other common Sicilian alcoholic drinks include limoncello, a lemon liqueur, and Amaro Averna, a herbal drink, which is often consumed after meals as a digestive.

===Street food===

Sicilians eat large quantities of street food, including the renowned arancini (a form of deep-fried rice croquettes). Popular street foods include, &quot;pani câ meusa&quot; and &quot;pane e panelle&quot; in the Palermo region, &#x27; and &quot;cipolline&quot; in the Catania region, and &#x27; and &quot;&quot; &quot;messinese&quot; (or &quot;pitone&quot; or &quot;pidune&quot;, in dialect) in the Messina area.

==See also==

* Italian cuisine
* List of Sicilian dishes
* Sicilian pizza

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1859351" start="0" end="16" title="Sicilian cuisine" label="Sicilian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="58" end="64" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="214" end="229" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q744027" start="254" end="259" title="Greek cuisine" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q622512" start="261" end="268" title="Spanish cuisine" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q284288" start="270" end="276" title="Jewish cuisine" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381737" start="278" end="286" title="Maghrebi cuisine" label="Maghrebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q623970" start="292" end="296" title="Arab cuisine" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q728319" start="328" end="337" title="Mithaecus" label="Mithaecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="435" end="441" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="609" end="635" title="Magna Graecia" label="settled by Greek colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="663" end="667" title="Fish as food" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="669" end="674" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="676" end="681" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q30046" start="684" end="689" title="Vitis vinifera" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="692" end="703" title="Vicia faba" label="broad beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q81375" start="705" end="713" title="chickpea" label="chickpea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="716" end="723" title="Lentil" label="lentils"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="725" end="731" title="almond" label="almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q36071" start="734" end="743" title="pistachio" label="pistachio"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="768" end="772" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="817" end="842" title="Emirate of Sicily" label="Arab domination of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="904" end="909" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="911" end="917" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="919" end="923" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13186" start="925" end="931" title="raisin" label="raisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212933" start="934" end="943" title="Pine nut" label="pine nuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="963" end="970" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83165" start="972" end="978" title="nutmeg" label="nutmeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="984" end="992" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="994" end="1000" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="1056" end="1060" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1073" end="1079" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q622512" start="1253" end="1260" title="Spanish cuisine" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q767253" start="1272" end="1305" title="Columbian exchange" label="numerous items from the New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="1317" end="1322" title="chocolate" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="1324" end="1329" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="1331" end="1338" title="Bell pepper" label="peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533" start="1340" end="1348" title="zucchini" label="zucchini"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="1350" end="1356" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="1364" end="1370" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913301" start="1391" end="1398" title="produce" label="produce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540" start="1481" end="1489" title="eggplant" label="eggplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23041430" start="1491" end="1500" title="artichoke" label="artichoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="1533" end="1537" title="Tuna as food" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q239590" start="1539" end="1548" title="Sparidae" label="sea bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q217129" start="1550" end="1558" title="European seabass" label="sea bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q184479" start="1560" end="1570" title="cuttlefish" label="cuttlefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q164327" start="1576" end="1585" title="swordfish" label="swordfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13664" start="1590" end="1597" title="Trapani" label="Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381737" start="1643" end="1656" title="Maghrebi cuisine" label="North African"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="1692" end="1700" title="couscous" label="couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q622440" start="1750" end="1759" title="Antipasto" label="antipasti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034806" start="1839" end="1847" title="caponata" label="caponata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842043" start="1933" end="1938" title="Maccu" label="Maccu"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="1959" end="1963" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q131342" start="1992" end="2002" title="Vicia faba" label="fava beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7158418" start="2036" end="2048" title="Peasant foods" label="peasant food"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="2053" end="2059" title="staple food" label="staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="2079" end="2094" title="ancient history" label="ancient history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038328" start="2252" end="2275" title="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Saint Joseph&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="2450" end="2455" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089336" start="2581" end="2597" title="Tabula Rogeriana" label="Tabula Rogeriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q173441" start="2601" end="2619" title="Muhammad al-Idrisi" label="Muhammad al-Idrisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="2657" end="2674" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026" start="2717" end="2726" title="spaghetti" label="spaghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q901067" start="2741" end="2751" title="Paracentrotus lividus" label="sea urchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761000" start="2754" end="2796" title="pasta con le sarde" label="&amp;quot;pasta&amp;quot; &amp;quot;con le sarde&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423795" start="2803" end="2811" title="Sardines as food" label="sardines"/>
<link wikidata="Q548521" start="2823" end="2839" title="pasta alla Norma" label="pasta alla Norma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="2896" end="2903" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q20010" start="2968" end="2978" title="Cannelloni" label="Cannelloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658069" start="3062" end="3071" title="capuliato" label="capuliato"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="3248" end="3289" title="couscous" label="&amp;quot;couscous&amp;quot; &amp;quot;al pesce&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q164327" start="3332" end="3341" title="swordfish" label="swordfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471040" start="3426" end="3442" title="frutta martorana" label="frutta martorana"/>
<link wikidata="Q387673" start="3450" end="3482" title="Pignolata" label="&amp;quot;pignolata of Messina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q997642" start="3490" end="3500" title="buccellato" label="buccellato"/>
<link wikidata="Q836151" start="3508" end="3515" title="cannoli" label="cannoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q70612" start="3517" end="3524" title="granita" label="granita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048282" start="3526" end="3567" title="Cassata" label="&amp;quot;cassata&amp;quot; &amp;quot;siciliana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18150258" start="3582" end="3607" title="crocetta di Caltanissetta" label="crocetta di Caltanissetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q106252" start="3849" end="3857" title="Marzipan" label="Marzipan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3895" end="3925" title="Convent of Eloise at Martorana" label="Convent of Eloise at Martorana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4140" end="4158" title="Virgins of Palermo" label="Virgins of Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200895" start="4210" end="4226" title="Agatha of Sicily" label="Agatha of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="4536" end="4543" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="4547" end="4554" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13302" start="4654" end="4660" title="sorbet" label="sorbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13305" start="4665" end="4676" title="Italian ice" label="Italian ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686496" start="4752" end="4771" title="Jeffrey Steingarten" label="Jeffrey Steingarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="4886" end="4893" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13302" start="4961" end="4967" title="sorbet" label="sorbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319419" start="5067" end="5081" title="ice cream maker" label="gelato machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="5223" end="5236" title="Citrus" label="Citrus fruits"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="5317" end="5322" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="5399" end="5405" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="5767" end="5773" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q432527" start="5817" end="5823" title="Ribera, Agrigento" label="Ribera"/>
<link wikidata="Q432681" start="5828" end="5835" title="Sciacca" label="Sciacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q303669" start="5924" end="5936" title="blood orange" label="blood orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q478733" start="5987" end="5996" title="Palagonia" label="Palagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q478916" start="5998" end="6005" title="Scordia" label="Scordia"/>
<link wikidata="Q489962" start="6010" end="6021" title="Francofonte" label="Francofonte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6057" end="6064" title="Blood orange#Tarocco" label="Tarocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="6108" end="6115" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="6117" end="6125" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Siracusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246629" start="6248" end="6256" title="Valencia orange" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="6304" end="6317" title="confectionery" label="confectionery"/>
<link wikidata="Q488240" start="6376" end="6383" title="Lentini" label="Lentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q125337" start="6495" end="6510" title="mandarin orange" label="mandarin orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832520" start="6610" end="6624" title="Siracusa lemon" label="Siracusa lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="6702" end="6710" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="6712" end="6719" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="7076" end="7080" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q253140" start="7127" end="7141" title="Viticulture" label="growing grapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="7157" end="7167" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827" start="7397" end="7405" title="red wine" label="red wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054633" start="7548" end="7569" title="Cerasuolo di Vittoria" label="Cerasuolo di Vittoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713890" start="7578" end="7595" title="Nero d&amp;#x27;Avola" label="Nero d&amp;#x27;Avola"/>
<link wikidata="Q487174" start="7626" end="7630" title="Noto" label="Noto"/>
<link wikidata="Q10210" start="7655" end="7665" title="white wine" label="white wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12979" start="7671" end="7675" title="rosé" label="rosé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200945" start="7826" end="7838" title="dessert wine" label="dessert wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q842052" start="7849" end="7856" title="Marsala wine" label="Marsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165349" start="7865" end="7886" title="Malvasia delle Lipari" label="Malvasia delle Lipari"/>
<link wikidata="Q736208" start="7936" end="7946" title="limoncello" label="limoncello"/>
<link wikidata="Q790615" start="7969" end="7981" title="Amaro Averna" label="Amaro Averna"/>
<link wikidata="Q96755250" start="8040" end="8049" title="Apéritif and digestif" label="digestive"/>
<link wikidata="Q268857" start="8141" end="8149" title="arancini" label="arancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="8161" end="8171" title="Deep frying" label="deep-fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q70125" start="8177" end="8186" title="croquette" label="croquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293198" start="8226" end="8239" title="pani câ meusa" label="pani câ meusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738934" start="8263" end="8270" title="panelle" label="panelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="8284" end="8291" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903" start="8340" end="8347" title="Catania" label="Catania"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="8471" end="8478" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q192786" start="8502" end="8517" title="Italian cuisine" label="Italian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348037" start="8520" end="8543" title="List of Sicilian dishes" label="List of Sicilian dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121797" start="8546" end="8560" title="Sicilian pizza" label="Sicilian pizza"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44812" wikidata="Q580" url="?curid=44812" title="Łódź">
<text>Łódź is a city in central Poland and a former industrial centre. It is the capital of Łódź Voivodeship, and is located south-west of Warsaw. Łódź has a population of 655,279, making it the country&#x27;s fourth largest city.

Łódź first appears in records in 14th-century. It was granted town rights in 1423 by the Polish King Władysław II Jagiełło and it remained a private town of the Kuyavian bishops and clergy until the late 18th century. In the Second Partition of Poland in 1793, Łódź was annexed to Prussia before becoming part of the Napoleonic Duchy of Warsaw; the city joined Congress Poland, a Russian client state, at the 1815 Congress of Vienna. The Second Industrial Revolution (from 1870) brought rapid growth in textile manufacturing and in population owing to the inflow of migrants, notably Germans and Jews. Ever since the industrialization of the area, the city has been multinational and struggled with social inequalities, as documented in the novel &quot;The Promised Land&quot; by Nobel Prize–winning author Władysław Reymont. The contrasts greatly reflected on the architecture of the city, where luxurious mansions coexisted with red-brick factories and dilapidated tenement houses.

The industrial development and demographic surge made Łódź one of the largest cities in Poland. Under the German occupation during World War II Łódź was briefly renamed after Karl Litzmann. The city&#x27;s population was persecuted and its large Jewish minority was forced into a walled zone known as the Łódź Ghetto, from where they were sent to German concentration and extermination camps. The city became Poland&#x27;s temporary seat of power in 1945.

Łódź experienced a sharp demographic and economic decline after 1989. It was only in the 2010s that the city began to experience revitalization of its neglected downtown area. Łódź is ranked by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network on the &quot;Sufficiency&quot; level of global influence and is internationally known for its National Film School, a cradle for the most renowned Polish actors and directors, including Andrzej Wajda and Roman Polanski. In 2017, the city was inducted into the UNESCO Creative Cities Network and named UNESCO City of Film.

==Name and toponymy==
The Polish name for the city, , directly translates to &#x27;boat&#x27; in the English language. There is no unanimous consensus on its precise origin, but popular theories link it with the medieval village of Łodzia and the canalised River Łódka on which the modern city was founded. It may have also derived from the term denoting a willow tree and the personal Old Polish name Włodzisław.

==History==

===Early beginnings (1332–1815)===
Łódź first appears in a 1332 written record issued by Władysław the Hunchback, Duke of Łęczyca, which transferred the village of Łodzia to the Bishopric of Włocławek. The document enumerated the privileges of its inhabitants, notably the right to graze land, establish pastures and engage in logging. In 1423, King of Poland Władysław II Jagiełło officially granted town rights to the village under Magdeburg Law. For centuries, it remained a small remote settlement situated among woodlands and marshes, which was privately held by the Kuyavian bishops. It was administratively located in the Brzeziny County in the Łęczyca Voivodeship in the Greater Poland Province of the Kingdom of Poland. The economy was predominantly driven by agriculture and farming until the 19th century. The earliest two versions of the coat of arms appeared on seal emblems in 1535 and 1577, with the latter illustrating a boat-like vessel and a turned oar.

With the Second Partition of Poland in 1793, Łódź was annexed by Prussia. In 1798, the Kuyavian bishops&#x27; ownership over the region was formally revoked during the secularisation of church property. The town, governed by a burgomaster (), at the time had only 190 residents, 44 occupied dwellings, a church and a prison. In 1806, Łódź was incorporated into the Napoleonic Duchy of Warsaw. In the aftermath of the 1815 Congress of Vienna, the duchy was dissolved and the town became part of the Congress Kingdom of Poland, a client state of the Russian Empire.

===Partitions and development (1815–1918)===
In 1820, the government of the Congress Kingdom designated Łódź and its rural surroundings for centrally planned industrial development. Rajmund Rembieliński, head of the Administrative Council and prefect of Masovia, became the president of a commission that subdivided the works two major phases; the first (1821–23) comprised the creation of a new city centre with an octagonal square (contemporary ; Liberty Square) and arranged housing allotments on greenfield land situated south of the old marketplace; the second stage (1824–28) involved the establishment of cotton mill colonies and a linear street system along with an arterial north-south thoroughfare, Piotrkowska. Many of the early dwellings were timber cottages built for housing weavers ().

During this time, a sizeable number of German craftsmen settled in the city, encouraged by exemptions from tax obligations. Their settlement in Poland was encouraged by renowned philosopher and statesman Stanisław Staszic, who acted as the director of the Department of Trade, Crafts and Industry.

In 1851, the Imperial authorities abolished a customs barrier which was imposed on Congress Poland following the failed November Uprising (1830–1831). The suppression of tariffs allowed the city to freely export its goods to Russia, where the demand for textiles was high. Poland&#x27;s first steam-powered loom commenced operations at Ludwik Geyer&#x27;s White Factory in 1839. During the first weeks of the January Uprising (1863–1864), a unit of 300 Polish insurgents entered the city without resistance and seized weapons, and later on, there were also clashes between Polish insurgents and Russian troops in the city. In 1864, the inhabitants of adjacent villages were permitted to settle in Łódź without restrictions. The development of railways in the region was also instrumental in expanding the textile industry; in 1865 the Łódź–Koluszki line, a branch of the Warsaw–Vienna railway, was opened, thus providing a train connection to larger markets. In 1867, the city was incorporated into the Piotrków Governorate, a local province.

The infrastructure and edifices of Łódź were built at the expense of industrialists and business magnates, chiefly Karl Wilhelm Scheibler and Izrael Poznański, who sponsored schools, hospitals, orphanages, and places of worship. From 1872 to 1892, Poznański established a major textile manufactory composed of twelve factories, power plants, worker tenements, a private fire station, and a large eclectic palace. By the end of the century, Scheibler&#x27;s became one of Europe&#x27;s largest industrial complexes, employing 5,000 workers within a single facility. The years 1870–1890 saw the most intense industrialisation, which was marked by social inequalities and dire working conditions. Łódź soon became a notable centre of the socialist movement and the so-called Łódź rebellion(pl) in May 1892 was quelled by a military intervention.

The turn of the 20th century coincided with cultural and technological progress; in 1899, the first stationary cinema in Poland () was opened in Łódź. In the same year, Józef Piłsudski, the future Marshal of Poland, settled in the city and began printing the &quot;Robotnik&quot; (The Worker; p. 1894–1939), an underground newspaper published by the Polish Socialist Party. During the June Days (1905), approximately 100,000 unemployed labourers went on a mass strike, barricaded the streets and clashed with troops. Officially, 151 demonstrators were killed and thousands were wounded. In 1912, the Archcathedral of St. Stanislaus Kostka was completed and its tower at is one of the tallest in Poland.

Despite the impending crisis preceding World War I, Łódź grew exponentially and was one of the world&#x27;s most densely populated industrial cities, with a population density of by 1914. In the aftermath of the Battle of Łódź (1914), the city came under Imperial German occupation on 6 December. With Polish independence restored in November 1918, the local population disarmed the German army. Subsequently, the textile industry of Łódź stalled and its population briefly decreased as ethnic Germans left the city.

===Restored Poland (1918–1939)===
Despite its large population and economic output, Łódź did not serve as the seat of its province until the 20th century. Following the establishment of the Second Polish Republic, it became the capital of the Łódź Voivodeship in 1919. The early interwar period was characterised by considerable economic hardship and industrial stagnation. The Great Depression and the German–Polish customs war closed western markets to Polish textiles while the Bolshevik Revolution and the Civil War in Russia put an end to the most profitable trade with the East.

Because of rapid and, consequently, chaotic development in the previous century, Łódź did not possess the adequate infrastructure and living standards for its inhabitants. Pollution was acute, sanitary conditions were poor and the authorities did not invest in a sewage treatment system until the 1920s. From 1918 to 1939, many cultural, educational and scientific institutions were created, including elementary schools, museums, art galleries and public libraries which prior to the First World War did not exist. Łódź also began developing an entertainment scene, with 34 movie theatres opened by 1939. On 13 September 1925, the city&#x27;s first airport, Lublinek, commenced operations. In 1930, the first radio transmission from a newly-founded broadcasting station took place.

The ideological orientation of Łódź was strongly left-wing and the city was a notable centre of socialist, communist and bundist activity in Polish politics during the interbellum.

===Second World War (1939–1945)===

During the invasion of Poland in September 1939, the Polish forces of General Juliusz Rómmel&#x27;s Army Łódź defended the city against the German assault by forming a line of resistance between Sieradz and Piotrków Trybunalski. The attack was conducted by the 8th Army of Johannes Blaskowitz, who encircled the city with the X Army Corps. After fierce resistance, a Polish delegation surrendered to the Germans on 8 September, and the first troops entered in the early hours of 9 September. The German paramilitary death squad entered the city on 12 September. Arthur Greiser incorporated Łódź into a new administrative subdivision of Nazi Germany called on 9 November 1939, and on 11 April 1940 the city was renamed to after German general and NSDAP member Karl Litzmann.

The city became subjected to immediate Germanisation, with Polish and Jewish establishments closed, and Polish-language press banned. Low-wage forced labour was imposed on the city&#x27;s inhabitants aged 16 to 60; many were subsequently deported to Germany. As part of the , Polish intellectuals from the city and region were imprisoned at Radogoszcz and then either sent to concentration camps or murdered in the forests of Łagiewniki and the village of Lućmierz-Las. Polish children were forcibly taken from their parents, and from 1942 to 1945 the German &quot;Sicherheitspolizei&quot; operated a camp for kidnapped Polish children from various regions in Łódź.

The German authorities established the Łódź Ghetto () in the city and populated it with more than 200,000 Jews from the region, who were systematically sent to German extermination camps. It was the second-largest ghetto in occupied Europe, and the last major ghetto to be liquidated, in August 1944. The Polish resistance movement () operated in the city and aided the Jewish people throughout its existence. However, only 877 Jews were still alive by 1945. Of the 223,000 Jews in Łódź before the invasion, 10,000 survived the Holocaust in other places. The Germans also created camps for non-Jews, including the Romani people deported from abroad, who were ultimately murdered at Chełmno, as well as a penal forced labour camp, four transit camps for Poles expelled from the city and region, and a racial research camp.

===Post World War II (1945–1989)===

Following liberation by Soviet forces on 19 January 1945, and the end of the World War II, Łódź informally and temporarily took over the functions of Poland&#x27;s capital, and most of the government and country administration resided in the city prior to the reconstruction of Warsaw.

Łódź also experienced an influx of refugees from Kresy. Many migrated into the suburbs and occupied the empty properties. Under the Polish People&#x27;s Republic, the city&#x27;s industry and private companies were subject to nationalisation. On 24 May 1945, the University of Łódź was inaugurated. On 8 March 1948, the National Film School was opened, later becoming Poland&#x27;s primary academy of drama and cinema.

The spatial and urban planning after World War II was conducted in accordance with the Athens Charter, where the population from the old core was relocated into new residential areas. However, as a result, the inner-city and historical areas fell in significance and degenerated into a slum. A number of extensive panel block housing estates were constructed, including Retkinia, Teofilów, Widzew, Radogoszcz, and Chojny. These block housing estates were constructed between 1960 and 1990, covering an area of almost and accommodating a large part of the populace.

In mid-1981 Łódź became famous for its massive hunger demonstration of local mothers and their children.

===Contemporary history (1990–present)===
After 1989 the textile industry in Łódź collapsed and the city suffered from social and economic decline. The city&#x27;s industrial heritage and examples of Polish Art Nouveau became an early tourist attraction. In the 2000s the city&#x27;s main street, the Piotrkowska Street, was revitalized, providing space for shops and restaurants. By 2011 the city hosted around 60 festivals per year.

The local government&#x27;s efforts to transform the former industrial city into a thriving urban environment and tourist destination formed the basis for the city&#x27;s failed bid to organise the 2022 International EXPO exhibition on the subject of urban renewal.

== Geography ==
Łódź covers an area of approximately and is located in the centre of Poland. The city lies in the lowlands of the Central European Plain, not exceeding 300 metres in elevation. Topographically, the Łódź region is generally characterised by a flat landscape, with only several highlands which do not exceed 50 metres above the terrain level. The soil is predominantly sandy (62%) followed by clay (24%), silt (8%), and organogenic formations (6%) from regional wetlands. The forest cover (equivalent to 4.2% of the whole country) is considerably low compared to other cities, regions, and provinces of Poland.
=== Climate ===
Łódź has a humid continental climate (&quot;Dfb&quot; in the Köppen climate classification). The lowest temperature was recorded in January 1987.

==Administration==
===Government===

The city&#x27;s governance is executed by &quot;Urząd Miasta Łodzi&quot;, a local council or town hall, currently based at Juliusz Heinzl Palace. The power is divided between the President of Łódź (&quot;Prezydent Łodzi&quot;), a title held by the mayor, and the &quot;Rada Miejska&quot; assembly comprising 37 elected deputies. The term in office for deputies is 5 years. Łódź also acts as a city with powiat rights, exercising the powers and duties of a local powiat county.

Łódź is the capital of Łódź Voivodeship, one of Poland&#x27;s 16 provinces, and hosts the voivodeship sejmik – a regional assembly. The city is also the seat of the voivode, the province&#x27;s governor who is the representative of the Polish Council of Ministers in the voivodeship, is the head of the combined government administration, acts as supervisory authority over local government units and as a higher-level authority within the meaning of the provisions on administrative proceedings.
In medieval times, the town was governed by the burgomaster, who began his term as early as 1470. The first individual who held the title of 
&quot;president&quot; was Karol Tangermann, a close aide of Rajmund Rembieliński, when it was still a part of Congress Poland. The first president of Łódź under the independent Second Polish Republic was Leopold Skulski (1917–1919), who subsequently became the prime minister of Poland. The incumbent president since 2010 is Hanna Zdanowska from the Civic Coalition party.

===Administrative division===
Łódź was previously divided into 5 major boroughs (&quot;dzielnica&quot;) – Bałuty, Górna, Polesie, Śródmieście, and Widzew. In January 1993, the system of boroughs was abolished and the city became a single entity with no real subdivisions. In April 2000, a system of 36 neighbourhoods or dependent units (&quot;osiedle&quot;) was imposed by the City Council for administrative purposes only; these units have no local governing or regulatory authority.

==Demographics==
According to Statistics Poland (GUS), Łódź was inhabited by 672,185 people and had a population density of 2,292 persons per square kilometre (5,940/sq mi), Approximately 55.7 per cent of inhabitants are of working age (18–64 years), which is a considerable decrease from 64.1 per cent in 2010. An estimated 29.1 per cent is of post-working age compared to 21.8 per cent ten years earlier. In 2020, 54.39 per cent (365,500) of all residents were women. Łódź has one of the highest feminisation rates among Poland&#x27;s major cities, a legacy of the city&#x27;s industrial past, when the textile factories attracted large numbers of female employees.

At its peak in 1988 the population was around 854,000; however, this has since declined due to low fertility rates, outward migration and a lower life expectancy than in other parts of Poland. Łódź was the country&#x27;s second largest city until 2007, when it lost its position to Kraków. A major contributing factor was the abrupt transition from socialist to market-based economy after 1989 and the resulting economic crisis, but the economic growth which followed has not reversed the trend. Depopulation and ageing are major impediments for the future development of the city, putting strain on social infrastructure and medical services. As a result of the continuing demographic crisis and rapid population loss, Łódź was overtaken by Wrocław and dropped to become the country&#x27;s fourth-largest city in 2022.

Historically, Łódź was multi-ethnic and its diverse population comprised migrants from other regions of Europe. In 1839, approximately 78 per cent (6,648) of the total population was German. In 1913, Łódź had a population of 506,100 people, of whom 251,700 (49.7%) were Poles, 171,900 (34%) were Jews, 75,000 (14.8%) were Germans, and 6,300 (1.3%) were Russians. According to the 1931 Polish census, the total population of 604,000 included 375,000 (59%) Poles, 192,000 (32%) Jews and 54,000 (9%) Germans. By 1939, the Jewish minority had grown to well over 200,000.

===Religion===

The majority of believers in Łódź adhere to Roman Catholicism, the largest religious denomination in Poland. The first Catholic bishopric was established in December 1920 and has been elevated to the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Łódź in 1992 by Pope John Paul II. The primary church for Catholic worship is the Basilica of St. Stanislaus Kostka, which is often reserved for special occasions or during religious holidays. Constructed in 1912 in the Gothic Revival style, it is the tallest building in the city and one of Poland&#x27;s tallest churches since the completion of the tower in 1927. The Feast of Corpus Christi is widely celebrated and annual marches take place on Piotrkowska Street, in front of the Cathedral. Despite this, church attendance in Łódź is one of the lowest in Poland; mass attendance was estimated at 26% in 2013 and fell to 17% by 2023. Statistics also show that the city and its environs have one of the highest concentration of atheists in Poland.

Historically, Łódź had a strong and influential Protestant population (11% in 1921, 9.2% in 1931) that had its origins with the migration of German-speaking weavers and textile workers throughout the 19th century. The Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession representing Lutherans is the largest of the Protestant denominations. The city falls under the Lutheran Diocese of Warsaw, though the congregation is headquartered at the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul in Pabianice. The only active Lutheran church in Łódź is the historic St. Matthew&#x27;s Church, which seasonally serves as a concert hall. There is also a parish of the Polish Reformed Church (Calvinist), dating back to 1888, as well as Methodist and Evangelical temples. Łódź is considered to be one of the centres of Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses&#x27; activity in Poland.

Judaism was once the city&#x27;s second largest denomination (33.4% in 1931), with up to 250 synagogues and shtiebels in existence prior to 1939 and a strong cultural output. The Stara Synagogue, commonly known as Alte Szil, and Ezras Israel Synagogue were the primary places of worship for Orthodox Jews. The Great Synagogue, the largest of its kind, served the Reformed Jewish community. All were destroyed during the Second World War, except for the defunct 19th-century Synagoga Reicherów. The Union of Jewish Religious Communities in Poland (ZGWŻ) manages the Łódź municipality; the local base is situated at a newer synagogue on Pomorska Street where the Community maintains kosher facilities and a mikveh.

Łódź is the seat of a Mariavite Church diocese, initially created in 1910. The Marivites are followers of Old Catholicism and a considerable minority; there are only three Mariavite dioceses across the country.

==Economy and infrastructure==

Before 1990, the economy of Łódź was heavily reliant on the textile industry, which had developed in the city in the nineteenth century owing to the abundance of rivers used to power the industry&#x27;s fulling mills, bleaching plants and other machinery. Because of the growth in this industry, the city has sometimes been called the &quot;Polish Manchester&quot; and the &quot;lingerie capital of Poland&quot;. As a result, Łódź grew from a population of 13,000 in 1840 to over 500,000 in 1913. By the time right before World War I Łódź had become one of the most densely populated industrial cities in the world, with 13,280 inhabitants per km2, and also one of the most polluted. The textile industry declined dramatically in 1990 and 1991, and no major textile company survives in Łódź. However, countless small companies still provide a significant output of textiles, mostly for export. Łódź is no longer a significant industrial centre, but it has become a major hub for the business services sector in Poland owing to the availability of highly skilled workers and active cooperation between local universities and the business sector.

The city benefits from its central location in Poland. A number of firms have located their logistics centres in the vicinity. Two motorways, A1 spanning from the north to the south of Poland, and A2 going from the east to the west, intersect northeast of the city. the A2 is complete to Warsaw and the northern section of A1 is largely completed. With these connections, the advantages of the city&#x27;s central location should increase even further. Work has also begun on upgrading the railway connection with Warsaw, which reduced the 2-hour travel time to make the journey 1.5 hours in 2009. travel time from Łódź to Warsaw is around 1.2 hours with the modern Pesa SA Dart trains.

Recent years have seen many foreign companies opening and establishing their offices in Łódź. The Indian IT company Infosys has one of its centres in the city. In January 2009 Dell announced that it will shift production from its plant in Limerick, Ireland to its plant in Łódź, largely because the labour costs in Poland are a fraction of those in Ireland. The city&#x27;s investor friendly policies have attracted 980 foreign investors by January 2009. Foreign investment was one of the factors which decreased the unemployment rate in Łódź to 6.5 per cent in December 2008, from 20 per cent four years earlier.

===Transport===
Łódź is situated near the geographical centre of Poland, only a short distance away from the motorway junction in Stryków where the two main north–south (A1) and east–west (A2) Polish transport corridors meet, which positions the city on two of the ten major trans-European routes: from Gdańsk to Žilina and Brno and from Berlin to Moscow via Warsaw. It is also part of the New Silk Road, a regular cargo rail connection with the Chinese city of Chengdu operating since 2013. Łódź is served by the national motorway network, an international airport, and long-distance and regional railways. It is at the centre of a regional and commuter rail network operating from the city&#x27;s various train stations. Bus and tram services are operated by a municipal public transport company. There are of bicycle routes throughout the city (as in January 2019).
Major roads include:
* A1: Gdańsk – Toruń – Łódź – Częstochowa – Cieszyn (national border)
* A2: Świecko (national border) – Poznań – Łódź – Warszawa
* S8: Wrocław – Sieradz – Łódź – Piotrków Trybunalski – Warszawa – Białystok
* S14: Pabianice – Konstantynów Łódzki – Aleksandrów Łódzki – Zgierz
* DK14: Łowicz – Stryków – Łódź – Zduńska Wola – Sieradz – Złoczew – Walichnowy
* DK72: Konin – Turek – Poddębice – Łódź – Brzeziny – Rawa Mazowiecka
* DK91: Gdańsk – Tczew – Toruń – Łódź – Piotrków Trybunalski – Radomsko – Częstochowa

====Airport====

The city has an international airport: Łódź Władysław Reymont Airport located from the city centre. Flights connect the city with destinations in Europe including Turkey. In 2014 the airport handled 253,772 passengers. It is the 8th largest airport in Poland.

====Public transport====

The Municipal Transport Company – Łódź (Miejskie Przedsiębiorstwo Komunikacyjne – Łódź), owned by the Łódź City Government, is responsible for operating 58 bus routes and 19 tram lines. The tram network is one of the longest in the country and was the first electrified cable tramway in Congress Poland, beginning its operation on 23 December 1898. The regional tramway network also connects Łódź with the adjacent cities of Pabianice (since 2023) and Konstantynów Łódzki (since 2024), which are within the Łódź Agglomeration. The rolling stock largely comprises older but modernised wagons by Konstal and newer Polish-manufactured types such as Pesa Swing and Moderus Gamma. Among the popular models for buses are Mercedes Conecto LF and Solaris Urbino 18.

====Rail====
Łódź has a number of long distance and local railway stations. There are two main stations in the city, but with no direct rail connection between them—a legacy of 19th-century railway network planning. Originally constructed in 1866, the centrally-located Łódź Fabryczna was a terminus station for a branch line of the Warsaw-Vienna railway, whereas Łódź Kaliska was built more than thirty years later on the central section of the Warsaw-Kalisz railway. For this reason most intercity train traffic goes to this day through Łódź Kaliska station, despite its relative distance from the city centre, and Łódź Fabryczna serves mainly as a terminal station for trains to Warsaw. The situation will be remedied in 2026 after the construction of a tunnel connecting the two, which is likely to make Łódź Poland&#x27;s main railway hub. The tunnel will additionally serve Łódź Commuter Railway, providing a rapid transit system for the city, dubbed the Łódź Metro by the media and local authorities. Three new stations are being constructed on the underground line, one serving the needs of the Manufaktura complex, another one serving Koziny neighbourhood and the third one located in the area of Piotrkowska Street.
In December 2016, a few years after the demolition of the old building of station, a new underground station was opened. It is considered to be the largest and most modern of all train stations in Poland and is designed to handle increased traffic after the construction of the tunnel. It also serves as a multimodal transport hub, featuring an underground intercity bus station, and is integrated with a new transport interchange serving taxis and local trams and buses. The construction of the new Łódź Fabryczna station was part of a broader project of urban renewal known as Nowe Centrum Łodzi (New Centre of Łódź).

The third-largest train station in Łódź is Łódź Widzew. There are also many other stations and train stops in the city, many of which were upgraded as part of the Łódzka Kolej Aglomeracyjna commuter rail project. The rail service, founded as part of a major regional rail upgrade and owned by Łódź Voivodeship, operates on routes to Kutno, Sieradz, Skierniewice, Łowicz, and on selected days to Warsaw, with plans for further expansion after the construction of the tunnel.

==Education==

Łódź is a thriving center of academic life. Łódź hosts three major state-owned universities, six higher education establishments operating for more than a half of the century, and a number of smaller schools of higher education. The tertiary institutions with the most students in Łódź include:

*University of Łódź (&quot;UŁ&quot; – )
*Lodz University of Technology (&quot;PŁ&quot; – )
*Medical University of Łódź ()
*National Film School in Łódź ()
*Academy of Music in Łódź ()
*Academy of Fine Arts In Łódź ()

In the 2018 general ranking of state-owned tertiary education institutions in Poland, the University of Łódź came 20th (6th place among universities) and Lodz University of Technology 12th (6th place among technical universities). The Medical University of Łódź was ranked 5th among Polish medical universities. Leading courses taught in Łódź include administration (3rd place), law (4th) and biology (4th).

There is also a number of private-owned institutions of higher learning in Łódź. The largest of these are the University of Social Sciences () and the University of Humanities and Economics in Łódź (). In the 2018 ranking of private universities in Poland the former was ranked 9th, and the latter 23rd.

===National Film School in Łódź===
The Leon Schiller National Higher School of Film, Television and Theatre in Łódź () is the most notable academy for future actors, directors, photographers, camera operators and TV staff in Poland. It was founded on 8 March 1948 and was initially planned to be moved to Warsaw as soon as the city was rebuilt following the Warsaw Uprising. However, in the end the school remained in Łódź and became one of the best-known institutions of higher education in the city.

At the end of the Second World War Łódź was the only large Polish city besides Kraków which war had not destroyed. The creation of the National Film School gave Łódź a role of greater importance from a cultural viewpoint, which before the war had belonged exclusively to Warsaw and Kraków. Early students of the School include the directors Andrzej Munk, Roman Polanski, Andrzej Wajda, Kazimierz Karabasz (one of the founders of the so-called Black Series of Polish Documentary) and Janusz Morgenstern, who at the end of the 1950s became famous as one of the founders of the Polish Film School of Cinematography.

==Culture==
===Landmarks and events===

The most notable and recognizable landmark of the city is Piotrkowska Street, which remains the high-street and main tourist attraction in the city, runs north to south for a little over . This makes it one of the longest commercial streets in the world. Most of the building façades, many of which date back to the 19th century, have been renovated. It is the site of most restaurants, bars and cafes in Łódź&#x27;s city centre. Important monuments of architecture along Piotrkowska Street are the Old Town Hall, the Descent Of The Holy Spirit Church, the Łódź Catholic Cathedral and the St. Matthew&#x27;s Lutheran Church. Other important churches in the city center include the Alexander Nevsky Orthodox Cathedral and the Karol Scheibler&#x27;s Chapel, Lutheran part of Ogrodowa Street Cemetery.

Many neglected tenement houses and factories throughout the entire city centre have been renovated in recent years as part of the ongoing revitalization project run by the local authorities. The best example of urban regeneration in Łódź is the Manufaktura complex, occupying a large area of a former cotton factory dating back to the nineteenth century. The site, which was the heart of Izrael Poznański&#x27;s industrial empire, hosts a shopping mall, numerous restaurants, 4-star hotel, multiplex cinema, factory museum, bowling and fitness facilities and a science exhibition centre. Opened in 2006, it quickly became a centre of cultural entertainment and shopping, as well as a recognizable city landmark attracting both domestic and foreign tourists. Another example is the former factory of Karl Scheibler on Księży Młyn, which was turned into a mixed-use complex of offices and housing.
Łódź also provides plenty of green spaces for recreation. Woodland areas cover 9.61% of the city, with parks taking up an additional 2.37% of the area of Łódź ( (&#x27;Łagiewnicki Forest&#x27;) is recognized as the largest forested area within the administrative borders of any city in Europe. It has an area of 1,245 ha and is cut across by a number of hiking trails that traverse the hilly landscape on the western edge of Łódź Hills Landscape Park. A &quot;natural complex which has remained nearly intact as oak-hornbeam and oak woodland,&quot; the forest is also rich in history, and its attractions include a Franciscan friary dating back to the early 18th century and two 17th-century wooden chapels.

Out of a total of 44 parks in Łódź ( 11 have historical status, the oldest of them dating back to the middle of the 19th century. The largest of these, Józef Piłsudski Park (), is located near the Łódź Zoo and the city&#x27;s botanical garden, and together with them it comprises an extensive green complex known as serving the recreational needs of the city. Another notable park located in Łódź is the Józef Poniatowski Park.
The Jewish Cemetery at Bracka Street, one of the largest of its kind in Europe, was established in 1892. After the invasion of Poland by Nazi Germany in 1939, this cemetery became a part of Łódź&#x27;s &quot;eastern territory&quot; known as the enclosed Łódź ghetto (&quot;Ghetto Field&quot;). Between 1940 and 1944, approximately 43,000 burials took place within the grounds of this rounded-up cemetery. In 1956, a monument by Muszko in memory of the victims of the Łódź Ghetto was erected at the cemetery. It features a smooth obelisk, a menorah, and a broken oak tree with leaves stemming from the tree (symbolizing death, especially death at a young age). the cemetery has an area of . It contains approximately 180,000 graves, approximately 65,000 labelled tombstones, ohels and mausoleums. Many of these monuments have significant architectural value; 100 of these have been declared historical monuments and have been in various stages of restoration. The mausoleum of Izrael and Eleanora Poznański is perhaps the largest Jewish tombstone in the world and the only one decorated with mosaics.

===Museums in Łódź===
* Archaeological and Ethnographic Museum
* Book Art Museum
* Central Museum of Textiles
* City of Lodz History Museum
* Film Museum
* Herbst Palace Museum
* Muzeum Sztuki (Museum of Art)
* Natural History Museum, University of Łódź
* Muzeum Tradycji Niepodległościowych (Independence Traditions Museum) with three parts:
** Radegast train station
** Mausoleum and museum in Radogoszcz – Radogoszcz prison
** exhibition Kuźnia Romów (Roma forge) in former Łódź Ghetto
* Se-ma-for museum of stop-motion film animation
* The Centre for Science and Technology EC1 in former Łódź power plant

Łódź has one of the best museums of modern art in Poland. has three branches, two of which (ms1 and ms2) display collections of 20th and 21st-century art. The newest addition to the museum, ms2 was opened in 2008 in the Manufaktura complex. The unique collection of the Museum is presented in an unconventional way. Instead of a chronological lecture on the development of art, works of art representing various periods and movements are arranged into a story touching themes and motifs important for the contemporary public. The third branch of , located in one of the city&#x27;s many industrial palaces, also has more traditional art on display, presenting works by European and Polish masters such as Stanisław Wyspiański and Henryk Rodakowski.

Among the 14 registered museums to be found in Łódź, there is the independent Book Art Museum, awarded the American Printing History Association&#x27;s Institutional Award for 2015 for its outstanding contribution to the study, recording, preservation, and dissemination of printing history in Poland over the last 35 years. Other notable museums include the Central Museum of Textiles with its open-air display of wooden architecture, the Cinematography Museum, located in Scheibler Palace, and the Museum of Independence Traditions, occupying the building of a historical Tsarist prison from the late 19th century. A more unusual establishment, the museum offers tourists a chance to visit the municipal sewer designed in the early years of the 20th century by the British engineer William Heerlein Lindley.

===Łódź in literature and cinema===
Three major novels depict the development of industrial Łódź: Władysław Reymont&#x27;s &quot;The Promised Land&quot; (1898), Joseph Roth&#x27;s &quot;Hotel Savoy&quot; (1924) and Israel Joshua Singer&#x27;s &quot;The Brothers Ashkenazi&quot; (1937). Roth&#x27;s novel depicts the city on the eve of a workers&#x27; riot in 1919. Reymont&#x27;s novel was made into a film by Andrzej Wajda in 1975. In the 1990 film &quot;Europa Europa&quot;, Solomon Perel&#x27;s family flees pre-World War II Berlin and settles in Łódź. Paweł Pawlikowski&#x27;s film &quot;Ida&quot; was partially shot in Łódź. Chava Rosenfarb&#x27;s Yiddish trilogy &quot;The Tree of Life&quot; (1972; English translation 1985) portrays life within the Łódź Ghetto.

===Theatre===
*Grand Theatre (&quot;Teatr Wielki&quot;)
*Stefan Jaracz Theatre (&quot;Teatr Stefana Jaracza&quot;)
*Schiller&#x27;s Studio Theatre (&quot;Teatr Studyjny Schillera&quot;)

===Cuisine and food===

Among the traditional dishes of Łódź and the Łódź Voivodeship are &quot;zalewajka&quot; – a sour cereal and potato soup, often served with mushrooms, kielbasa sausage and bread – and cabbage soup (&quot;kapuśniak&quot;) served with potato dumplings and pork cracklings. These were once the staples of the working-class population employed in textile factories. Popular breads and baked goods include the &quot;angielka&quot; baguette roll and &quot;żulik&quot; bun with raisins. Aspic in various forms (&quot;galareta&quot;, &quot;zimne nóżki&quot; or &quot;drygle&quot;) was once a well-established comfort and party food in the city. Łódź and the surrounding region is also known for having a strong preference for mushroom soup over barszcz (borscht) for the Polish Wigilia Christmas Eve supper.

Major food venues are primarily located at Piotrkowska Street, for example the OFF Piotrkowska, a mixed-use development complex situated in a heritage-listed red brick factory. Food trucks are a common sight around the city centre and several neighbourhoods.

=== Sport ===

The city has experience as a host for international sporting events such as the 2009 EuroBasket, the 2011 EuroBasket Women, the 2014 FIVB Volleyball Men&#x27;s World Championship and the 2019 FIFA U-20 World Cup, with the opening and final of the latter taking place at Widzew Stadium. Łódź will also host the sixth edition of the European Universities Games in 2022.

Under communism it was common for clubs to participate in many different sports for all ages and sexes. Many of these traditional clubs still survive. Originally they were owned directly by a public body, but have become independently operated by clubs or private companies. However, they get public support through the cheap rent of land and other subsidies from the city. Some of their sections have gone professional and separated from the clubs as private companies. For example, Budowlani S.A is a private company that owns the only professional rugby team in Łódź, while Klub Sportowy Budowlani remains a community amateur club.

* Budowlani Łódź – rugby (six times Polish champions), hockey, wrestling, volleyball
* ŁKS Łódź – association football (two times Polish champions), basketball (Polish champions 1953), volleyball (two times Polish champions), handball, boxing
* SMS Łódź – association football, volleyball, basketball
* KS Społem Łódź – road and track cycling
* SKS Start Łódź – football, swimming
* Widzew Łódź – association football (four time Polish champions, semi-finalists of the 1982–83 European Cup)
* Orzeł Łódź - motorcycle speedway team
* Sroki Łódź - Rugby league (three times Polish champions)

In Ekstraklasa of Polish beach soccer Łódź have three professional clubs: Grembach, KP and .

===Horticultural Expo 2029===
Łódź bid for the Specialized Expo 2022/2023 but lost out to Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Łódź was planned to host the Horticultural Expo in 2024. However, multiple Expo events were delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, a Horticultural Expo in Doha, Qatar from 2021/22 to 23/24 among them. As a result, the Horticultural Expo in Łódź has been rescheduled to 2029 to maintain a required time interval between them.

==Notable residents==


*Daniel Amit (1938–2007), Israeli physicist
*Yehuda Ashlag (1885–1954), rabbi
*Grażyna Bacewicz (1909–1969), composer
*Aleksander Bardini (1913–1995), theatre director and actor
*Andrzej Bartkowiak (born 1950), cameraman and film director
*Jurek Becker (1937–1997), writer
*Sylwester Bednarek (born 1989), high jumper
*Marek Belka (born 1952), politician, former Prime Minister
*Karolina Bielawska (born 1999), model and Miss World 2021
*Kazimierz Brandys (1916–2000), writer
*Artur Brauner (1918–2019), film producer
*Edward G. Brisch (1901–1960), industrial coding and classification expert
*Jacob Bronowski (1908–1974), writer, mathematician and Britain&#x27;s leading academic TV figure of the 1970s
*Sabina Citron (1928–2023), Holocaust survivor, activist and author
*Bat-Sheva Dagan (1925–2024), Holocaust survivor, teacher, psychologist and author
*Karl Dedecius (1921–2016), translator
*Elizabeth Diller (born 1954), American architect
*Marek Edelman (1919/1922–2009), politician, human rights activist and Holocaust survivor
*Jacob Eisner (born 1947), Israeli basketball player
*Max Factor Sr. (1877–1938), businessman, founder of the Max Factor cosmetics company
*Magdalena Fręch (born 1997), tennis player
*Dov Freiberg (1927–2008), Holocaust survivor and writer
*Joseph Friedenson (1922–2013), Holocaust survivor and writer
*Piotr Fronczewski (born 1946), Polish actor
*Maciej Golubiewski (born 1976), Polish political scientist and diplomat, Consul General of the Republic of Poland in New York City
*Marcin Gortat (born 1984), basketball player
*Mendel Grossman (1913–1945), Łódź ghetto photographer
*Józef Hecht (1891–1951), engraver and printmaker
*Jerzy Janowicz (born 1990), tennis player
*Josef Joffe (born 1944), journalist
*Michał Kalecki (1899–1970), Marxian economist
*Roman Kantor (1912–1943), épée fencer
*Jan Karski (1914–2000), diplomat and anti-nazi resistant
*Aharon Katzir (1914–1972), Israeli pioneer in study of electrochemistry of biopolymers; killed in Lod Airport Massacre
*Paul Kletzki (1900–1973), conductor
*Katarzyna Kobro (1898–1951), sculptor
*Lea Koenig (born 1929), Israeli actress
*Tomasz Konieczny (born 1972), opera singer
*Jerzy Kosinski (1933–1991), writer
*Jan Kowalewski (1892–1965), cryptologist
*Karolina Kowalkiewicz (born 1985), mixed martial artist
*Feliks W. Kres (1966-2022), fantasy writer
*Anna Lewandowska (born 1988), karateka and nutrition expert
*Nathan Lewin, Washington, D.C. attorney
*Daniel Libeskind (born 1946), architect
*Eliezer Livneh (1902-1975), Zionist activist, journalist, publicist, and Israeli politician
*Mikołaj Marczyk (born 1995), rally driver
*Binyamin Mintz (1903– 1961), Israeli Minister of Postal Services 
*Tadeusz Miciński (1873–1918), poet
*Izabella Miko (born 1981), actress
*Stanisław Mikulski (1929–2014), actor
*Ruth Minsky Sender (1926–2024), author and survivor
*Zew Wawa Morejno (1916–2011), Chief Rabbi
*Henry Morgentaler (1923–2013), physician 
*Konstantin Petrovich Nechaev (1883–1946), White movement leader and mercenary commander in China
*Zbigniew Nienacki (1929–1994), writer
*Marek Olędzki (born 1951), archaeologist
*Marian P. Opala (1921–2010), Oklahoma Supreme Court Justice
*O.S.T.R. (born 1980), rapper
*Adam Palma (born 1974), Polish-British guitarist and teacher
*Aghvan Papikyan (born 1994), Polish-Armenian international football player
*Władysław Pasikowski (born 1959), film director
*Roman Polanski (born 1933), film director
*Piotr Pustelnik (born 1951), alpine and high-altitude climber, the 20th man to climb all 14 eight-thousanders
*Ze&#x27;ev Raban (born Wolf Rawicki; 1890–1970), Israeli painter and sculptor
*Adolph Moses Radin (1848–1909), rabbi
*Damian Radowicz (born 1989), footballer
*Władysław Reymont (1867–1925), writer, Nobel Prize winner
*Joseph Rotblat (1908–2005), physicist, Nobel Prize winner
*Stefan Rozental (1903–1994), nuclear physicist
*Arthur Rubinstein (1887–1982), pianist
*Arnold Rutkowski, opera singer
*Zbigniew Rybczyński (born 1949), animator
*Marek Saganowski (born 1978), footballer
*Andrzej Sapkowski (born 1948), fantasy writer
*Karl Wilhelm Scheibler (1820–1881), industrialist
*Ebi Smolarek (born 1981), footballer
*Piotr Sobociński (1958–2001), cinematographer
*Andrzej Sontag (born 1952), track-and-field athlete
*Natan Spigel (1900–1942), painter
*Władysław Strzemiński (1893–1952), painter
*Borys Szyc (born 1978), actor and musician
*Arthur Szyk (1894–1951), artist
*Adam Szymczyk (born 1970), art critic and curator
*Alexandre Tansman (1897–1986), composer and pianist
*Jack Tramiel (1928–2012), computer manufacturer, the founder of Commodore
*Julian Tuwim (1894–1953), poet
*Andrzej Udalski (born 1957), astronomer and astrophysicist
*Miś Uszatek, cartoon character
*Sławosz Uznański-Wiśniewski (born 1984), engineer and reserve astronaut of the European Space Agency
* Avraham Verdiger (1921–2013), Israeli politician
*Michał Wiśniewski (born 1972), singer
*Paweł Zatorski (born 1990), volleyball player
*Hanna Zdanowska (born 1959), politician, Mayor of Łódź
*Aleksandra Ziółkowska-Boehm (born 1949), writer

==International relations==

Łódź is home to fourteen foreign consulates, i.e. honorary consulates general of Hungary and Turkey, and honorary consulates of Albania, Armenia, Austria, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova and Ukraine.

===Twin towns – sister cities===

Łódź is twinned with:

* Chemnitz, Germany 
* Stuttgart, Germany 
* Lyon, France 
* Vilnius, Lithuania 
* Odesa, Ukraine 
* Tianjin, China 
* Tel Aviv, Israel 
* Rustavi, Georgia 
* Barreiro, Portugal 
* Tampere, Finland 
* Puebla, Mexico 
* Murcia, Spain 
* Lviv, Ukraine 
* Szeged, Hungary 
* Guangzhou, China 
* Chengdu, China 
Łódź belongs also to the Eurocities network.

After the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Łódź terminated the partnership with Russian cities Ivanovo and Kaliningrad, and with Minsk, the capital of Belarus on 2 March 2022.

==See also==

* History of Łódź
* Łódź Design Festival
* International Festival of Comics and Games in Łódź
* Bednarska Street, Łódź
* Karol Anstadt Avenue, Łódź
* Helenów Park in Łódź
* Fabrykant Oak

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
===Inline citations===
===Bibliography===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* Alan Adelson and Robert Lapides, &quot;Łódź Ghetto : A Community History Told in Diaries, Journals, and Documents&quot;, Viking, 1989. 
* &quot;A Stairwell in Lodz,&quot; Constance Cappel, 2004, Xlibris, (in English).
* &quot;Lodz – The Last Ghetto in Poland,&quot; Michal Unger, Yad Vashem, 600 pages (in Hebrew)
* Stefański, Krzysztof (2000). &quot;Gmachy użyteczności publicznej dawnej Łodzi&quot;, Łódź 2000 .
* Stefański, Krzysztof (2009). &quot;Ludzie którzy zbudowali Łódź Leksykon architektów i budowniczych miasta (do 1939 roku)&quot;, Łódź 2009 .
* 
==External links==
* 
* Public Transport Official Site
* City map of Łódź
* Historic images of Łódź
* Łódź Special Economic Zone
* Łódź-Lublinek Airport 
* —English language newspaper
* The Łódź Ghetto </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="0" end="4" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="26" end="32" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54158" start="86" end="102" title="Łódź Voivodeship" label="Łódź Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="133" end="139" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q103930" start="204" end="223" title="List of cities and towns in Poland" label="fourth largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="288" end="299" title="city rights" label="town rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q54049" start="327" end="348" title="Władysław II Jagiełło" label="Władysław II Jagiełło"/>
<link wikidata="Q836693" start="387" end="394" title="Kuyavia" label="Kuyavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="451" end="477" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="507" end="514" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="543" end="551" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="554" end="569" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="587" end="602" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="606" end="613" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="640" end="658" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q217200" start="664" end="692" title="Second Industrial Revolution" label="Second Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641089" start="892" end="905" title="multinational state" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656167" start="979" end="996" title="The Promised Land (novel)" label="The Promised Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="1006" end="1017" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q121180" start="1033" end="1050" title="Władysław Reymont" label="Władysław Reymont"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1342" end="1354" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q73441" start="1386" end="1399" title="Karl Litzmann" label="Karl Litzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="1457" end="1463" title="History of the Jews in Poland" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q327895" start="1516" end="1527" title="Łódź Ghetto" label="Łódź Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="1565" end="1602" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="concentration and extermination camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531726" start="1866" end="1913" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network" label="Globalization and World Cities Research Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458675" start="2008" end="2028" title="National Film School in Łódź" label="National Film School"/>
<link wikidata="Q106685" start="2100" end="2113" title="Andrzej Wajda" label="Andrzej Wajda"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="2118" end="2132" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2174" end="2180" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139352" start="2181" end="2204" title="Creative Cities Network" label="Creative Cities Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123683" start="2222" end="2234" title="City of Film" label="City of Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="2263" end="2269" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2338" end="2354" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2449" end="2457" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187134" start="2484" end="2493" title="canalised" label="canalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="2594" end="2605" title="willow" label="willow tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q149838" start="2623" end="2633" title="Old Polish language" label="Old Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215954" start="2754" end="2777" title="Władysław the Hunchback" label="Władysław the Hunchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311396" start="2779" end="2794" title="Duchy of Łęczyca" label="Duke of Łęczyca"/>
<link wikidata="Q878118" start="2843" end="2865" title="Bishopric of Włocławek" label="Bishopric of Włocławek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="2947" end="2952" title="grazing" label="graze"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="2969" end="2976" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q995609" start="2992" end="2999" title="Wood industry" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="3010" end="3024" title="King of Poland" label="King of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54049" start="3025" end="3046" title="Władysław II Jagiełło" label="Władysław II Jagiełło"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="3099" end="3112" title="Magdeburg Law" label="Magdeburg Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="3196" end="3201" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q836693" start="3237" end="3244" title="Kuyavia" label="Kuyavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q970940" start="3317" end="3336" title="Łęczyca Voivodeship" label="Łęczyca Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500794" start="3344" end="3367" title="Greater Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Greater Poland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="3434" end="3445" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="3515" end="3527" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="3540" end="3552" title="seal (emblem)" label="seal emblems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003749" start="3632" end="3635" title="oar" label="oar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="3647" end="3673" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="3703" end="3710" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413401" start="3806" end="3839" title="Secularization (church property)" label="secularisation of church property"/>
<link wikidata="Q177529" start="3865" end="3876" title="burgomaster" label="burgomaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="4014" end="4029" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="4060" end="4078" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="4136" end="4162" title="Congress Kingdom of Poland" label="Congress Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="4166" end="4178" title="client state" label="client state"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="4186" end="4200" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="4343" end="4360" title="Planned community" label="centrally planned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794525" start="4385" end="4405" title="Rajmund Rembieliński" label="Rajmund Rembieliński"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4419" end="4441" title="Administrative Council#Congress Poland" label="Administrative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q643843" start="4457" end="4464" title="Masovia" label="Masovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q683595" start="4681" end="4699" title="Land lot" label="housing allotments"/>
<link wikidata="Q12018455" start="4703" end="4718" title="greenfield land" label="greenfield land"/>
<link wikidata="Q946725" start="4815" end="4826" title="cotton mill" label="cotton mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095484" start="4912" end="4923" title="Piotrkowska Street" label="Piotrkowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="4992" end="4999" title="weaving" label="weavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="5044" end="5050" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q708435" start="5209" end="5226" title="Stanisław Staszic" label="Stanisław Staszic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="5350" end="5357" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="5424" end="5441" title="November Uprising" label="November Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="5597" end="5610" title="steam engine" label="steam-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574844" start="5660" end="5673" title="White Factory" label="White Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="5713" end="5729" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q11837438" start="6006" end="6026" title="abolition of serfdom in Poland" label="without restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11757183" start="6139" end="6157" title="Łódź–Koluszki railway" label="Łódź–Koluszki line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548361" start="6175" end="6196" title="Warsaw–Vienna railway" label="Warsaw–Vienna railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532730" start="6307" end="6327" title="Piotrków Governorate" label="Piotrków Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="6436" end="6452" title="business magnate" label="business magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q69221" start="6463" end="6485" title="Karl Wilhelm Scheibler" label="Karl Wilhelm Scheibler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346413" start="6490" end="6506" title="Izrael Poznański" label="Izrael Poznański"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370598" start="6558" end="6575" title="Place of worship" label="places of worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q26658" start="6626" end="6645" title="Manufaktura" label="textile manufactory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078374" start="6697" end="6706" title="tenements" label="tenements"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578195" start="6744" end="6759" title="Izrael Poznański Palace" label="eclectic palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="7083" end="7092" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9182104" start="7120" end="7134" title="Łódź rebellion" label="Łódź rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7135" end="7137" title=":pl:Bunt łódzki" label="pl"/>
<link wikidata="Q41253" start="7303" end="7309" title="Movie theater" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="7361" end="7376" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454304" start="7389" end="7406" title="Marshal of Poland" label="Marshal of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353452" start="7457" end="7465" title="Robotnik (1894–1939)" label="Robotnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056537" start="7503" end="7524" title="Polish underground press" label="underground newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q210431" start="7542" end="7564" title="Polish Socialist Party" label="Polish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q766868" start="7577" end="7586" title="Łódź insurrection" label="June Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140861" start="7792" end="7830" title="Łódź Cathedral" label="Archcathedral of St. Stanislaus Kostka"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7935" end="7946" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q696300" start="8108" end="8122" title="Battle of Łódź (1914)" label="Battle of Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="8151" end="8166" title="German Empire" label="Imperial German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292715" start="8198" end="8217" title="History of Poland (1918–39)" label="Polish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="8279" end="8290" title="Imperial German army" label="German army"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="8604" end="8626" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q54158" start="8657" end="8673" title="Łódź Voivodeship" label="Łódź Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="8693" end="8708" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="8792" end="8808" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q821376" start="8817" end="8842" title="German–Polish customs war" label="German–Polish customs war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="8895" end="8915" title="Russian Revolution (1917)" label="Bolshevik Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="8924" end="8933" title="Russian Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="9263" end="9279" title="sewage treatment" label="sewage treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q28564" start="9449" end="9465" title="Public library" label="public libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="9546" end="9559" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q764554" start="9659" end="9667" title="Łódź Władysław Reymont Airport" label="Lublinek"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="9710" end="9715" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="9833" end="9842" title="Left-wing politics" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="9891" end="9900" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q427797" start="9905" end="9912" title="Bundism" label="bundist"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="10013" end="10031" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q507739" start="10080" end="10094" title="Juliusz Rómmel" label="Juliusz Rómmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069624" start="10102" end="10111" title="Łódź Army" label="Army Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q745074" start="10197" end="10204" title="Sieradz" label="Sieradz"/>
<link wikidata="Q158004" start="10209" end="10229" title="Piotrków Trybunalski" label="Piotrków Trybunalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q671863" start="10263" end="10271" title="8th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="8th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q57234" start="10275" end="10294" title="Johannes Blaskowitz" label="Johannes Blaskowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664266" start="10328" end="10340" title="X Army Corps (Wehrmacht)" label="X Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q213826" start="10564" end="10578" title="Arthur Greiser" label="Arthur Greiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="10748" end="10753" title="NSDAP" label="NSDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q73441" start="10761" end="10774" title="Karl Litzmann" label="Karl Litzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267540" start="10816" end="10829" title="Germanisation in Poland (1939–1945)" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="10881" end="10896" title="Polish language" label="Polish-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="10920" end="10933" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281508" start="11118" end="11128" title="Radogoszcz prison" label="Radogoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="11153" end="11172" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402995" start="11233" end="11245" title="Lućmierz-Las" label="Lućmierz-Las"/>
<link wikidata="Q11833200" start="11268" end="11301" title="kidnapping of ethnic Polish children by Nazi Germany" label="forcibly taken from their parents"/>
<link wikidata="Q684065" start="11342" end="11360" title="Sicherheitspolizei" label="Sicherheitspolizei"/>
<link wikidata="Q327895" start="11483" end="11494" title="Ghetto Litzmannstadt" label="Łódź Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="11604" end="11630" title="Nazi extermination camp" label="German extermination camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="11668" end="11683" title="German-occupied Europe" label="occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="11749" end="11775" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Polish resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="11968" end="11981" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="12034" end="12042" title="Gentile" label="non-Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="12058" end="12071" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="12114" end="12122" title="Romani genocide" label="murdered"/>
<link wikidata="Q160152" start="12126" end="12133" title="Chełmno extermination camp" label="Chełmno"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="12154" end="12167" title="forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836025" start="12203" end="12211" title="expulsion of Poles by Nazi Germany" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q15912661" start="12244" end="12259" title="racial policy of Nazi Germany" label="racial research"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12381" end="12393" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="12582" end="12588" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="12640" end="12645" title="Kresy" label="Kresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="12723" end="12752" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="12817" end="12832" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q137503" start="12854" end="12872" title="University of Łódź" label="University of Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458675" start="12911" end="12931" title="Łódź Film School" label="National Film School"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="13027" end="13041" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q922026" start="13098" end="13112" title="Athens Charter" label="Athens Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q674950" start="13176" end="13192" title="residential area" label="residential area"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="13297" end="13301" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386430" start="13325" end="13330" title="panel building" label="panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159853" start="13381" end="13389" title="Retkinia" label="Retkinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637254" start="13624" end="13680" title="summer 1981 hunger demonstrations in Poland" label="hunger demonstration of local mothers and their children"/>
<link wikidata="Q607081" start="13740" end="13756" title="textile industry" label="textile industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569871" start="13847" end="13866" title="industrial heritage" label="industrial heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901641" start="13883" end="13901" title="Art Nouveau in Poland" label="Polish Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12183361" start="14500" end="14508" title="upland and lowland" label="lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q560549" start="14516" end="14538" title="North European Plain" label="Central European Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="14793" end="14797" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="14805" end="14809" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="14876" end="14888" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="15088" end="15117" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="15304" end="15313" title="town hall" label="town hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574151" start="15334" end="15355" title="Juliusz Heinzl Palace" label="Juliusz Heinzl Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9140947" start="15390" end="15407" title="List of mayors of Łódź" label="President of Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="15459" end="15464" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q925381" start="15604" end="15627" title="city with powiat rights" label="city with powiat rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q247073" start="15673" end="15679" title="powiat" label="powiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q54158" start="15712" end="15728" title="Łódź Voivodeship" label="Łódź Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q675911" start="15779" end="15797" title="voivodeship sejmik" label="voivodeship sejmik"/>
<link wikidata="Q275102" start="15854" end="15861" title="voivode" label="voivode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338983" start="15925" end="15952" title="Council of Ministers (Poland)" label="Polish Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q177529" start="16234" end="16245" title="burgomaster" label="burgomaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794525" start="16388" end="16408" title="Rajmund Rembieliński" label="Rajmund Rembieliński"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="16438" end="16453" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="16505" end="16527" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q727220" start="16532" end="16547" title="Leopold Skulski" label="Leopold Skulski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259469" start="16589" end="16613" title="prime minister of Poland" label="prime minister of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q293211" start="16653" end="16668" title="Hanna Zdanowska" label="Hanna Zdanowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021144" start="16678" end="16693" title="Civic Coalition (Poland)" label="Civic Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434401" start="16789" end="16798" title="dzielnica" label="dzielnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277441" start="17045" end="17052" title="osiedle" label="osiedle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547190" start="17218" end="17235" title="Statistics Poland" label="Statistics Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="17290" end="17308" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q907748" start="17686" end="17698" title="feminization (sociology)" label="feminisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q964401" start="17956" end="17965" title="fertility" label="fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q187668" start="17973" end="17990" title="emigration" label="outward migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="18139" end="18145" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="18206" end="18215" title="planned economy" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="18219" end="18231" title="market economy" label="market-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q284137" start="18353" end="18365" title="Depopulation" label="Depopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="18599" end="18606" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="18782" end="18788" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="18861" end="18867" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="18948" end="18953" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="18974" end="18978" title="History of Jews in Poland" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="19031" end="19039" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210017" start="19058" end="19076" title="Polish census of 1931" label="1931 Polish census"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="19306" end="19323" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="19337" end="19359" title="religious denomination" label="religious denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="19390" end="19399" title="bishopric" label="bishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365926" start="19462" end="19496" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Łódź" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="19508" end="19525" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140861" start="19574" end="19607" title="Łódź Cathedral" label="Basilica of St. Stanislaus Kostka"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="19712" end="19726" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q152395" start="19862" end="19885" title="Feast of Corpus Christi" label="Feast of Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188412" start="20001" end="20018" title="church attendance" label="church attendance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="20222" end="20230" title="atheists" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="20291" end="20301" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379796" start="20461" end="20506" title="Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in Poland" label="Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="20520" end="20529" title="Lutherans" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231932" start="20603" end="20629" title="Lutheran Diocese of Warsaw" label="Lutheran Diocese of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746092" start="20679" end="20711" title="Church of St. Peter and St. Paul, Pabianice" label="Church of St. Peter and St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q158589" start="20715" end="20724" title="Pabianice" label="Pabianice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575430" start="20782" end="20807" title="St. Matthew&amp;#x27;s Church, Łódź" label="St. Matthew&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="20868" end="20874" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209974" start="20882" end="20904" title="Polish Reformed Church" label="Polish Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="20906" end="20915" title="Reformed Christianity" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="20950" end="20959" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="20964" end="20975" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="21032" end="21056" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="21084" end="21091" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="21177" end="21186" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891027" start="21192" end="21200" title="shtiebel" label="shtiebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790844" start="21263" end="21278" title="Stara Synagogue (Łódź)" label="Stara Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790912" start="21313" end="21335" title="Ezras Israel Synagogue" label="Ezras Israel Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="21375" end="21388" title="Orthodox Jews" label="Orthodox Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548447" start="21394" end="21409" title="Great Synagogue (Łódź)" label="Great Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="21447" end="21472" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reformed Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q132237468" start="21582" end="21629" title="Union of Jewish Religious Communities in Poland" label="Union of Jewish Religious Communities in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211351" start="21789" end="21795" title="mikveh" label="mikveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q819290" start="21820" end="21836" title="Mariavite Church" label="Mariavite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="21904" end="21919" title="Old Catholicism" label="Old Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="21980" end="21987" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="22102" end="22118" title="textile" label="textile industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="22390" end="22400" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q855691" start="22421" end="22429" title="lingerie" label="lingerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q429163" start="23330" end="23332" title="A1 autostrada (Poland)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q429422" start="23385" end="23387" title="A2 autostrada (Poland)" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817331" start="23854" end="23861" title="Pesa SA" label="Pesa SA"/>
<link wikidata="Q26989" start="23992" end="23999" title="Infosys" label="Infosys"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="24052" end="24056" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="24115" end="24123" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="24296" end="24313" title="Foreign direct investment" label="foreign investors"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="24331" end="24349" title="Foreign direct investment" label="Foreign investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="24393" end="24410" title="unemployment" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q114093" start="24621" end="24628" title="Stryków" label="Stryków"/>
<link wikidata="Q143701" start="24661" end="24663" title="National road 1 (Poland)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q429422" start="24680" end="24682" title="A2 autostrada (Poland)" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="24794" end="24800" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25797" start="24804" end="24810" title="Žilina" label="Žilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="24815" end="24819" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="24829" end="24835" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="24839" end="24845" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="24850" end="24856" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411055" start="24881" end="24894" title="Eurasian Land Bridge" label="New Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="24953" end="24960" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094196" start="25005" end="25030" title="national roads in Poland" label="national motorway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626453" start="25124" end="25132" title="regional rail" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="25137" end="25150" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q429163" start="25383" end="25385" title="A1 autostrada (Poland)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q429422" start="25453" end="25455" title="A2 autostrada (Poland)" label="A2"/>
<link wikidata="Q636661" start="25512" end="25514" title="Expressway S8 (Poland)" label="S8"/>
<link wikidata="Q578679" start="25589" end="25592" title="Expressway S14 (Poland)" label="S14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149586" start="25808" end="25812" title="National road 91 (Poland)" label="DK91"/>
<link wikidata="Q764554" start="25949" end="25979" title="Łódź Władysław Reymont Airport" label="Łódź Władysław Reymont Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="26484" end="26499" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q158589" start="26622" end="26631" title="Pabianice" label="Pabianice"/>
<link wikidata="Q867349" start="26649" end="26668" title="Konstantynów Łódzki" label="Konstantynów Łódzki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130918" start="26791" end="26798" title="Konstal" label="Konstal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132310" start="26843" end="26853" title="Pesa Swing" label="Pesa Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28600793" start="26858" end="26871" title="Moderus Gamma" label="Moderus Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596370" start="26936" end="26953" title="Solaris Urbino 18" label="Solaris Urbino 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q801687" start="27226" end="27240" title="Łódź Fabryczna" label="Łódź Fabryczna"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="27247" end="27263" title="terminus station" label="terminus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548361" start="27289" end="27310" title="Warsaw-Vienna railway" label="Warsaw-Vienna railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025255" start="27320" end="27332" title="Łódź Kaliska railway station" label="Łódź Kaliska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970925" start="27402" end="27423" title="Warsaw-Kalisz Railway" label="Warsaw-Kalisz railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="27638" end="27644" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395008" start="27836" end="27857" title="Łódzka Kolej Aglomeracyjna" label="Łódź Commuter Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="27871" end="27884" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q26658" start="28059" end="28070" title="Manufaktura" label="Manufaktura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095484" start="28162" end="28180" title="Piotrkowska Street" label="Piotrkowska Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q801687" start="28267" end="28290" title="Łódź Fabryczna" label="new underground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="28738" end="28751" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28761" end="28779" title="Nowe Centrum Łodzi" label="Nowe Centrum Łodzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940317" start="28846" end="28857" title="Łódź Widzew railway station" label="Łódź Widzew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395008" start="28966" end="28992" title="Łódzka Kolej Aglomeracyjna" label="Łódzka Kolej Aglomeracyjna"/>
<link wikidata="Q54158" start="29096" end="29112" title="Łódź Voivodeship" label="Łódź Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q202160" start="29136" end="29141" title="Kutno" label="Kutno"/>
<link wikidata="Q745074" start="29143" end="29150" title="Sieradz" label="Sieradz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734" start="29152" end="29164" title="Skierniewice" label="Skierniewice"/>
<link wikidata="Q109992" start="29166" end="29172" title="Łowicz" label="Łowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="29198" end="29204" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="29360" end="29371" title="Public ownership" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q137503" start="29590" end="29608" title="University of Łódź" label="University of Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140369" start="29630" end="29659" title="Lodz University of Technology" label="Lodz University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q495957" start="29681" end="29707" title="Medical University of Łódź" label="Medical University of Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458675" start="29712" end="29740" title="National Film School in Łódź" label="National Film School in Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504848" start="29745" end="29769" title="Academy of Music in Łódź" label="Academy of Music in Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822382" start="29774" end="29802" title="Academy of Fine Arts In Łódź" label="Academy of Fine Arts In Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q263043" start="30560" end="30573" title="Leon Schiller" label="Leon Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="30879" end="30894" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458675" start="31159" end="31179" title="National Film School in Łódź" label="National Film School"/>
<link wikidata="Q515331" start="31365" end="31377" title="Andrzej Munk" label="Andrzej Munk"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="31379" end="31393" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q106685" start="31395" end="31408" title="Andrzej Wajda" label="Andrzej Wajda"/>
<link wikidata="Q326364" start="31410" end="31428" title="Kazimierz Karabasz" label="Kazimierz Karabasz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356055" start="31507" end="31525" title="Janusz Morgenstern" label="Janusz Morgenstern"/>
<link wikidata="Q719868" start="31599" end="31617" title="Polish Film School" label="Polish Film School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095484" start="31736" end="31754" title="Piotrkowska Street" label="Piotrkowska Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140861" start="32235" end="32258" title="Łódź Cathedral" label="Łódź Catholic Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575430" start="32267" end="32301" title="St. Matthew&amp;#x27;s Church, Łódź" label="St. Matthew&amp;#x27;s Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q770458" start="32359" end="32394" title="Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, Łódź" label="Alexander Nevsky Orthodox Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790823" start="32403" end="32432" title="Karol Scheibler&amp;#x27;s Chapel" label="Karol Scheibler&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26658" start="32723" end="32734" title="Manufaktura" label="Manufaktura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346413" start="32866" end="32882" title="Izrael Poznański" label="Izrael Poznański"/>
<link wikidata="Q69221" start="33277" end="33291" title="Karl Wilhelm Scheibler" label="Karl Scheibler"/>
<link wikidata="Q684754" start="33295" end="33306" title="Księży Młyn (Łódź)" label="Księży Młyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081140" start="33799" end="33824" title="Łódź Hills Landscape Park" label="Łódź Hills Landscape Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="33989" end="33999" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574102" start="34280" end="34288" title="Łódź Zoo" label="Łódź Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811620" start="34487" end="34509" title="Józef Poniatowski Park in Łódź" label="Józef Poniatowski Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q115094" start="34515" end="34547" title="Jewish Cemetery, Łódź" label="Jewish Cemetery at Bracka Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="34626" end="34644" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="34648" end="34660" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q327895" start="34978" end="34989" title="Łódź Ghetto" label="Łódź Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q170476" start="35051" end="35058" title="menorah (Temple)" label="menorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346413" start="35487" end="35516" title="Izrael Poznański" label="Izrael and Eleanora Poznański"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061472" start="35695" end="35721" title="Central Museum of Textiles, Łódź" label="Central Museum of Textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141934" start="35791" end="35804" title="Muzeum Sztuki in Łódź" label="Muzeum Sztuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q439432" start="35958" end="35980" title="Radegast train station" label="Radegast train station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281508" start="36021" end="36038" title="Radogoszcz prison" label="Radogoszcz prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="36067" end="36071" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q327895" start="36089" end="36100" title="Łódź Ghetto" label="Łódź Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856977" start="36103" end="36112" title="Se-ma-for" label="Se-ma-for"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="36209" end="36220" title="power plant" label="power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q312627" start="36927" end="36947" title="Stanisław Wyspiański" label="Stanisław Wyspiański"/>
<link wikidata="Q301435" start="36952" end="36969" title="Henryk Rodakowski" label="Henryk Rodakowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061472" start="37331" end="37357" title="Central Museum of Textiles" label="Central Museum of Textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q460624" start="37756" end="37780" title="William Heerlein Lindley" label="William Heerlein Lindley"/>
<link wikidata="Q121180" start="37881" end="37898" title="Władysław Reymont" label="Władysław Reymont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656167" start="37912" end="37929" title="The Promised Land (novel)" label="The Promised Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q78509" start="37944" end="37955" title="Joseph Roth" label="Joseph Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q678013" start="37969" end="37980" title="Hotel Savoy (novel)" label="Hotel Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q557691" start="37998" end="38018" title="Israel Joshua Singer" label="Israel Joshua Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720370" start="38032" end="38054" title="The Brothers Ashkenazi" label="The Brothers Ashkenazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171197" start="38173" end="38189" title="The Promised Land (1975 film)" label="made into a film"/>
<link wikidata="Q106685" start="38193" end="38206" title="Andrzej Wajda" label="Andrzej Wajda"/>
<link wikidata="Q176626" start="38239" end="38252" title="Europa Europa" label="Europa Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q542243" start="38260" end="38273" title="Solomon Perel" label="Solomon Perel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377022" start="38339" end="38356" title="Paweł Pawlikowski" label="Paweł Pawlikowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087230" start="38375" end="38378" title="Ida (film)" label="Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485932" start="38568" end="38581" title="Grand Theatre, Łódź" label="Grand Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606145" start="38610" end="38631" title="Stefan Jaracz Theatre" label="Stefan Jaracz Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628243" start="38669" end="38699" title="Studio Theatre, Łódź" label="Schiller&amp;#x27;s Studio Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q54158" start="38809" end="38825" title="Łódź Voivodeship" label="Łódź Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386405" start="38836" end="38845" title="zalewajka" label="zalewajka"/>
<link wikidata="Q703313" start="38856" end="38867" title="sour cereal soup" label="sour cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q829720" start="38914" end="38922" title="kielbasa" label="kielbasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q564622" start="38947" end="38959" title="cabbage soup" label="cabbage soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11554312" start="39022" end="39032" title="cracklings" label="cracklings"/>
<link wikidata="Q127388" start="39174" end="39182" title="Veka (pastry)" label="angielka"/>
<link wikidata="Q13186" start="39234" end="39240" title="raisin" label="raisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q837480" start="39243" end="39248" title="Aspic" label="Aspic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179158" start="39481" end="39494" title="mushroom soup" label="mushroom soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551" start="39500" end="39507" title="barszcz" label="barszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053549" start="39533" end="39540" title="Wigilia" label="Wigilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="39541" end="39554" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484938" start="39643" end="39658" title="OFF Piotrkowska" label="OFF Piotrkowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303463" start="39741" end="39751" title="Food truck" label="Food truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q81274" start="39919" end="39934" title="2009 EuroBasket" label="2009 EuroBasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q810329" start="39940" end="39961" title="EuroBasket Women 2011" label="2011 EuroBasket Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520188" start="39967" end="40017" title="2014 FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="2014 FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758108" start="40026" end="40050" title="2019 FIFA U-20 World Cup" label="2019 FIFA U-20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565485" start="40109" end="40123" title="Widzew Łódź Stadium" label="Widzew Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377066" start="40170" end="40197" title="European Universities Games" label="European Universities Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="40214" end="40223" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="40242" end="40247" title="sports club" label="clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985162" start="40846" end="40860" title="Budowlani Łódź" label="Budowlani Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="40863" end="40868" title="rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="40899" end="40905" title="field hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="40907" end="40916" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="40918" end="40928" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q345142" start="40931" end="40939" title="ŁKS Łódź" label="ŁKS Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="40942" end="40962" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="40993" end="41003" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="41029" end="41039" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8418" start="41070" end="41078" title="handball" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="41080" end="41086" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864795" start="41089" end="41097" title="UKS SMS Łódź" label="SMS Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609" start="41164" end="41168" title="road bicycle racing" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q221635" start="41173" end="41186" title="track cycling" label="track cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q244981" start="41227" end="41238" title="Widzew Łódź" label="Widzew Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q642777" start="41313" end="41333" title="1982–83 European Cup" label="1982–83 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11799419" start="41337" end="41347" title="Orzeł Łódź" label="Orzeł Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="41390" end="41402" title="Rugby league" label="Rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q24577095" start="41438" end="41472" title="Ekstraklasa (beach soccer)" label="Ekstraklasa of Polish beach soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360190" start="41509" end="41517" title="Grembach Łódź" label="Grembach"/>
<link wikidata="Q24947277" start="41519" end="41521" title="KP Łódź" label="KP"/>
<link wikidata="Q30898225" start="41576" end="41602" title="Expo 2023" label="Specialized Expo 2022/2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="41619" end="41631" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="41756" end="41773" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65046629" start="41777" end="41810" title="2021 World Horticultural Exposition" label="Horticultural Expo in Doha, Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897032" start="41995" end="42006" title="Daniel Amit" label="Daniel Amit"/>
<link wikidata="Q212589" start="42039" end="42052" title="Yehuda Ashlag" label="Yehuda Ashlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q230978" start="42073" end="42089" title="Grażyna Bacewicz" label="Grażyna Bacewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q324218" start="42113" end="42131" title="Aleksander Bardini" label="Aleksander Bardini"/>
<link wikidata="Q494835" start="42173" end="42191" title="Andrzej Bartkowiak" label="Andrzej Bartkowiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q77317" start="42234" end="42246" title="Jurek Becker" label="Jurek Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q976641" start="42268" end="42286" title="Sylwester Bednarek" label="Sylwester Bednarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q55900" start="42313" end="42324" title="Marek Belka" label="Marek Belka"/>
<link wikidata="Q97182931" start="42373" end="42391" title="Karolina Bielawska" label="Karolina Bielawska"/>
<link wikidata="Q107042242" start="42415" end="42430" title="Miss World 2021" label="Miss World 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q558972" start="42432" end="42449" title="Kazimierz Brandys" label="Kazimierz Brandys"/>
<link wikidata="Q215578" start="42471" end="42484" title="Artur Brauner" label="Artur Brauner"/>
<link wikidata="Q64876057" start="42513" end="42529" title="Edward G. Brisch" label="Edward G. Brisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q374117" start="42588" end="42603" title="Jacob Bronowski" label="Jacob Bronowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090776" start="42699" end="42712" title="Sabina Citron" label="Sabina Citron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188619" start="42767" end="42782" title="Bat-Sheva Dagan" label="Bat-Sheva Dagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q74252" start="42850" end="42863" title="Karl Dedecius" label="Karl Dedecius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225543" start="42889" end="42905" title="Elizabeth Diller" label="Elizabeth Diller"/>
<link wikidata="Q160817" start="42939" end="42952" title="Marek Edelman" label="Marek Edelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q57320826" start="43029" end="43041" title="Jacob Eisner" label="Jacob Eisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q868560" start="43082" end="43096" title="Max Factor Sr." label="Max Factor Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2354647" start="43138" end="43148" title="Max Factor" label="Max Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10636559" start="43168" end="43183" title="Magdalena Fręch" label="Magdalena Fręch"/>
<link wikidata="Q828105" start="43212" end="43224" title="Dov Freiberg" label="Dov Freiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409870" start="43238" end="43256" title="Holocaust survivor" label="Holocaust survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751991" start="43269" end="43286" title="Joseph Friedenson" label="Joseph Friedenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55373" start="43331" end="43348" title="Piotr Fronczewski" label="Piotr Fronczewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q60613250" start="43376" end="43394" title="Maciej Golubiewski" label="Maciej Golubiewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209895" start="43449" end="43506" title="Polish Consulate General, New York City" label="Consul General of the Republic of Poland in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q358723" start="43508" end="43521" title="Marcin Gortat" label="Marcin Gortat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305763" start="43554" end="43569" title="Mendel Grossman" label="Mendel Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707201" start="43609" end="43620" title="Józef Hecht" label="Józef Hecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q29063" start="43659" end="43673" title="Jerzy Janowicz" label="Jerzy Janowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q75720" start="43702" end="43713" title="Josef Joffe" label="Josef Joffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q436745" start="43739" end="43753" title="Michał Kalecki" label="Michał Kalecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q854537" start="43767" end="43784" title="Marxian economist" label="Marxian economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362030" start="43786" end="43798" title="Roman Kantor" label="Roman Kantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q212523" start="43825" end="43835" title="Jan Karski" label="Jan Karski"/>
<link wikidata="Q400054" start="43883" end="43896" title="Aharon Katzir" label="Aharon Katzir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154073" start="43981" end="44001" title="Lod Airport Massacre" label="Lod Airport Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q31261" start="44003" end="44015" title="Paul Kletzki" label="Paul Kletzki"/>
<link wikidata="Q290168" start="44040" end="44055" title="Katarzyna Kobro" label="Katarzyna Kobro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778259" start="44079" end="44089" title="Lea Koenig" label="Lea Koenig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440466" start="44120" end="44136" title="Tomasz Konieczny" label="Tomasz Konieczny"/>
<link wikidata="Q319447" start="44164" end="44178" title="Jerzy Kosinski" label="Jerzy Kosinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028475" start="44200" end="44214" title="Jan Kowalewski" label="Jan Kowalewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565693" start="44242" end="44263" title="Karolina Kowalkiewicz" label="Karolina Kowalkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4482448" start="44299" end="44313" title="Feliks W. Kres" label="Feliks W. Kres"/>
<link wikidata="Q16913508" start="44343" end="44359" title="Anna Lewandowska" label="Anna Lewandowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969209" start="44404" end="44416" title="Nathan Lewin" label="Nathan Lewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="44418" end="44434" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q154538" start="44445" end="44461" title="Daniel Libeskind" label="Daniel Libeskind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904321" start="44486" end="44500" title="Eliezer Livneh" label="Eliezer Livneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q60613443" start="44579" end="44594" title="Mikołaj Marczyk" label="Mikołaj Marczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904692" start="44622" end="44636" title="Binyamin Mintz" label="Binyamin Mintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856908" start="44689" end="44705" title="Tadeusz Miciński" label="Tadeusz Miciński"/>
<link wikidata="Q267550" start="44725" end="44738" title="Izabella Miko" label="Izabella Miko"/>
<link wikidata="Q723331" start="44761" end="44779" title="Stanisław Mikulski" label="Stanisław Mikulski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383132" start="44800" end="44818" title="Ruth Minsky Sender" label="Ruth Minsky Sender"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069876" start="44853" end="44869" title="Zew Wawa Morejno" label="Zew Wawa Morejno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501412" start="44883" end="44894" title="Chief Rabbi" label="Chief Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q476995" start="44896" end="44913" title="Henry Morgentaler" label="Henry Morgentaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318234" start="44939" end="44967" title="Konstantin Petrovich Nechaev" label="Konstantin Petrovich Nechaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="44981" end="44995" title="White movement" label="White movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="45030" end="45035" title="Republic of China (1912–49)" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628307" start="45037" end="45054" title="Zbigniew Nienacki" label="Zbigniew Nienacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q106155254" start="45076" end="45089" title="Marek Olędzki" label="Marek Olędzki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896676" start="45118" end="45133" title="Marian P. Opala" label="Marian P. Opala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931736" start="45179" end="45187" title="O.S.T.R." label="O.S.T.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q16526397" start="45209" end="45219" title="Adam Palma" label="Adam Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631647" start="45271" end="45286" title="Aghvan Papikyan" label="Aghvan Papikyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q448929" start="45347" end="45367" title="Władysław Pasikowski" label="Władysław Pasikowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q51552" start="45396" end="45410" title="Roman Polanski" label="Roman Polanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q949795" start="45439" end="45454" title="Piotr Pustelnik" label="Piotr Pustelnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035529" start="45550" end="45566" title="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Raban" label="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Raban"/>
<link wikidata="Q111203203" start="45629" end="45647" title="Adolph Moses Radin" label="Adolph Moses Radin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701246" start="45668" end="45683" title="Damian Radowicz" label="Damian Radowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q121180" start="45709" end="45726" title="Władysław Reymont" label="Władysław Reymont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="45748" end="45759" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q219982" start="45768" end="45782" title="Joseph Rotblat" label="Joseph Rotblat"/>
<link wikidata="Q957232" start="45827" end="45842" title="Stefan Rozental" label="Stefan Rozental"/>
<link wikidata="Q183182" start="45875" end="45892" title="Arthur Rubinstein" label="Arthur Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q696060" start="45915" end="45931" title="Arnold Rutkowski" label="Arnold Rutkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q168169" start="45947" end="45966" title="Zbigniew Rybczyński" label="Zbigniew Rybczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q359894" start="45990" end="46006" title="Marek Saganowski" label="Marek Saganowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q312101" start="46032" end="46049" title="Andrzej Sapkowski" label="Andrzej Sapkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q69221" start="46079" end="46101" title="Karl Wilhelm Scheibler" label="Karl Wilhelm Scheibler"/>
<link wikidata="Q245295" start="46130" end="46142" title="Ebi Smolarek" label="Ebi Smolarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566683" start="46168" end="46184" title="Piotr Sobociński" label="Piotr Sobociński"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394292" start="46215" end="46229" title="Andrzej Sontag" label="Andrzej Sontag"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968392" start="46268" end="46280" title="Natan Spigel" label="Natan Spigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471547" start="46303" end="46324" title="Władysław Strzemiński" label="Władysław Strzemiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911384" start="46347" end="46357" title="Borys Szyc" label="Borys Szyc"/>
<link wikidata="Q711673" start="46391" end="46402" title="Arthur Szyk" label="Arthur Szyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222715" start="46424" end="46437" title="Adam Szymczyk" label="Adam Szymczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q550218" start="46475" end="46492" title="Alexandre Tansman" label="Alexandre Tansman"/>
<link wikidata="Q380363" start="46528" end="46540" title="Jack Tramiel" label="Jack Tramiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208305" start="46592" end="46601" title="Commodore International" label="Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q376278" start="46603" end="46615" title="Julian Tuwim" label="Julian Tuwim"/>
<link wikidata="Q675302" start="46635" end="46650" title="Andrzej Udalski" label="Andrzej Udalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q929924" start="46695" end="46706" title="Miś Uszatek" label="Miś Uszatek"/>
<link wikidata="Q115387945" start="46727" end="46754" title="Sławosz Uznański-Wiśniewski" label="Sławosz Uznański-Wiśniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="46806" end="46827" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910374" start="46830" end="46846" title="Avraham Verdiger" label="Avraham Verdiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920083" start="46880" end="46897" title="Michał Wiśniewski" label="Michał Wiśniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898386" start="46919" end="46933" title="Paweł Zatorski" label="Paweł Zatorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q293211" start="46966" end="46981" title="Hanna Zdanowska" label="Hanna Zdanowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715596" start="47022" end="47049" title="Aleksandra Ziółkowska-Boehm" label="Aleksandra Ziółkowska-Boehm"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="47181" end="47188" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="47193" end="47199" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="47228" end="47235" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="47237" end="47244" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="47246" end="47253" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="47255" end="47287" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="47289" end="47303" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="47305" end="47312" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="47314" end="47320" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="47322" end="47331" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="47333" end="47343" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="47345" end="47350" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="47352" end="47359" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="47364" end="47371" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="47416" end="47423" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795" start="47433" end="47441" title="Chemnitz" label="Chemnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="47454" end="47463" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="47476" end="47480" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="47492" end="47499" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="47514" end="47519" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="47532" end="47539" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="47550" end="47558" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q182521" start="47570" end="47577" title="Rustavi" label="Rustavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q217394" start="47590" end="47598" title="Barreiro (city)" label="Barreiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="47612" end="47619" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q125293" start="47632" end="47638" title="Puebla (city)" label="Puebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12225" start="47650" end="47656" title="Murcia" label="Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="47667" end="47671" title="Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q81581" start="47684" end="47690" title="Szeged" label="Szeged"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="47703" end="47712" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="47723" end="47730" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374874" start="47764" end="47774" title="Eurocities" label="Eurocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="47795" end="47822" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630" start="47876" end="47883" title="Ivanovo" label="Ivanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829" start="47888" end="47899" title="Kaliningrad" label="Kaliningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="47910" end="47915" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="47932" end="47939" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q85766861" start="47974" end="47989" title="History of Łódź" label="History of Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q384319" start="47992" end="48012" title="Łódź Design Festival" label="Łódź Design Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q906104" start="48015" end="48057" title="International Festival of Comics and Games" label="International Festival of Comics and Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364932" start="48068" end="48090" title="Bednarska Street, Łódź" label="Bednarska Street, Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q9144882" start="48093" end="48119" title="Karol Anstadt Avenue, Łódź" label="Karol Anstadt Avenue, Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811340" start="48122" end="48142" title="Helenów Park in Łódź" label="Helenów Park in Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q22047713" start="48145" end="48158" title="Fabrykant Oak" label="Fabrykant Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="48585" end="48595" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44813" wikidata="Q1471040" url="?curid=44813" title="Frutta martorana">
<text> (also called or, in Sicilian, ) is a Sicilian marzipan sweet in the form of fruits and vegetables from the provinces of Palermo and Trapani.

Realistically coloured with vegetable dyes, it is said to have originated at the Benedictine nunnery of Santa Maria dell&#x27;Ammiraglio, Palermo, known as La Martorana after its foundress, when nuns decorated empty fruit trees with marzipan fruit to impress an archbishop visiting at a season when the trees were not fruiting. It is traditionally put by children&#x27;s bedsides on All Souls&#x27; Day.

==See also==

* Sicilian cuisine
* List of Italian desserts and pastries

==References==
==Further reading==
* Lilliana Ballina: &quot;La frutta martorana&quot;. Aurora Books, Santiago de Chile, 1992. .
* Maria Oliveri: &quot;I segreti del chiostro. Storie e ricette dei monasteri di Palermo&quot;. Il Genio Editore, 2017. , .

==External links==

* Martorana fruit Commercial page with image</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1471040" start="0" end="0" title="Frutta martorana" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="21" end="29" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859351" start="38" end="46" title="Sicilian cuisine" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106252" start="47" end="55" title="marzipan" label="marzipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q460453" start="56" end="61" title="Sweetness" label="sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16227" start="121" end="128" title="Province of Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16288" start="133" end="140" title="Province of Trapani" label="Trapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="224" end="235" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644597" start="247" end="279" title="Church of Santa Maria dell&amp;#x27;Ammiraglio" label="Santa Maria dell&amp;#x27;Ammiraglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033140" start="526" end="545" title="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day" label="All Souls&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859351" start="564" end="580" title="Sicilian cuisine" label="Sicilian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973580" start="583" end="620" title="List of Italian desserts and pastries" label="List of Italian desserts and pastries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44815" wikidata="Q82765" url="?curid=44815" title="Olsztyn">
<text>Olsztyn ( , ; ; Old Prussian: &quot;Alnāsteini&quot; ) is a city on the Łyna River in northern Poland. It is the capital of the Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship, and is a city with county rights. The population of the city was estimated at 169,793 residents 

Olsztyn is the largest city in Warmia, and has been the capital of the voivodeship since 1999. In the same year, the University of Warmia and Masuria was founded from the fusion of three other local universities. Today, the Castle of Warmian Cathedral Chapter houses a museum and is a venue for concerts, art exhibitions, film shows and other cultural events, which make Olsztyn a popular tourist destination. The city is the seat of the Archbishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Warmia.

The most important sights of the city include the medieval Old Town and the St. James Pro-cathedral (former St. James Parish Church), which dates back more than 600 years. The market square is part of the European Route of Brick Gothic and the pro-cathedral is regarded as one of the greatest monuments of Gothic architecture in Poland.

Olsztyn, for a number of years, has been ranked very highly in quality of life, income, employment and safety. It is one of the best places in Poland to live and work. It is also one of the happiest cities in the country.

== History ==
===Middle Ages===
In 1334, a watchtower was established on the Łyna River. In 1346, the forest was cleared at the location for a new settlement, mentioned in a historical document from 1348. The following year, the Teutonic Knights began the construction of an &quot;Ordensburg&quot; (castle) as a stronghold against the Baltic Prussians. Allenstein was granted municipal rights by the cathedral chapter of the Bishopric of Warmia in October 1353. The German &quot;Allenstein&quot; referred to the river&#x27;s Baltic Prussian name &quot;Alna&quot;, which meant a hind. Local Poles, having arrived along with German settlers, called it &quot;Holstin&quot; and &quot;Olsztyn&quot;, which are Polonizations of the German name. The castle was completed in 1397. The town was captured by the Kingdom of Poland during the Polish-Lithuanian-Teutonic War in 1410, and again in 1414 during the Hunger War, but it was returned to the monastic state of the Teutonic Knights after hostilities ended.

The city joined the Prussian Confederation in 1440, and rebelled against the Teutonic Knights in 1454 upon the outbreak of the Thirteen Years&#x27; War to join the Kingdom of Poland under King Casimir IV Jagiellon. In 1454, upon the request of the Confederation, King Casimir IV signed the act of incorporation of the region to Poland, and the townspeople took the castle and recognized the Polish king as the rightful ruler. Although the Teutonic Knights recaptured the city the following year, it was retaken by Polish troops in 1463. The Second Peace of Thorn in 1466 confirmed Allenstein as part of the Kingdom of Poland. Administratively it was located in the Prince-Bishopric of Warmia within the provinces of Royal Prussia and Greater Poland.

===Modern era===

From 1516 to 1521, Nicolaus Copernicus lived in the town castle as an administrator and then in Mehlsack (Melzak, now Pieniężno). Copernicus was in charge of the Polish defences in the Siege of Allenstein during the Polish-Teutonic War of 1519–21. He also started and managed the repopulation of the region, inviting a new wave of Polish settlers from Mazovia. The town along with Warmia then entered what is considered the region&#x27;s golden age, when crafts and trade developed, thanks also to the city&#x27;s location on the Warsaw-Königsberg trade route. During this period, the city was still visited several times by Copernicus, as well as leading figures of the Polish Renaissance, writers, royal secretaries and diplomats: Johannes Dantiscus, called the &quot;father of Polish diplomacy&quot;, and Marcin Kromer, who was also a historian and music theorist. St. James&#x27; Pro-Cathedral, one of the most distinctive landmarks of the cityscape, was completed at that time.

Prosperity was halted in the 1620s, when the town suffered a fire and an epidemic. In 1626, during the Swedish invasion, clerics from Frauenburg (Frombork) took refuge in the town, which the Swedes did not reach. The city was sacked by Swedish troops later, in 1655 and 1708, during the next Polish-Swedish wars, and its population was nearly wiped out in 1710 by epidemics of the bubonic plague and cholera.

The town became part of the Kingdom of Prussia in 1772 after the First Partition of Poland and its economy initially collapsed. Poles became subject to extensive Germanisation policies. A Prussian census recorded a population of 1,770 people, predominantly farmers, and Allenstein was administered within the newly created Province of East Prussia.
On February 3, 1807, the Battle of Allenstein took place. The French Army clashed with the Imperial Russian army. On that day, Allenstein was visited by Napoleon Bonaparte. Napoleon gathered enormous forces in the city and planned to engage the Russians and Prussians in a decisive battle. The Russian army was stationed in Jonkowo, but retreated after the French attack. Thanks to the victory at Allenstein, Napoleon&#x27;s army was able to move north and a few days later the general Battle of Eylau took place.

The growth of the city started again after it became a district seat in 1818, a significant influx of German settlers began and by 1825, the town was inhabited by 1,341 Germans and 1,266 Poles. In the early 1830s the city suffered from a cholera epidemic and a hunger crisis, however afterwards it flourished again, when despite Germanisation policies it was administered by Polish mayor Jakub Rarkowski from 1836 to 1865. Under Rarkowski the city was expanded and modernized, and the mayor also hid Polish insurgents in the city during the January Uprising. The first German-language newspaper, the &quot;Allensteiner Zeitung&quot;, began publishing in 1841. Polish historian Wojciech Kętrzyński was arrested in Jomendorf (the present-day district of Jaroty), and imprisoned in the city&#x27;s High Gate in 1863 for smuggling weapons for the Polish January Uprising in the Russian Partition of Poland. The town hospital was founded in 1867.

In 1871, with the unification of Germany, Allenstein became part of the German Empire. Two years later, the city was connected by railway to Thorn (Toruń). Despite Germanisation attempts the city remained an important Polish centre. Its first Polish language newspaper, the &quot;Gazeta Olsztyńska&quot;, was founded in 1886. Allenstein&#x27;s infrastructure developed rapidly: gas was installed in 1890, telephones in 1892, public water supply in 1898, and electricity in 1907. The Provincial Mental Sanatorium Kortau was established in 1886 just south of Allenstein (today part of Olsztyn-Kortowo). In 1905, the city became the capital of Regierungsbezirk Allenstein, a government administrative region in East Prussia. From 1818 to 1910, the city was administered within the East Prussian Allenstein District, after which it became an independent city.

===World War I, interbellum and World War II===
Shortly after the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Russian troops captured Allenstein, but it was recovered by the Imperial German Army in the Battle of Tannenberg.

After the defeat of Germany in World War I, the East Prussian plebiscite was held in 1920 to determine whether the populace of the region, including Allenstein, wished to remain in German East Prussia or become part of Poland, which had just regained independence. In order to advertise the plebiscite, special postage stamps were produced by overprinting German stamps and sold on 3 April of that year. One kind of overprint read , while the other read inside an oval whose border gave the full name of the plebiscite commission. Each overprint was applied to 14 denominations ranging from 5 Pfennigs to 3 Marks. The Polish community faced discrimination, Polish rallies were dispersed, the participants were threatened and beaten. In March, Polish activist Bogumił Linka died in Allenstein, a few weeks after being attacked by the German militia in nearby Szczytno in Masuria. He was buried in Allenstein, however, his grave was soon devastated by local German nationalists. A monument to Linka was unveiled after Poland regained control of the city after World War II. The presence of a Royal Irish battalion ensured a relative peace in Allenstein. The plebiscite, held on 11 July, produced 16,742 votes for Germany and 342 votes for Poland.
In the interwar period, numerous Polish organisations operated in the city, including the Polish Scouting and Guiding Association, Union of Poles in Germany, a People&#x27;s Bank (&quot;Bank Ludowy&quot;), local Poles organised a school, library, puppet theatre. The Polish Consulate also operated. After the January 1933 Nazi seizure of power in Germany, Poles and Jews in Allenstein were increasingly persecuted. In 1935, the German Wehrmacht made the city the seat of the Allenstein &quot;Militärischer Bereich&quot;. It was then home of the 11th and 217th infantry divisions and 11th Artillery Regiment. At the same time, the football club SV Hindenburg Allenstein played in Allenstein from 1921 to 1945.

Beginning in 1936, members of the Polish minority were increasingly persecuted, especially members of the Union of Poles in Germany. In early 1939, many local Polish activists were expelled. In an attempt to rig the results of an upcoming census and understate the number of Poles in the city and region, the Germans terrorized the Polish population and, in May 1939, the Gestapo confiscated 10,000 Polish information leaflets in the headquarters of the &quot;Gazeta Olsztyńska&quot;. In August 1939, Germany introduced martial law in the region, which allowed for even more blatant persecution of Poles. In August and September 1939, the authorities carried out mass arrests of local Poles, including the chairman of the local Polish bank and his assistant, the chief of the &quot;Rolnik&quot; Cooperative, and the principal of the local Polish school.

Nazi Germany co-formed the &quot;Einsatzgruppe V&quot; in the city, which then entered several Polish cities and towns, including Grudziądz, Mława, Ciechanów, Łomża and Siedlce, to commit various atrocities against Poles during the German invasion of Poland that began World War II in 1939. German troops invaded Poland also from Olsztyn (then called Allenstein). After the German invasion of Poland, local Poles were also subjected to mass executions and deportations to occupied Poland. Arrested Poles were held in a local prison and then forced to remove Polish signs and inscriptions in the city, while the German population gathered and insulted them. The &quot;Gazeta Olsztyńska&quot; was abolished by the German authorities, the newspaper&#x27;s headquarters was demolished and the editor-in-chief Seweryn Pieniężny was arrested and executed in the along with co-publisher Wojciech Gałęziewski and the &quot;Rolnik&quot; Cooperative chief Leon Włodarczyk, while Pieniężny&#x27;s wife was deported to the Ravensbrück concentration camp. The last pre-war Polish consul in Allenstein, Bohdan Jałowiecki, along with the consulate staff, was imprisoned in the Hohenbruch and Soldau concentration camps, and then murdered. Polish teachers were deported to the Dachau concentration camp.
During the war five forced labour camps were established in the city. On 12 October 1939, the Wehrmacht established an area headquarters for one of its military districts, Wehrkreis I (headquartered at Königsberg), that controlled the environs of Allenstein, including Lötzen (now Giżycko), and Ciechanów in occupied Poland. As part of the &quot;Aktion T4&quot;, Nazi Germany conducted medical experiments on the patients of the psychiatric hospital in the present-day district of Kortowo, in which at least 5,000 people were killed.

On 22 January 1945, near the end of the war, the city was plundered and burned by the conquering Soviet Red Army, and much of its German population fled. The remaining, mostly Polish population, was subjected to various crimes, including murder, rape and looting. The Soviets also murdered the remaining patients and staff of the psychiatric hospital, who were either burned alive or shot. Remains of three Roman Catholic nuns who served as nurses at Olsztyn&#x27;s St. Mary&#x27;s Hospital and were killed by Soviet soldiers in 1945 were excavated in October 2020.

On 23 May 1945, the Soviets established a Polish administration in the region which aroused British and American protest. The Polish rule was accepted under the preliminary provisions of the Potsdam Conference. In October 1945, the remaining German population was expelled in accordance with the Potsdam Agreement, and remaining Poles were joined by new Polish settlers, mostly those expelled from pre-war Polish regions of Vilnius, Grodno and Volhynia, annexed by the Soviet Union, as well as settlers from Warsaw, which had been destroyed by German forces during World War II. Reconstruction and removal of damage lasted until the 1950s.

===Contemporary history===

In December 1945, a match factory was launched in Olsztyn, as the city&#x27;s first post-war industrial plant of national importance. A tyre factory was founded in Olsztyn in 1967. Its subsequent names included OZOS, Stomil and Michelin. City limits were greatly expanded in 1966 and 1987.

In 1956, Olsztyn was the site of the largest Polish demonstration of support for the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. On the 500th anniversary of the birth of Nicolaus Copernicus, in 1973, a planetarium was opened in Olsztyn. In 1989 the former &quot;Gazeta Olsztyńska&quot; headquarters was rebuilt and re-opened as a museum. In 1991 Pope John Paul II visited the city. In 1999 the University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn was established, which is now one of the largest universities in northeastern Poland.

Olsztyn became the capital of the Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship in 1999. It was previously in the Olsztyn Voivodeship.

===Olsztyn Castle===

The Olsztyn Castle was built between 1346–1353 and by then it had one wing on the north-east side of the rectangular courtyard. Access to the castle leads from the drawbridge over the river Łyna, surrounded by a belt of defensive walls and a moat. The south-west wing of the castle was built in the 15th century, the tower situated in the west corner of the courtyard, from the middle of the 14th century, was rebuilt in the early 16th century and had a round shape on a square base and was 40 meters high. At the same time, the castle walls were raised to a height of 12 meters and a second belt of the lower walls was built. The castle walls were partly combined with city walls, which made the castle look as if it had been a powerful bastion defending access to the city. 
The castle was owned by Warmia Chapter, which until 1454, together with the Prince-Bishopric of Warmia, was under the military protection of the Teutonic Knights and their Monastic State in Prussia.

The castle had played a huge role in the Polish-Teutonic wars by then. After the Battle of Grunwald in 1410, the Poles took it after a few days siege. In the Thirteen Years&#x27; War (1454–66) it was jumping from rule to rule. The Knights threatened the castle and the town in 1521, but the defense was very effective. They contained one failed assault. There is a connection between the history of the castle, the city of Olsztyn, and Nicolaus Copernicus. He prepared the defense of Olsztyn against the invasion of the Teutonic Knights in 1520.

In the sixteenth century, there were two prince-bishops of Warmia that stayed there: Johannes Dantiscus – the first Sarmatian poet, endowed with the imperial laurel wreath for &quot;Latin Songs&quot; (1538, 1541) and Marcin Kromer, who wrote with equal ease in Latin and Polish scientific and literary works (1580). Kromer consecrated the chapel of St. Anna, which was built in the south-west wing of the castle. In the course of time, both wings of the castle lost military importance, which for residential purposes has become very convenient. In 1779, Prince-Bishop Ignacy Krasicki stopped here as well.

After the Prussian annexation of Warmia during the First Partition of Poland in 1772, the castle became the property of the state board of estates (&quot;Kriegs- und Domänenkammer&quot; — War and Domain Chamber). In 1845, the bridge over the moat was replaced by a causeway better connecting the castle with the city. In 1901–1911 a general renovation of the castle was performed, however, several sections of the building were violated at the same time where they changed the original look of the castle e.g. putting on window frames in a cloister. The tower was topped off in 1921 and again in 1926.

In 1945, the whole castle became home to the Masurian Museum, which today is called the Museum of Warmia and Masuria. In addition, there are also popular events held within the frameworks of the Olsztyn Artistic Summer and so-called &quot;evenings of the castle&quot; and &quot;Sundays in the Museum&quot;.

===Jewish community===

Although Jews were permitted to trade in the city itself and its fairs during the medieval times, they were restricted from trading freely in the villages surrounding the town. In 1718, Bishop Teodor Andrzej Potocki imposed a ban on Jewish trade in the city as well. The ban, even if continued by successive bishops, proved not to be particularly successful in the light of repeated complains by the local merchants about Jewish dealing in animal leather and similar products as the one recorded in 1742. Permanent Jewish settlement can be dated to 1780 when the Jews were finally permitted to settle in the city albeit outside the immediate city walls. In 1814, the Simonson brothers opened the first Jewish store. Yet the growth of the Jewish community worried city authorities, who tried to curb it with restrictions and punitive measures. In 1850, a new law imposed fines and imprisonment on anyone who harboured a “wandering” Jew in their home.

The roots of the Jewish congregation in the town can be traced to 1820. Shortly after that date, an official prayer room was established on Richterstraße. In 1877, the congregation bought a plot of land on Liebstädterstraße and built a synagogue there. A Jewish cemetery was built on Seestraße (present-day Grunwaldzka). At its peak, the town&#x27;s Jewish population reached 448 people (1933).

During the &quot;Kristallnacht&quot;, the town synagogue was destroyed by Nazi Germans, only to be later used as a bomb shelter. Today, the site of the former synagogue is occupied by a local sports club.

By 1939, only 135 Jews were left in the city. The remainder fled the country. Those who still lived in the town by 1940 were deported to Nazi concentration camps. In June 1946, 16 Holocaust survivors settled in the city and in 1948, the congregation had 190 worshipers. Most of them emigrated to Israel throughout the next few decades. There is no trace of the Jewish cemetery.

The city was the birthplace of world-famous Jewish architect Erich Mendelsohn. In town, Mendelsohn planned the mourners&#x27; chapel (called the Mendelsohn house) next to the cemetery. The building is restored. In addition, it was the birthplace of German Socialist and SPD leader Hugo Haase. , an Impressionist, lived and worked in the city from 1910 to 1927. Documentation of the Jewish owned shops in town exists.

== Geography ==

Olsztyn is located in the north-east part of Poland in the region known as the &quot;Thousand Lakes&quot;.

=== Greenbelt ===
More than half of the forests occupying 21.2% of the city area form a single complex of the Municipal Forest (1050 ha) used mainly for recreation and tourism purposes. Within the Municipal Forest area are situated two peat-land flora sanctuaries, Mszar and Redykajny. Municipal greenery (560 ha, 6.5% of the town area) developed in the form of numerous parks, green spots and three cemeteries over a century old. The greenery includes 910 monuments of nature and groups of protected trees in the form of beech, oak, maple and lime-lined avenues.

=== Lakes ===
The city is situated in a lake region of forests and plains. There are 15 lakes inside the administrative bounds of the city (13 with areas greater than 1 ha). The overall area of lakes in Olsztyn is about 725 ha, which constitutes 8.25% of the total city area.

===Climate===
Olszytn has an oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Cfb&quot;) using the isotherm or a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Dfb&quot;) using the isotherm.

== Administrative division ==

Olsztyn is divided into 23 districts:

There are many smaller districts: Jakubowo, Karolin, Kolonia Jaroty, Kortowo II, Łupstych, Niedźwiedź, Piękna Góra, Podlesie, Pozorty, Skarbówka Poszmanówka, Słoneczny Stok, Stare Kieźliny, Stare Miasto, Stare Zalbki, Stary Dwór, Track. These do not have council representative assemblies.

== Culture ==

=== Theatres ===
* Stefan Jaracz Theatre (est. 1925) the host of International Theatre Festival DEMOLUDY
* Puppet Theatre

=== Cinemas ===
* Helios
* Multikino

=== Museums ===
* Museum of Warmia and Mazury (&quot;Muzeum Warmii i Mazur&quot;) – Olsztyn&#x27;s largest museum.
** Gazeta Olsztyńska House (&quot;Dom &quot;Gazety Olsztyńskiej&quot;&quot;)
** Museum of Nature (&quot;Muzeum Przyrody&quot;)
* Museum of Sports (&quot;Muzeum Sportu&quot;)
* &quot;Muzeum Nowoczesności&quot;

=== Architecture ===

The historic central district of Olsztyn is the Old Town (&quot;Stare Miasto&quot;), which contains various historic buildings and structures, including:
* the Gothic castle of Warmian Chapter, built during the 14th century, former home of Nicolaus Copernicus, now a museum
* Gothic St. James&#x27; Pro-cathedral with Gothic-Renaissance-Baroque interior
* Old Town Hall on the Market Square – built in the mid-14th century.
* Gazeta Olsztyńska House at the &quot;Targ Rybny&quot; (&quot;Fish Market&quot;), now a museum.
* the town walls and the High Gate (until the mid-19th century known as the Upper Gate).
* Our Lady Queen of Poland church
* Monument to Nicolaus Copernicus
* Park Zamkowy (&quot;Castle Park&quot;)
* Baroque Archpresbyter&#x27;s Palace (&quot;Pałac Archiprezbitera&quot;)
* Gothic Revival Church of the Salvator

Notable structures outside of the Old Town include:
* the New City Hall
* Jewish Tahara house in Olsztyn built in 1911-1912 by Erich Mendelsohn
* Modernist planetarium with mosaics by Stefan Knapp
* the , built in 1565
* Neogothic Sacred Heart church, built during the years 1901–1902
* Church of St. Lawrence in the Gutkowo district, built in the late 14th century
* Home Army and Stefan Jaracz monuments and the White Eagle Column
* the Railway Bridge over the River Łyna gorge near Artyleryjska and Wyzwolenia streets, built during the years 1872–1873
* Main Post Office
* Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship office
* &quot;Instytut Północny im. Wojciecha Kętrzyńskiego&quot; (&quot;Wojciech Kętrzyński Northern Institute&quot;)
* Park Centralny (&quot;Central Park&quot;)
* the Książnica Polska building with one of the oldest active passenger elevators in Poland and Europe
* FM- and TV-mast Olsztyn-Pieczewo – 360 metres high, since the collapse of the Warsaw radio mast the tallest structure in Poland
=== Music ===

The city is home to the National Symphony Orchestra.

== Economy ==

The Michelin Polska tyre company (former Stomil Olsztyn) is the largest employer in the region of Warmia and Masuria. Other important industries are food processing and furniture manufacturing.

==Transportation==
===Road===
====Bus====
A bus network with 36 bus lines exists, including 6 suburban lines and 2 night-time lines.

====Trolleybus====
In 1939, due to poor economic situation throughout the interwar period and the city&#x27;s growing population, a trolleybus line began operation, partially replacing the original tram network. During the Second World War the cars were mainly driven by women.

The trolleybus network consisting of 4 lines was decommissioned on 31 July 1971.

===Rail===
Olsztyn has train connections to various major cities in Poland, including Warsaw, Kraków, Gdańsk, Szczecin, Poznań, Bydgoszcz, Białystok, Wrocław, Łódź, Toruń, and various towns in the region, including Elbląg, Iława, Działdowo and Ełk. Olsztyn Główny is the main railway station in the city. Plans exist to demolish the building and replace it with new infrastructure, contrary to previous information about the current building being renovated.

====Tram====

Historically, the city&#x27;s first tram line was built in 1907 and gradually expanded over the years. It ceased operation in 1965.

In 2006, authorities considered the reintroduction of trams in the city to address transport problems and subsequently concluded feasibility studies on the matter in 2009. An long tram network was built between 2011 and 2015. The contract was signed in 2011 and construction commenced in 2012. It was a first new tram system built in Poland in 55 years; 15 low-floor Tramino trams were ordered from Solaris in September 2012.
There are five tram lines in operation.

In 2024, a long extension was completed the Turkish manufacturer Durmazlar had been selected to supply 24 trams for the network.

===Air===

The region and city is served by Olsztyn-Mazury Airport with scheduled international passenger flights. It is located in Szymany, 10 km off Szczytno and 58 km south of the city of Olsztyn. The airport operates flights to London, Dortmund, Kraków and seasonal flights to Rzeszów and Wrocław.

== Education ==

* University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn
* Masurian Institute (est. 1943)

== Sports ==

* Indykpol AZS Olsztyn – men&#x27;s volleyball team playing in the Polish Volleyball League (PLS, Polska Liga Siatkówki), five time Polish champions
* Stomil Olsztyn – men&#x27;s football team, playing in the lower divisions. It played in the Ekstraklasa, the country&#x27;s top flight, from 1994 to 2002.
* – men&#x27;s handball team playing in the I liga (second tier). It played in the Superliga, the country&#x27;s top flight, most recently from 2005 to 2012.
* – one of the oldest football clubs in the city, playing in the lower leagues. It played on the second tier, most recently in the 1990s
* AZS UWM Trójeczka Olsztyn – men&#x27;s basketball team playing in the Polish Second League
* WMPD Olsztyn – men&#x27;s rugby team, playing in the First Polish League
* Budowlani Olsztyn – a wrestling team
* Joanna Jędrzejczyk (born 1987), Polish Muay-Thai and MMA fighter, former UFC Women&#x27;s Strawweight Champion
* Łukasz Gikiewicz (born 1987), Polish footballer
* Rafał Gikiewicz (born 1987), Polish footballer
* Filip Kurto (born 1991), Polish footballer
*Olsztyn Lakers – American football team

The Memorial of Hubert Jerzy Wagner, an international volleyball friendly tournament, was organized in Olsztyn from 2003 to 2008. The Tour de Pologne, one of UCI World Tour races, was organized in Olsztyn numerous times, most recently in 2008 (as of 2019).

== Politics ==

Members of the Sejm elected from Olsztyn constituency in 2005:

* Mieczysław Aszkiełowicz, Self-Defense of the Republic of Poland (Samoobrona Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej)
* Beata Bublewicz, Civic Platform (PO, Platforma Obywatelska)
* Jerzy Gosiewski, Law and Justice (PiS, Prawo i Sprawiedliwość)
* Tadeusz Iwiński, Democratic Left Alliance (SLD, Sojusz Lewicy Demokratycznej)
* Edward Ośko, League of Polish Families (LPR, Liga Polskich Rodzin)
* Adam Puza, Law and Justice (PiS, Prawo i Sprawiedliwość)
* Sławomir Rybicki, Civic Platform (PO, Platforma Obywatelska)
* Lidia Staroń, Civic Platform (PO, Platforma Obywatelska)
* Aleksander Marek Szczygło, Law and Justice (PiS, Prawo i Sprawiedliwość)
* Zbigniew Włodkowski, Polish Peasant Party (PSL, Polskie Stronnictwo Ludowe)

Members of Senate elected from Olsztyn constituency in 2005:

* Ryszard Józef Górecki, Civic Platform (PO, Platforma Obywatelska)
* Jerzy Szmit, Law and Justice (PiS, Prawo i Sprawiedliwość)

== Notable people ==
* Johannes von Leysen (1310–1388), town founder and mayor
* Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543), astronomer, administrator, and town commander
* Johannes Knolleisen (+1511), German academic and provider of academic stipends
* Lucas David (1503–1583), German historian of Prussia
* Marcin Kromer (1512–1589), Polish cartographer, diplomat and historian, personal secretary of Kings of Poland, Bishop of Warmia
* Antoni Blank (1785–1844), Polish painter
* Hugo Haase (1863–1919), Jewish-German politician, jurist and pacifist
* Franz Justus Rarkowski (1873–1950), military bishop (1938–1945)
* August Trunz (1875–1963), founder of the Prussica-Sammlung Trunz
* Feliks Nowowiejski (1877–1946), Polish composer, conductor, concert organist
* Maximilian Kaller (1880–1947) German prelate, bishop of Ermland in 1930–1945
* Erich Mendelsohn (1887–1953), German-Jewish architect who fled the Nazis
* Olga Desmond (1891–1964), German dancer and actress
* Hermann Dohna-Finckenstein (1894–1942), German estate owner and politician
* Günter Wand (1912–2002), German conductor
* Kurt Baluses (1914–72) German football (soccer) player and manager
* Herbert Schachtschneider (1919–2008), German operatic tenor
* Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski (1922–2005), German politician
* Curt Lowens (1925–2017), German actor
* Leonhard Pohl (1929–2014), German gymnast
* Józef Glemp (1929–2013), Polish prelate, bishop of Warmia 1979–1981
* Jörg Kuebart (1934–2018) German general of the German Air Force
* Karl-Heinz Hopp (1936–2007) German rower who competed in the 1960 Summer Olympics
* Wolf Lepenies (born 1941), German sociologist, political scientist and author
* Eugeniusz Geno Malkowski (1942–2016), Polish artist, painter and academic
* Ulrich Schrade (1943–2009), German-Polish philosopher and pedagogue
* Marian Bublewicz (1950–1993), Polish rally and race driver of the 1980s and 1990s
* Juliusz Machulski (born 1955), Polish film director
* Izabela Trojanowska (born 1955), Polish actress and singer
* Andrzej Friszke (born 1956), Polish historian
* Krzysztof Hołowczyc (born 1962), Polish rally driver
* Piotr &quot;Peter&quot; Wiwczarek (born 1965), Polish musician, vocalist and lead guitarist of the death metal band Vader
* Artur Wojdat (born 1968), swimmer
* Elżbieta Jabłońska (born 1970), Polish multidisciplinary artist, born in Olsztyn
* Mamed Khalidov (born 1980), Russian-Polish mixed martial artist
* Wojciech Grzyb (born 1981), Polish volleyball player
* Julia Marcell (born 1982), Polish singer/songwriter and pianist
* Małgorzata Jasińska (born 1984), Polish professional cyclist (retd.)
* Michał Trzeciakiewicz (born 1984), retired Polish footballer
* Marcin Możdżonek (born 1985), volleyball player
* Adrian Mierzejewski (born 1986), Polish footballer
* Łukasz Gikiewicz (born 1987), Polish footballer
* Rafał Gikiewicz (born 1987), Polish footballer
* Joanna Jędrzejczyk (born 1987), Muay-Thai and MMA fighter, former UFC Women&#x27;s Strawweight Champion
* Paweł Dawidowicz (born 1995), Polish footballer
* Artur Szalpuk (born 1995), Polish volleyball player, 2018 World Champion

== International relations ==
===Consulates===
There are honorary consulates of Belarus, Germany and Lithuania in Olsztyn.

=== Twin towns – Sister cities ===

Olsztyn is twinned with:

Olsztyn belongs to the Federation of Copernicus Cities, an association of cities where Copernicus lived and worked, such as Bologna, Frombork, Kraków, and Toruń. The main office of the federation is situated at Olsztyn Planetarium and Astronomical Observatory, located on St. Andrew&#x27;s Hill (143 m) in a former water tower erected in 1897.

== Citations ==
===Notes===
===References===
=== Further reading ===

* http://www.olsztyn.eu/ 
* https://web.archive.org/web/20100220023326/http://zamkigotyckie.org.pl/olsztyn.htm 
* https://web.archive.org/web/20120308112401/http://www.pascal.pl/atrakcja.php?id=25797 
==External links==
*News Olsztyn 
*Jewish history of Olsztyn</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82765" start="0" end="7" title="Olsztyn" label="Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q35501" start="16" end="28" title="Old Prussian" label="Old Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620" start="72" end="82" title="Łyna River" label="Łyna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="95" end="101" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54184" start="128" end="156" title="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship" label="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q925381" start="167" end="190" title="city with powiat rights" label="city with county rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q322620" start="287" end="293" title="Warmia" label="Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733433" start="373" end="405" title="University of Warmia and Masuria" label="University of Warmia and Masuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386527" start="480" end="515" title="Olsztyn Castle" label="Castle of Warmian Cathedral Chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q182832" start="551" end="559" title="concerts" label="concerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364478" start="712" end="748" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Warmia" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q695863" start="801" end="818" title="Brick Gothic" label="medieval Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3919808" start="827" end="850" title="Co-Cathedral Basilica of St. James in Olsztyn" label="St. James Pro-cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q552967" start="956" end="986" title="European Route of Brick Gothic" label="European Route of Brick Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="1057" end="1076" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="1152" end="1167" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="1169" end="1175" title="income" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="Q17090395" start="1279" end="1294" title="World Happiness Report" label="happiest cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q947103" start="1355" end="1365" title="watchtower" label="watchtower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620" start="1389" end="1399" title="Łyna River" label="Łyna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="1541" end="1557" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q365216" start="1593" end="1603" title="Ordensburg" label="Ordensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q109073" start="1647" end="1663" title="Baltic Prussians" label="Baltic Prussians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981896" start="1688" end="1704" title="German town law" label="municipal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184737" start="1712" end="1729" title="cathedral chapter" label="cathedral chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q506218" start="1737" end="1756" title="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia" label="Bishopric of Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35501" start="1837" end="1852" title="Old Prussian language" label="Baltic Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="1890" end="1894" title="deer" label="hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="2017" end="2029" title="Polonization" label="Polonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386527" start="2055" end="2061" title="Olsztyn Castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="2114" end="2131" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q937255" start="2143" end="2173" title="Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War" label="Polish-Lithuanian-Teutonic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q834498" start="2212" end="2222" title="Hunger War" label="Hunger War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="2251" end="2289" title="monastic state of the Teutonic Knights" label="monastic state of the Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q281484" start="2336" end="2358" title="Prussian Confederation" label="Prussian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q315921" start="2443" end="2467" title="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–66)" label="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="2480" end="2497" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="2509" end="2529" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q233532" start="2857" end="2878" title="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)" label="Second Peace of Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q506218" start="2981" end="3007" title="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia" label="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="3032" end="3045" title="Royal Prussia" label="Royal Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500794" start="3050" end="3064" title="Greater Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="3104" end="3123" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q768689" start="3203" end="3212" title="Pieniężno" label="Pieniężno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509804" start="3270" end="3289" title="Siege of Allenstein" label="Siege of Allenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q558423" start="3301" end="3331" title="Polish–Teutonic War (1519–1521)" label="Polish-Teutonic War of 1519–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q643843" start="3437" end="3444" title="Mazovia" label="Mazovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120832" start="3622" end="3632" title="Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="3633" end="3644" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903045" start="3756" end="3774" title="Polish Renaissance" label="Polish Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358292" start="3818" end="3836" title="Johannes Dantiscus" label="Johannes Dantiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q66649" start="3893" end="3906" title="Marcin Kromer" label="Marcin Kromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985977" start="4172" end="4188" title="Polish–Swedish War (1626–1629)" label="Swedish invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q497115" start="4203" end="4213" title="Frombork" label="Frauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="4305" end="4312" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645044" start="4361" end="4380" title="Polish–Swedish wars" label="Polish-Swedish wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="4450" end="4464" title="bubonic plague" label="bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="4469" end="4476" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="4507" end="4525" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="4544" end="4569" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137265" start="4641" end="4654" title="Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="4802" end="4826" title="Province of East Prussia" label="Province of East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872050" start="4853" end="4873" title="Battle of Allenstein" label="Battle of Allenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q504721" start="4890" end="4901" title="Grande Armée" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="4981" end="4999" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q984351" start="5152" end="5159" title="Jonkowo" label="Jonkowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q331347" start="5314" end="5329" title="Battle of Eylau" label="Battle of Eylau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283531" start="5398" end="5406" title="Districts of Prussia" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="5884" end="5900" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q153420" start="6020" end="6039" title="Wojciech Kętrzyński" label="Wojciech Kętrzyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q129797" start="6217" end="6234" title="Russian Partition" label="Russian Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="6304" end="6326" title="unification of Germany" label="unification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="6358" end="6371" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47554" start="6427" end="6432" title="Toruń" label="Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="6529" end="6544" title="Polish language" label="Polish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529090" start="6566" end="6583" title="Gazeta Olsztyńska" label="Gazeta Olsztyńska"/>
<link wikidata="Q86834393" start="6769" end="6804" title="Provincial Mental Sanatorium Kortau" label="Provincial Mental Sanatorium Kortau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11044638" start="6877" end="6884" title="Kortowo" label="Kortowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q561389" start="6927" end="6954" title="Allenstein (region)" label="Regierungsbezirk Allenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q15092400" start="7124" end="7140" title="independent city" label="independent city"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7221" end="7232" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="7306" end="7326" title="German Army (German Empire)" label="Imperial German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q153858" start="7334" end="7354" title="Battle of Tannenberg (1914)" label="Battle of Tannenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q477392" start="7405" end="7429" title="East Prussian plebiscite" label="East Prussian plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="7545" end="7557" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="7576" end="7582" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166786" start="7700" end="7709" title="overprint" label="overprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q165717" start="7950" end="7957" title="Pfennig" label="Pfennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281830" start="7964" end="7969" title="Mark (money)" label="Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9175582" start="8116" end="8129" title="Bogumił Linka" label="Bogumił Linka"/>
<link wikidata="Q953181" start="8215" end="8223" title="Szczytno" label="Szczytno"/>
<link wikidata="Q815834" start="8227" end="8234" title="Masuria" label="Masuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374349" start="8447" end="8458" title="Royal Irish Regiment (1684–1922)" label="Royal Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="8609" end="8624" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995166" start="8692" end="8731" title="Polish Scouting and Guiding Association" label="Polish Scouting and Guiding Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q318833" start="8733" end="8758" title="Union of Poles in Germany" label="Union of Poles in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="8924" end="8928" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="8929" end="8945" title="Machtergreifung" label="seizure of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="8968" end="8972" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="9037" end="9046" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q320947" start="9246" end="9270" title="SV Hindenburg Allenstein" label="SV Hindenburg Allenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q318833" start="9418" end="9443" title="Union of Poles in Germany" label="Union of Poles in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="9684" end="9691" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="9832" end="9843" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="10200" end="10215" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppe V"/>
<link wikidata="Q123511" start="10297" end="10306" title="Grudziądz" label="Grudziądz"/>
<link wikidata="Q983868" start="10308" end="10313" title="Mława" label="Mława"/>
<link wikidata="Q745051" start="10315" end="10324" title="Ciechanów" label="Ciechanów"/>
<link wikidata="Q215633" start="10326" end="10331" title="Łomża" label="Łomża"/>
<link wikidata="Q319813" start="10336" end="10343" title="Siedlce" label="Siedlce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983410" start="10363" end="10387" title="Nazi crimes against the Polish nation" label="atrocities against Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="10406" end="10424" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10436" end="10448" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="10639" end="10654" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q589298" start="10956" end="10971" title="editor-in-chief" label="editor-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q159483" start="11178" end="11208" title="Ravensbrück concentration camp" label="Ravensbrück concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q207978" start="11234" end="11240" title="Consul (representative)" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q513698" start="11344" end="11350" title="Soldau concentration camp" label="Soldau"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="11428" end="11453" title="Dachau concentration camp" label="Dachau concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="11475" end="11488" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q689690" start="11627" end="11638" title="Wehrkreis I" label="Wehrkreis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q841356" start="11724" end="11730" title="Lötzen" label="Lötzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q745051" start="11750" end="11759" title="Ciechanów" label="Ciechanów"/>
<link wikidata="Q154494" start="11801" end="11810" title="Aktion T4" label="Aktion T4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="11818" end="11830" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q31896" start="11841" end="11860" title="Nazi human experimentation" label="medical experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q11044638" start="11936" end="11943" title="Kortowo" label="Kortowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12087" end="12093" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="12094" end="12102" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379380" start="12138" end="12142" title="Evacuation of East Prussia" label="fled"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12397" end="12411" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="12748" end="12766" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837151" start="12789" end="12829" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans from Poland during and after World War II" label="remaining German population was expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q277476" start="12853" end="12870" title="Potsdam Agreement" label="Potsdam Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322583" start="12981" end="12988" title="Vilnius Region" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="12990" end="12996" title="Grodno" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="13001" end="13009" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="13065" end="13071" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q22796" start="13088" end="13097" title="Destruction of Warsaw" label="destroyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="13246" end="13251" title="match" label="match"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677003" start="13454" end="13462" title="Michelin Polska" label="Michelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="13602" end="13630" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="13705" end="13716" title="planetarium" label="planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="13849" end="13866" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733433" start="13897" end="13939" title="University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn" label="University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q54184" start="14061" end="14089" title="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship" label="Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q259995" start="14124" end="14143" title="Olsztyn Voivodeship" label="Olsztyn Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386527" start="14172" end="14186" title="Olsztyn Castle" label="Olsztyn Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q506218" start="15021" end="15047" title="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia" label="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="15090" end="15106" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="15117" end="15142" title="State of the Teutonic Order" label="Monastic State in Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33570" start="15226" end="15244" title="Battle of Grunwald" label="Battle of Grunwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q315921" start="15303" end="15337" title="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–66)" label="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–66)"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="15581" end="15600" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358292" start="15777" end="15795" title="Johannes Dantiscus" label="Johannes Dantiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366558" start="15808" end="15817" title="Sarmatism" label="Sarmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q66649" start="15909" end="15922" title="Marcin Kromer" label="Marcin Kromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q380545" start="16261" end="16276" title="Ignacy Krasicki" label="Ignacy Krasicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="16310" end="16318" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="16351" end="16376" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q322620" start="17001" end="17007" title="Warmia" label="Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q815834" start="17012" end="17019" title="Masuria" label="Masuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="17244" end="17248" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="17317" end="17325" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383476" start="17428" end="17450" title="Teodor Andrzej Potocki" label="Teodor Andrzej Potocki"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="18599" end="18612" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="18925" end="18949" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="Nazi concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="18968" end="18977" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="19084" end="19090" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q76730" start="19228" end="19244" title="Erich Mendelsohn" label="Erich Mendelsohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9209549" start="19312" end="19328" title="Mendelsohn house" label="Mendelsohn house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="19423" end="19432" title="Socialist" label="Socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="19437" end="19440" title="SPD" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q438913" start="19448" end="19458" title="Hugo Haase" label="Hugo Haase"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="19465" end="19478" title="Impressionist" label="Impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19975" end="19980" title=":pl:Mszar" label="Mszar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306540" start="19985" end="19994" title="Redykajny" label="Redykajny"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="20232" end="20237" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="20239" end="20242" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q42292" start="20244" end="20249" title="maple" label="maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="20254" end="20258" title="Tilia" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="20444" end="20446" title="hectare" label="ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="20581" end="20596" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="20598" end="20627" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="20670" end="20695" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20870" end="20878" title="Jakubowo, Olsztyn" label="Jakubowo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20880" end="20887" title="Karolin, Olsztyn" label="Karolin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20889" end="20903" title="Kolonia Jaroty" label="Kolonia Jaroty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20905" end="20915" title="Kortowo II" label="Kortowo II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20917" end="20925" title="Łupstych, Olsztyn" label="Łupstych"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20927" end="20937" title="Niedźwiedź, Olsztyn" label="Niedźwiedź"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20939" end="20950" title="Piękna Góra, Olsztyn" label="Piękna Góra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20952" end="20960" title="Podlesie, Olsztyn" label="Podlesie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20962" end="20969" title="Pozorty, Olsztyn" label="Pozorty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20971" end="20992" title="Skarbówka Poszmanówka" label="Skarbówka Poszmanówka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20994" end="21008" title="Słoneczny Stok, Olsztyn" label="Słoneczny Stok"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21010" end="21024" title="Stare Kieźliny" label="Stare Kieźliny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21026" end="21038" title="Stare Miasto, Olsztyn" label="Stare Miasto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21040" end="21052" title="Stare Zalbki" label="Stare Zalbki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21054" end="21064" title="Stary Dwór, Olsztyn" label="Stary Dwór"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21066" end="21071" title="Track, Olsztyn" label="Track"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21161" end="21182" title="Stefan Jaracz Theatre, Olsztyn" label="Stefan Jaracz Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053929" start="21207" end="21246" title="International Theatre Festival DEMOLUDY" label="International Theatre Festival DEMOLUDY"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21249" end="21263" title="Puppet Theatre, Olsztyn" label="Puppet Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705879" start="21283" end="21289" title="Helios (cinemas)" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21292" end="21301" title="Multikino (cinemas)" label="Multikino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21321" end="21348" title="Museum of Warmia and Mazury" label="Museum of Warmia and Mazury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21421" end="21444" title="Gazeta Olsztyńska House" label="Gazeta Olsztyńska House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21498" end="21514" title="Museum of Nature in Olsztyn" label="Museum of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21547" end="21563" title="Museum of Sports in Olsztyn" label="Museum of Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="21810" end="21816" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386527" start="21817" end="21842" title="Olsztyn Castle" label="castle of Warmian Chapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="21890" end="21909" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22076" end="22099" title="Gazeta Olsztyńska House" label="Gazeta Olsztyńska House"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="22308" end="22327" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="22371" end="22378" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="22445" end="22459" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22542" end="22555" title="New City Hall (Olsztyn)" label="New City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9209549" start="22565" end="22588" title="Mendelsohn House" label="Tahara house in Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606161" start="22668" end="22680" title="Stefan Knapp" label="Stefan Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="22705" end="22714" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Neogothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="22852" end="22861" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622841" start="22866" end="22879" title="Stefan Jaracz" label="Stefan Jaracz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170496" start="22898" end="22909" title="Coat of arms of Poland" label="White Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620" start="22947" end="22957" title="Łyna River" label="River Łyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q132911" start="23325" end="23333" title="elevator" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760646" start="23358" end="23390" title="FM- and TV-mast Olsztyn-Pieczewo" label="FM- and TV-mast Olsztyn-Pieczewo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121720" start="23436" end="23453" title="Warsaw radio mast" label="Warsaw radio mast"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="23479" end="23485" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677003" start="23574" end="23589" title="Michelin Polska" label="Michelin Polska"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="23590" end="23594" title="tire" label="tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="23704" end="23714" title="Industry (economics)" label="industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="23719" end="23734" title="food processing" label="food processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="23973" end="23988" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="24031" end="24041" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="24122" end="24138" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="24346" end="24352" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="24354" end="24360" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="24362" end="24368" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="24370" end="24378" title="Szczecin" label="Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="24380" end="24386" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="24388" end="24397" title="Bydgoszcz" label="Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="24399" end="24408" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="24410" end="24417" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="24419" end="24423" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q47554" start="24425" end="24430" title="Toruń" label="Toruń"/>
<link wikidata="Q104712" start="24475" end="24481" title="Elbląg" label="Elbląg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8194" start="24483" end="24488" title="Iława" label="Iława"/>
<link wikidata="Q983720" start="24490" end="24499" title="Działdowo" label="Działdowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61480" start="24504" end="24507" title="Ełk" label="Ełk"/>
<link wikidata="Q801295" start="24509" end="24523" title="Olsztyn Główny railway station" label="Olsztyn Główny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="25047" end="25051" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="25201" end="25207" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q780281" start="25234" end="25241" title="Solaris Tramino" label="Tramino"/>
<link wikidata="Q838369" start="25266" end="25273" title="Solaris Bus &amp;amp; Coach" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25399" end="25408" title="Durmazlar Holding" label="Durmazlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432944" start="25508" end="25530" title="Olsztyn-Mazury Airport" label="Olsztyn-Mazury Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7665046" start="25596" end="25603" title="Szymany, Szczytno County" label="Szymany"/>
<link wikidata="Q953181" start="25615" end="25623" title="Szczytno" label="Szczytno"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="25696" end="25702" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295" start="25704" end="25712" title="Dortmund" label="Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="25714" end="25720" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q598" start="25745" end="25752" title="Rzeszów" label="Rzeszów"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="25757" end="25764" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733433" start="25786" end="25828" title="University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn" label="University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785726" start="25831" end="25849" title="Masurian Institute" label="Masurian Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028313" start="25879" end="25899" title="AZS UWM Olsztyn" label="Indykpol AZS Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814346" start="25902" end="25923" title="Volleyball in Poland" label="men&amp;#x27;s volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067442" start="25944" end="25997" title="Polish Volleyball League" label="Polish Volleyball League (PLS, Polska Liga Siatkówki)"/>
<link wikidata="Q651966" start="26028" end="26042" title="Stomil Olsztyn (football)" label="Stomil Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888210" start="26056" end="26064" title="Football in Poland" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q44763" start="26120" end="26131" title="Ekstraklasa" label="Ekstraklasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647307" start="26198" end="26206" title="Handball in Poland" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345484" start="26266" end="26275" title="Polish Superliga (men&amp;#x27;s handball)" label="Superliga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26480" end="26505" title="AZS UWM Trójeczka Olsztyn" label="AZS UWM Trójeczka Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499047" start="26519" end="26529" title="Basketball in Poland" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26573" end="26585" title="WMPD Olsztyn" label="WMPD Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26648" end="26665" title="Budowlani Olsztyn" label="Budowlani Olsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14436702" start="26687" end="26705" title="Joanna Jędrzejczyk" label="Joanna Jędrzejczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q345556" start="26800" end="26816" title="Łukasz Gikiewicz" label="Łukasz Gikiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282431" start="26850" end="26865" title="Rafał Gikiewicz" label="Rafał Gikiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q721552" start="26899" end="26910" title="Filip Kurto" label="Filip Kurto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854433" start="26988" end="27019" title="Memorial of Hubert Jerzy Wagner" label="Memorial of Hubert Jerzy Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11777237" start="27108" end="27112" title="2008 Memorial of Hubert Jerzy Wagner" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q549121" start="27118" end="27133" title="Tour de Pologne" label="Tour de Pologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q635366" start="27142" end="27156" title="UCI World Tour" label="UCI World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q935140" start="27222" end="27226" title="2008 Tour de Pologne" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="27273" end="27277" title="Sejm of the Republic of Poland" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843581" start="27324" end="27347" title="Mieczysław Aszkiełowicz" label="Mieczysław Aszkiełowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128266" start="27349" end="27426" title="Self-Defense of the Republic of Poland" label="Self-Defense of the Republic of Poland (Samoobrona Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877005" start="27429" end="27444" title="Beata Bublewicz" label="Beata Bublewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q156868" start="27446" end="27488" title="Civic Platform" label="Civic Platform (PO, Platforma Obywatelska)"/>
<link wikidata="Q327439" start="27491" end="27506" title="Jerzy Gosiewski" label="Jerzy Gosiewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="27508" end="27553" title="Law and Justice (Poland)" label="Law and Justice (PiS, Prawo i Sprawiedliwość)"/>
<link wikidata="Q376871" start="27556" end="27571" title="Tadeusz Iwiński" label="Tadeusz Iwiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q953174" start="27573" end="27633" title="Democratic Left Alliance (Poland)" label="Democratic Left Alliance (SLD, Sojusz Lewicy Demokratycznej)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344718" start="27636" end="27647" title="Edward Ośko" label="Edward Ośko"/>
<link wikidata="Q687574" start="27649" end="27702" title="League of Polish Families" label="League of Polish Families (LPR, Liga Polskich Rodzin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679638" start="27705" end="27714" title="Adam Puza" label="Adam Puza"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="27716" end="27761" title="Law and Justice (Poland)" label="Law and Justice (PiS, Prawo i Sprawiedliwość)"/>
<link wikidata="Q461364" start="27764" end="27780" title="Sławomir Rybicki" label="Sławomir Rybicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q156868" start="27782" end="27824" title="Civic Platform" label="Civic Platform (PO, Platforma Obywatelska)"/>
<link wikidata="Q434015" start="27827" end="27839" title="Lidia Staroń" label="Lidia Staroń"/>
<link wikidata="Q156868" start="27841" end="27883" title="Civic Platform" label="Civic Platform (PO, Platforma Obywatelska)"/>
<link wikidata="Q734755" start="27886" end="27911" title="Aleksander Szczygło" label="Aleksander Marek Szczygło"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="27913" end="27958" title="Law and Justice (Poland)" label="Law and Justice (PiS, Prawo i Sprawiedliwość)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067774" start="27961" end="27980" title="Zbigniew Włodkowski" label="Zbigniew Włodkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q218477" start="27982" end="28036" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Polish Peasant Party (PSL, Polskie Stronnictwo Ludowe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q98975" start="28049" end="28055" title="Senate of the Republic of Poland" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28102" end="28123" title="Ryszard Józef Górecki" label="Ryszard Józef Górecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q156868" start="28125" end="28167" title="Civic Platform" label="Civic Platform (PO, Platforma Obywatelska)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28170" end="28181" title="Jerzy Szmit" label="Jerzy Szmit"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="28183" end="28228" title="Law and Justice (Poland)" label="Law and Justice (PiS, Prawo i Sprawiedliwość)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217125" start="28253" end="28272" title="Johannes von Leysen" label="Johannes von Leysen"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="28311" end="28330" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108976" start="28392" end="28411" title="Johannes Knolleisen" label="Johannes Knolleisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q70346" start="28473" end="28484" title="Lucas David" label="Lucas David"/>
<link wikidata="Q66649" start="28528" end="28541" title="Marcin Kromer" label="Marcin Kromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q588346" start="28658" end="28670" title="Antoni Blank" label="Antoni Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q438913" start="28701" end="28711" title="Hugo Haase" label="Hugo Haase"/>
<link wikidata="Q95922" start="28773" end="28795" title="Franz Justus Rarkowski" label="Franz Justus Rarkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114479" start="28839" end="28851" title="Prussica-Sammlung Trunz" label="August Trunz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114479" start="28880" end="28903" title="Prussica-Sammlung Trunz" label="Prussica-Sammlung Trunz"/>
<link wikidata="Q765533" start="28906" end="28924" title="Feliks Nowowiejski" label="Feliks Nowowiejski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1914001" start="28985" end="29002" title="Maximilian Kaller" label="Maximilian Kaller"/>
<link wikidata="Q506218" start="29041" end="29048" title="Bishopric of Ermland" label="Ermland"/>
<link wikidata="Q76730" start="29064" end="29080" title="Erich Mendelsohn" label="Erich Mendelsohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q88107" start="29139" end="29151" title="Olga Desmond" label="Olga Desmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q123150563" start="29193" end="29219" title="Hermann Dohna-Finckenstein" label="Hermann Dohna-Finckenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q62692" start="29270" end="29281" title="Günter Wand" label="Günter Wand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793366" start="29314" end="29326" title="Kurt Baluses" label="Kurt Baluses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609005" start="29383" end="29407" title="Herbert Schachtschneider" label="Herbert Schachtschneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q67517" start="29445" end="29468" title="Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski" label="Hans-Jürgen Wischnewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q75760" start="29502" end="29513" title="Curt Lowens" label="Curt Lowens"/>
<link wikidata="Q316677" start="29542" end="29555" title="Leonhard Pohl" label="Leonhard Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q365238" start="29586" end="29597" title="Józef Glemp" label="Józef Glemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q99722" start="29656" end="29668" title="Jörg Kuebart" label="Jörg Kuebart"/>
<link wikidata="Q84829" start="29722" end="29737" title="Karl-Heinz Hopp" label="Karl-Heinz Hopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="29783" end="29803" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q66216" start="29806" end="29819" title="Wolf Lepenies" label="Wolf Lepenies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059627" start="29886" end="29910" title="Eugeniusz Geno Malkowski" label="Eugeniusz Geno Malkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476671" start="29962" end="29976" title="Ulrich Schrade" label="Ulrich Schrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097621" start="30032" end="30048" title="Marian Bublewicz" label="Marian Bublewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349134" start="30116" end="30133" title="Juliusz Machulski" label="Juliusz Machulski"/>
<link wikidata="Q461879" start="30170" end="30189" title="Izabela Trojanowska" label="Izabela Trojanowska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4759596" start="30231" end="30246" title="Andrzej Friszke" label="Andrzej Friszke"/>
<link wikidata="Q717224" start="30279" end="30298" title="Krzysztof Hołowczyc" label="Krzysztof Hołowczyc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465087" start="30334" end="30367" title="Piotr &amp;quot;Peter&amp;quot; Wiwczarek" label="Piotr &amp;quot;Peter&amp;quot; Wiwczarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q483251" start="30433" end="30444" title="death metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q622982" start="30450" end="30455" title="Vader (band)" label="Vader"/>
<link wikidata="Q277049" start="30458" end="30470" title="Artur Wojdat" label="Artur Wojdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9253145" start="30494" end="30512" title="Elżbieta Jabłońska" label="Elżbieta Jabłońska"/>
<link wikidata="Q347936" start="30577" end="30591" title="Mamed Khalidov" label="Mamed Khalidov"/>
<link wikidata="Q8029118" start="30643" end="30657" title="Wojciech Grzyb" label="Wojciech Grzyb"/>
<link wikidata="Q512974" start="30698" end="30711" title="Julia Marcell" label="Julia Marcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q511658" start="30764" end="30783" title="Małgorzata Jasińska" label="Małgorzata Jasińska"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836069" start="30835" end="30856" title="Michał Trzeciakiewicz" label="Michał Trzeciakiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q123232" start="30898" end="30914" title="Marcin Możdżonek" label="Marcin Możdżonek"/>
<link wikidata="Q47091" start="30948" end="30967" title="Adrian Mierzejewski" label="Adrian Mierzejewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q345556" start="31001" end="31017" title="Łukasz Gikiewicz" label="Łukasz Gikiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282431" start="31051" end="31066" title="Rafał Gikiewicz" label="Rafał Gikiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14436702" start="31100" end="31118" title="Joanna Jędrzejczyk" label="Joanna Jędrzejczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273217" start="31206" end="31222" title="Paweł Dawidowicz" label="Paweł Dawidowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16530336" start="31256" end="31269" title="Artur Szalpuk" label="Artur Szalpuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q18417968" start="31309" end="31328" title="2018 FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="2018 World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="31410" end="31417" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="31419" end="31426" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="31431" end="31440" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="31501" end="31508" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="31603" end="31613" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="31640" end="31647" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q497115" start="31649" end="31657" title="Frombork" label="Frombork"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="31659" end="31665" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q47554" start="31671" end="31676" title="Toruń" label="Toruń"/>
<link wikidata="Q274153" start="31831" end="31842" title="water tower" label="water tower"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="44816" wikidata="Q181839" url="?curid=44816" title="Pragmatics">
<text>In linguistics and related fields, pragmatics is the study of how context contributes to meaning. The field of study evaluates how human language is utilized in social interactions, as well as the relationship between the interpreter and the interpreted. Linguists who specialize in pragmatics are called pragmaticians. The field has been represented since 1986 by the International Pragmatics Association (IPrA).

Pragmatics encompasses phenomena including implicature, speech acts, relevance and conversation, as well as nonverbal communication. Theories of pragmatics go hand-in-hand with theories of semantics, which studies aspects of meaning, and syntax, which examines sentence structures, principles, and relationships. The ability to understand another speaker&#x27;s intended meaning is called &quot;pragmatic competence&quot;. In 1938, Charles Morris first distinguished pragmatics as an independent subfield within semiotics, alongside syntax and semantics. Pragmatics emerged as its own subfield in the 1950s after the pioneering work of J. L. Austin and Paul Grice.

==Origin of the field==

Pragmatics was a reaction to structuralist linguistics as outlined by Ferdinand de Saussure. In many cases, it expanded upon his idea that language has an analyzable structure, composed of parts that can be defined in relation to others. Pragmatics first engaged only in synchronic study, as opposed to examining the historical development of language. However, it rejected the notion that all meaning comes from signs existing purely in the abstract space of &quot;langue&quot;. Meanwhile, historical pragmatics has also come into being. The field did not gain linguists&#x27; attention until the 1970s, when two different schools emerged: the Anglo-American pragmatic thought and the European continental pragmatic thought (also called the perspective view).

==Areas of interest==

* The study of the speaker&#x27;s meaning focusing not on the phonetic or grammatical form of an utterance but on what the speaker&#x27;s intentions and beliefs are.
* The study of the meaning in context and the influence that a given context can have on the message. It requires knowledge of the speaker&#x27;s identities, and the place and time of the utterance.
* The study of implicatures: the things that are communicated even though they are not explicitly expressed.
* The study of relative distance, both social and physical, between speakers in order to understand what determines the choice of what is said and what is not said.
* The study of what is not meant, as opposed to the intended meaning: what is unsaid and unintended, or unintentional.
* Information structure, the study of how utterances are marked in order to efficiently manage the common ground of referred entities between speaker and hearer. 
* Formal Pragmatics, the study of those aspects of meaning and use for which context of use is an important factor by using the methods and goals of formal semantics.
*The study of the role of pragmatics in the development of children with autism spectrum disorders or developmental language disorder (DLD).

==Ambiguity==

Ambiguity refers to when it is difficult to infer meaning without knowing the context, the identity of the speaker or the speaker&#x27;s intent. For example, the sentence &quot;You have a green light&quot; is ambiguous, as without knowing the context, one could reasonably interpret it as meaning:
* the space that belongs to you has green ambient lighting;
* you are driving through a green traffic signal;
* you no longer have to wait to continue driving;
* you are permitted to proceed in a non-driving context;
* your body is cast in a greenish glow;
* you possess a light source which radiates green; or
* you possess a light with a green surface.

Another example of an ambiguous sentence is, &quot;I went to the bank.&quot; This is an example of lexical ambiguity, as the word bank can either be in reference to a place where money is kept, or the edge of a river. To understand what the speaker is truly saying, it is a matter of context, which is why it is pragmatically ambiguous as well.

Similarly, the sentence &quot;Sherlock saw the man with binoculars&quot; could mean that Sherlock observed the man by using binoculars, or it could mean that Sherlock observed a man who was holding binoculars (&quot;syntactic ambiguity&quot;). The meaning of the sentence depends on an understanding of the context and the speaker&#x27;s intent. As defined in linguistics, a sentence is an abstract entity: a string of words divorced from non-linguistic context, as opposed to an utterance, which is a concrete example of a speech act in a specific context. The more closely conscious subjects stick to common words, idioms, phrasings, and topics, the more easily others can surmise their meaning; the further they stray from common expressions and topics, the wider the variations in interpretations. That suggests that sentences do not have intrinsic meaning, that there is no meaning associated with a sentence or word, and that either can represent an idea only symbolically. &quot;The cat sat on the mat&quot; is a sentence in English. If someone were to say to someone else, &quot;The cat sat on the mat&quot;, the act is itself an utterance. That implies that a sentence, term, expression or word cannot symbolically represent a single true meaning; such meaning is underspecified (which cat sat on which mat?) and potentially ambiguous. By contrast, the meaning of an utterance can be inferred through knowledge of both its linguistic and non-linguistic contexts (which may or may not be sufficient to resolve ambiguity). In mathematics, with Berry&#x27;s paradox, there arises a similar systematic ambiguity with the word &quot;definable&quot;.

==Referential uses of language==

The referential uses of language are how signs are used to refer to certain items. A sign is the link or relationship between a signified and the signifier as defined by de Saussure and Jean-René Huguenin. The signified is some entity or concept in the world. The signifier represents the signified. An example would be:

:&quot;Signified: the concept cat&quot;
:&quot;Signifier: the word &quot;cat&quot;&quot;

The relationship between the two gives the sign meaning. The relationship can be explained further by considering what is meant by &quot;meaning.&quot; In pragmatics, there are two different types of meaning to consider: semantic-referential meaning and indexical meaning. Semantic-referential meaning refers to the aspect of meaning, which describes events in the world that are independent of the circumstance they are uttered in. An example would be propositions such as:

:&quot;Santa Claus eats cookies.&quot;

In this case, the proposition is describing that Santa Claus eats cookies. The meaning of the proposition does not rely on whether or not Santa Claus is eating cookies at the time of its utterance. Santa Claus could be eating cookies at any time and the meaning of the proposition would remain the same. The meaning is simply describing something that is the case in the world. In contrast, the proposition, &quot;Santa Claus is eating a cookie right now&quot;, describes events that are happening at the time the proposition is uttered.

Semantic-referential meaning is also present in meta-semantical statements such as:

:&quot;Tiger: carnivorous, a mammal&quot;

If someone were to say that a tiger is a carnivorous animal in one context and a mammal in another, the definition of tiger would still be the same. The meaning of the sign tiger is describing some animal in the world, which does not change in either circumstance.

Indexical meaning, on the other hand, is dependent on the context of the utterance and has rules of use. By rules of use, it is meant that indexicals can tell when they are used, but not what they actually mean.

:&quot;Example&quot;: &quot;I&quot;

Whom &quot;I&quot; refers to, depends on the context and the person uttering it.

As mentioned, these meanings are brought about through the relationship between the signified and the signifier. One way to define the relationship is by placing signs in two categories: referential indexical signs, also called &quot;shifters&quot;, and pure indexical signs.

Referential indexical signs are signs where the meaning shifts depending on the context hence the nickname &quot;shifters.&quot; &#x27;I&#x27; would be considered a referential indexical sign. The referential aspect of its meaning would be &#x27;1st person singular&#x27; while the indexical aspect would be the person who is speaking (refer above for definitions of semantic-referential and indexical meaning). Another example would be:

:&quot;This&quot;
:&quot;Referential: singular count&quot;
:&quot;Indexical: Close by&quot;

A pure indexical sign does not contribute to the meaning of the propositions at all. It is an example of a &quot;non-referential use of language.&quot;

A second way to define the signified and signifier relationship is C.S. Peirce&#x27;s Peircean Trichotomy. The components of the trichotomy are the following:

:1. Icon: the signified resembles the signifier (signified: a dog&#x27;s barking noise, signifier: bow-wow)
:2. Index: the signified and signifier are linked by proximity or the signifier has meaning only because it is pointing to the signified
:3. Symbol: the signified and signifier are arbitrarily linked (signified: a cat, signifier: the word cat)

These relationships allow signs to be used to convey intended meaning. If two people were in a room and one of them wanted to refer to a characteristic of a chair in the room he would say &quot;this chair has four legs&quot; instead of &quot;a chair has four legs.&quot; The former relies on context (indexical and referential meaning) by referring to a chair specifically in the room at that moment while the latter is independent of the context (semantico-referential meaning), meaning the concept chair.

=== Referential expressions in conversation ===
Referring to things and people is a common feature of conversation, and conversants do so collaboratively. Individuals engaging in discourse utilize pragmatics. In addition, individuals within the scope of discourse cannot help but avoid intuitive use of certain utterances or word choices in an effort to create communicative success. The study of referential language is heavily focused upon definite descriptions and referent accessibility. Theories have been presented for why direct referent descriptions occur in discourse. (In layman&#x27;s terms: why reiteration of certain names, places, or individuals involved or as a topic of the conversation at hand are repeated more than one would think necessary.) Four factors are widely accepted for the use of referent language including (i) competition with a possible referent, (ii) salience of the referent in the context of discussion (iii) an effort for unity of the parties involved, and finally, (iv) a blatant presence of distance from the last referent.

Referential expressions are a form of anaphora. They are also a means of connecting past and present thoughts together to create context for information at hand. Analyzing the context of a sentence and determining whether or not the use of referent expression is necessary is highly reliant upon the author/speaker&#x27;s digression- and is correlated strongly with the use of pragmatic competency.

==Nonreferential uses of language==
===Silverstein&#x27;s &quot;Pure&quot; Indexes===
Michael Silverstein has argued that &quot;nonreferential&quot; or &quot;pure&quot; indices do not contribute to an utterance&#x27;s referential meaning but instead &quot;signal some particular value of one or more contextual variables.&quot; Although nonreferential indexes are devoid of semantico-referential meaning, they do encode &quot;pragmatic&quot; meaning.

The sorts of contexts that such indexes can mark are varied. Examples include:
* Sex indexes are affixes or inflections that index the sex of the speaker, e.g. the verb forms of female Koasati speakers take the suffix &quot;-s&quot;.
* Deference indexes are words that signal social differences (usually related to status or age) between the speaker and the addressee. The most common example of a deference index is the V form in a language with a T–V distinction, the widespread phenomenon in which there are multiple second-person pronouns that correspond to the addressee&#x27;s relative status or familiarity to the speaker. Honorifics are another common form of deference index and demonstrate the speaker&#x27;s respect or esteem for the addressee via special forms of address and/or self-humbling first-person pronouns.
* An Affinal taboo index is an example of avoidance speech that produces and reinforces sociological distance, as seen in the Aboriginal Dyirbal language of Australia. In that language and some others, there is a social taboo against the use of the everyday lexicon in the presence of certain relatives (mother-in-law, child-in-law, paternal aunt&#x27;s child, and maternal uncle&#x27;s child). If any of those relatives are present, a Dyirbal speaker has to switch to a completely separate lexicon reserved for that purpose.

In all of these cases, the semantico-referential meaning of the utterances is unchanged from that of the other possible (but often impermissible) forms, but the pragmatic meaning is vastly different.

===The performative===
J. L. Austin introduced the concept of the performative, contrasted in his writing with &quot;constative&quot; (i.e. descriptive) utterances. According to Austin&#x27;s original formulation, a performative is a type of utterance characterized by two distinctive features:
* It is not truth-evaluable (i.e. it is neither true nor false)
* Its uttering &quot;performs&quot; an action rather than simply describing one

Examples:
* &quot;I hereby pronounce you man and wife.&quot;
* &quot;I accept your apology.&quot;
* &quot;This meeting is now adjourned.&quot;

To be performative, an utterance must conform to various conditions involving what Austin calls felicity. These deal with things like appropriate context and the speaker&#x27;s authority. For instance, when a couple has been arguing and the husband says to his wife that he accepts her apology even though she has offered nothing approaching an apology, his assertion is infelicitous: because she has made neither expression of regret nor request for forgiveness, there exists none to accept, and thus no act of accepting can possibly happen.

===Jakobson&#x27;s six functions of language===
Roman Jakobson, expanding on the work of Karl Bühler, described six &quot;constitutive factors&quot; of a speech event, each of which represents the privileging of a corresponding function, and only one of which is the referential (which corresponds to the context of the speech event). The six constitutive factors and their corresponding functions are diagrammed below.

The six constitutive factors of a speech event

:::Context
:::Message
Addresser --------------------- Addressee
:::Contact
:::Code

The six functions of language

:::Referential
:::Poetic
Emotive ----------------------- Conative
:::Phatic
:::Metalingual
* The Referential Function corresponds to the factor of Context and describes a situation, object or mental state. The descriptive statements of the referential function can consist of both definite descriptions and deictic words, e.g. &quot;The autumn leaves have all fallen now.&quot;
* The Expressive (alternatively called &quot;emotive&quot; or &quot;affective&quot;) Function relates to the Addresser and is best exemplified by interjections and other sound changes that do not alter the denotative meaning of an utterance but do add information about the Addresser&#x27;s (speaker&#x27;s) internal state, e.g. &quot;Wow, what a view!&quot;
* The Conative Function engages the Addressee directly and is best illustrated by vocatives and imperatives, e.g. &quot;Tom! Come inside and eat!&quot;
* The Poetic Function focuses on &quot;the message for its own sake&quot; and is the operative function in poetry as well as slogans.
* The Phatic Function is language for the sake of interaction and is therefore associated with the Contact factor. The Phatic Function can be observed in greetings and casual discussions of the weather, particularly with strangers.
* The Metalingual (alternatively called &quot;metalinguistic&quot; or &quot;reflexive&quot;) Function is the use of language (what Jakobson calls &quot;Code&quot;) to discuss or describe itself.

==Related fields==
There is considerable overlap between pragmatics and sociolinguistics, since both share an interest in linguistic meaning as determined by usage in a speech community. However, sociolinguists tend to be more interested in variations in language within such communities. Influences of philosophy and politics are also present in the field of pragmatics, as the dynamics of societies and oppression are expressed through language 

Pragmatics helps anthropologists relate elements of language to broader social phenomena; it thus pervades the field of linguistic anthropology. Because pragmatics describes generally the forces in play for a given utterance, it includes the study of power, gender, race, identity, and their interactions with individual speech acts. For example, the study of code switching directly relates to pragmatics, since a switch in code effects a shift in pragmatic force.

According to Charles W. Morris, pragmatics tries to understand the relationship between signs and their users, while semantics tends to focus on the actual objects or ideas to which a word refers, and syntax (or &quot;syntactics&quot;) examines relationships among signs or symbols. Semantics is the literal meaning of an idea whereas pragmatics is the implied meaning of the given idea.

Speech Act Theory, pioneered by J. L. Austin and further developed by John Searle, centers around the idea of the performative, a type of utterance that performs the very action it describes. Speech Act Theory&#x27;s examination of Illocutionary Acts has many of the same goals as pragmatics, as outlined above.

Computational Pragmatics, as defined by Victoria Fromkin, concerns how humans can communicate their intentions to computers with as little ambiguity as possible. That process, integral to the science of natural language processing (seen as a sub-discipline of artificial intelligence), involves providing a computer system with some database of knowledge related to a topic and a series of algorithms, which control how the system responds to incoming data, using contextual knowledge to more accurately approximate natural human language and information processing abilities. Reference resolution, how a computer determines when two objects are different or not, is one of the most important tasks of computational pragmatics.

==Formalization==
There has been a great amount of discussion on the boundary between semantics and pragmatics and there are many different formalizations of aspects of pragmatics linked to context dependence. Particularly interesting cases are the discussions on the semantics of indexicals and the problem of referential descriptions, a topic developed after the theories of Keith Donnellan. A proper logical theory of formal pragmatics has been developed by Carlo Dalla Pozza, according to which it is possible to connect classical semantics (treating propositional contents as true or false) and intuitionistic semantics (dealing with illocutionary forces). The presentation of a formal treatment of pragmatics appears to be a development of the Fregean idea of assertion sign as formal sign of the act of assertion.

=== Rational Speech Act and Probabilistic Pragmatics ===
Over the past decade, many probabilistic and Bayesian methods have become very popular in the modelling of pragmatics, of which the most successful framework has been the Rational Speech Act framework developed by Noah Goodman and Michael C. Frank, which has already seen much use in the analysis of metaphor, hyperbole and politeness. In the Rational Speech Act, listeners and speakers both reason about the other&#x27;s reasoning concerning the literal meaning of the utterances, and as such, the resulting interpretation depends, but is not necessarily determined by the literal truth conditional meaning of an utterance, and so it uses recursive reasoning to pursue a broadly Gricean co-operative ideal.

In the most basic form of the Rational Speech Act, there are three levels of inference; Beginning from the highest level, the pragmatic listener formula_1 will reason about the pragmatic speaker formula_2, and will then infer the likely world state formula_3 taking into account that formula_2 has deliberately chosen to produce utterance formula_5, while formula_2 chooses to produce utterance formula_5 by reasoning about how the literal listener formula_8 will understand the literal meaning of formula_5 and so will attempt to maximise the chances that formula_8 will correctly infer the world state formula_3. As such, a simple schema of the Rational Speech Act reasoning hierarchy can be formulated for use in a reference game such that:

formula_12

==In literary theory==
Pragmatics (more specifically, Speech Act Theory&#x27;s notion of the performative) underpins Judith Butler&#x27;s theory of gender performativity. In &quot;Gender Trouble&quot;, they claim that gender and sex are not natural categories, but socially constructed roles produced by &quot;reiterative acting.&quot;

In &quot;Excitable Speech&quot; they extend
their theory of performativity to hate speech and censorship, arguing that censorship necessarily strengthens any discourse it tries to suppress and therefore, since the state has sole power to define hate speech legally, it is the state that makes hate speech performative.

Jacques Derrida remarked that some work done under Pragmatics aligned well with the program he outlined in his book &quot;Of Grammatology&quot;.

Émile Benveniste argued that the pronouns &quot;I&quot; and &quot;you&quot; are fundamentally distinct from other pronouns because of their role in creating the subject.

Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari discuss linguistic pragmatics in the fourth chapter of &quot;A Thousand Plateaus&quot; (&quot;November 20, 1923--Postulates of Linguistics&quot;). They draw three conclusions from Austin: (1) A performative utterance does not communicate information about an act second-hand, but it is the act; (2) Every aspect of language (&quot;semantics, syntactics, or even phonematics&quot;) functionally interacts with pragmatics; (3) There is no distinction between language and speech. This last conclusion attempts to refute Saussure&#x27;s division between &quot;langue&quot; and &quot;parole&quot; and Chomsky&#x27;s distinction between deep structure and surface structure simultaneously.

==Significant works and concepts==
* J. L. Austin&#x27;s &quot;How To Do Things With Words&quot;
* Paul Grice&#x27;s cooperative principle and conversational maxims
* Brown and Levinson&#x27;s politeness theory
* Geoffrey Leech&#x27;s politeness maxims
*Levinson&#x27;s presumptive meanings
* Jürgen Habermas&#x27;s universal pragmatics
* Dan Sperber and Deirdre Wilson&#x27;s relevance theory
* Dallin D. Oaks&#x27;s &quot;Structural Ambiguity in English: An Applied Grammatical Inventory&quot;
* Vonk, Hustinx, and Simon&#x27;s 1992 journal article &quot;The use of referential expressions in structuring discourse&quot;
* Nancy Bauer&#x27;s &quot;How To Do Things With Pornography&quot;
* Piotr Gmytrasiewicz, &quot;How to Do Things with Words: A Bayesian Approach&quot;, https://www.jair.org/index.php/jair/article/view/11951/26599.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Notes==
==References==
* Austin, J. L. (1962) &quot;How to Do Things With Words&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Ariel, Mira (2008), &quot;Pragmatics and Grammar&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Brown, Penelope, and Stephen C. Levinson. (1978) &quot;Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Carston, Robyn (2002) &quot;Thoughts and Utterances: The Pragmatics of Explicit Communication&quot;. Oxford: Blackwell.
* Clark, Herbert H. (1996) &quot;Using Language&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Cole, Peter, ed.. (1978) &quot;Pragmatics&quot;. (Syntax and Semantics, 9). New York: Academic Press.
* Dijk, Teun A. van. (1977) &quot;Text and Context. Explorations in the Semantics and Pragmatics of Discourse&quot;. London: Longman.
* Grice, H. Paul. (1989) &quot;Studies in the Way of Words&quot;. Cambridge (MA): Harvard University Press.
* Laurence R. Horn and Gregory Ward. (2005) &quot;The Handbook of Pragmatics&quot;. Blackwell.
* Leech, Geoffrey N. (1983) &quot;Principles of Pragmatics&quot;. London: Longman.
* Levinson, Stephen C. (1983) &quot;Pragmatics&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Levinson, Stephen C. (2000). Presumptive meanings: The theory of generalized conversational implicature. MIT Press.
* Moumni, Hassan (2005). Politeness in Parliamentary Discourse : A Comparative Pragmatic Study of British and Moroccan MPs’ Speech Acts at Question Time. Unpub. Ph.D. Thesis. Mohammed V University, Rabat, Morocco.
*Mey, Jacob L. (1993) &quot;Pragmatics: An Introduction&quot;. Oxford: Blackwell (2nd ed. 2001).
* Potts, Christopher. (2005) &quot;The Logic of Conventional Implicatures&quot;. Oxford Studies in Theoretical Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
* Robinson, Douglas. (2003). &quot;Performative Linguistics: Speaking and Translating as Doing Things With Words&quot;. London and New York: Routledge.
* Robinson, Douglas. (2006). &quot;Introducing Performative Pragmatics&quot;. London and New York: Routledge.
* Also available from ucl.ac.uk.
* Thomas, Jenny (1995) &quot;Meaning in Interaction: An Introduction to Pragmatics&quot;. Longman.
* Also available from the Internet Archive.
* Verschueren, Jef, Jan-Ola Östman, Jan Blommaert, eds. (1995) &quot;Handbook of Pragmatics&quot;. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
* Watzlawick, Paul, Janet Helmick Beavin and Don D. Jackson (1967) &quot;Pragmatics of Human Communication: A Study of Interactional Patterns, Pathologies, and Paradoxes&quot;. New York: Norton.
* Wierzbicka, Anna (1991) &quot;Cross-cultural Pragmatics. The Semantics of Human Interaction&quot;. Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
* Yule, George (1996) &quot;Pragmatics&quot; (Oxford Introductions to Language Study). Oxford University Press.
* Silverstein, Michael. 1976. &quot;Shifters, Linguistic Categories, and Cultural Description&quot;, in Meaning and Anthropology, Basso and Selby, eds. New York: Harper &amp; Row
* Wardhaugh, Ronald. (2006). &quot;An Introduction to Sociolinguistics&quot;. Blackwell.
* Duranti, Alessandro. (1997). &quot;Linguistic Anthropology&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Carbaugh, Donal. (1990). &quot;Cultural Communication and Intercultural Contact.&quot; LEA.

==External links==
* Pragmatics, &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;
* Meaning and Context Sensitivity, &quot;Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;
* Journal of Pragmatics
* International Pragmatics Association (IPrA).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="3" end="14" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="35" end="45" title="Pragmatics" label="pragmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q196626" start="66" end="73" title="Context (linguistics)" label="context"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="305" end="318" title="Pragmatics" label="pragmaticians"/>
<link wikidata="Q571227" start="458" end="469" title="implicature" label="implicature"/>
<link wikidata="Q25481968" start="471" end="481" title="speech act" label="speech act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548396" start="484" end="493" title="relevance theory" label="relevance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624720" start="498" end="510" title="Conversation analysis" label="conversation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207125" start="523" end="546" title="nonverbal communication" label="nonverbal communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="604" end="613" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="653" end="659" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="1051" end="1063" title="J. L. Austin" label="J. L. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q311776" start="1068" end="1078" title="Paul Grice" label="Paul Grice"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="1135" end="1148" title="Structuralism" label="structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="1176" end="1197" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1377" end="1387" title="Course in General Linguistics#Synchronic and diachronic axes" label="synchronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="1519" end="1524" title="sign (semiotics)" label="signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774348" start="1597" end="1618" title="historical pragmatics" label="historical pragmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q571227" start="2271" end="2282" title="implicature" label="implicature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031227" start="2651" end="2672" title="Information structure" label="Information structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495618" start="2814" end="2831" title="Formal Pragmatics" label="Formal Pragmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469969" start="2961" end="2977" title="Formal semantics (linguistics)" label="formal semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="3052" end="3077" title="Autism spectrum" label="autism spectrum disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313089" start="3113" end="3119" title="Developmental language disorder" label="(DLD)."/>
<link wikidata="Q2456276" start="4352" end="4371" title="syntactic ambiguity" label="syntactic ambiguity"/>
<link wikidata="Q258403" start="4616" end="4625" title="utterance" label="utterance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25481968" start="4660" end="4670" title="speech act" label="speech act"/>
<link wikidata="Q827144" start="5687" end="5707" title="Berry&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Berry&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="5866" end="5871" title="Sign (semiotics)" label="signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11801374" start="5953" end="5980" title="Sign (semiotics)" label="signified and the signifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="5995" end="6006" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169913" start="6011" end="6029" title="Jean-René Huguenin" label="Jean-René Huguenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661162" start="7686" end="7695" title="Indexical" label="Indexical"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="9047" end="9058" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="C.S. Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q121769" start="10049" end="10058" title="Reference" label="Referring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145523" start="10139" end="10154" title="Collaboration" label="collaboratively"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="10180" end="10189" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q265469" start="10443" end="10463" title="definite description" label="definite description"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404470" start="10886" end="10894" title="salience (language)" label="salience"/>
<link wikidata="Q156751" start="11103" end="11112" title="Anaphora (linguistics)" label="anaphora."/>
<link wikidata="Q4391924" start="11551" end="11570" title="Michael Silverstein" label="Michael Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q35162" start="12102" end="12109" title="Koasati language" label="Koasati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124935" start="12366" end="12381" title="T–V distinction" label="T–V distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326966" start="12547" end="12556" title="Honorific" label="Honorific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635861" start="12787" end="12803" title="avoidance speech" label="avoidance speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q35465" start="12882" end="12898" title="Dyirbal language" label="Dyirbal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="13496" end="13508" title="J. L. Austin" label="J. L. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q965415" start="13539" end="13551" title="Performative utterance" label="performative"/>
<link wikidata="Q185521" start="13780" end="13795" title="Truth value" label="truth-evaluable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441813" start="14153" end="14161" title="felicity conditions" label="felicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156201" start="14649" end="14663" title="Roman Jakobson" label="Roman Jakobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q58851" start="14690" end="14701" title="Karl Bühler" label="Karl Bühler"/>
<link wikidata="Q25481968" start="14755" end="14767" title="speech act" label="speech event"/>
<link wikidata="Q340015" start="15492" end="15499" title="deixis" label="deictic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83034" start="15709" end="15722" title="interjections" label="interjections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189753" start="15769" end="15787" title="denotation" label="denotative meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q185077" start="16004" end="16012" title="vocative" label="vocative"/>
<link wikidata="Q22716" start="16018" end="16029" title="imperative mood" label="imperatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q13557517" start="16214" end="16220" title="Phatic" label="Phatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160845" start="16708" end="16724" title="sociolinguistics" label="sociolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="16758" end="16776" title="linguistic meaning" label="linguistic meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="17205" end="17228" title="linguistic anthropology" label="linguistic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q255615" start="17445" end="17459" title="Code-switching" label="code switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q357041" start="17565" end="17582" title="Charles W. Morris" label="Charles W. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="17669" end="17678" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="17753" end="17759" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q25481968" start="17941" end="17958" title="Speech act" label="Speech Act Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="17973" end="17985" title="J. L. Austin" label="J. L. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q295012" start="18011" end="18022" title="John Searle" label="John Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q965415" start="18055" end="18067" title="performative" label="performative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1599204" start="18173" end="18191" title="Illocutionary act" label="Illocutionary Acts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18246" end="18251" title="#Areas of interest" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926717" start="18294" end="18310" title="Victoria Fromkin" label="Victoria Fromkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="18457" end="18484" title="natural language processing" label="natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="18514" end="18537" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397057" start="19360" end="19375" title="Keith Donnellan" label="Keith Donnellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17487567" start="19444" end="19461" title="Carlo Dalla Pozza" label="Carlo Dalla Pozza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16729083" start="20093" end="20109" title="Michael C. Frank" label="Michael C. Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q965415" start="21421" end="21433" title="performative" label="performative"/>
<link wikidata="Q219368" start="21445" end="21458" title="Judith Butler" label="Judith Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551016" start="21476" end="21497" title="gender performativity" label="gender performativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170617" start="21508" end="21522" title="Gender Trouble" label="Gender Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21668" end="21696" title="Judith Butler##Excitable_Speech_(1997)" label="&amp;quot;Excitable Speech&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627138" start="21725" end="21739" title="performativity" label="performativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="21743" end="21754" title="hate speech" label="hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="21759" end="21769" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="21985" end="22000" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020428" start="22107" end="22122" title="Of Grammatology" label="Of Grammatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q274931" start="22131" end="22147" title="Émile Benveniste" label="Émile Benveniste"/>
<link wikidata="Q36224" start="22164" end="22172" title="pronouns" label="pronouns"/>
<link wikidata="Q41798914" start="22292" end="22299" title="Subject (philosophy)" label="subject"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="22302" end="22316" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Gilles Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q352465" start="22321" end="22335" title="Félix Guattari" label="Félix Guattari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563786" start="22397" end="22416" title="A Thousand Plateaus" label="A Thousand Plateaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q965415" start="22530" end="22552" title="performative utterance" label="performative utterance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="22854" end="22869" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Saussure&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q19973772" start="22887" end="22928" title="langue and parole" label="&amp;quot;langue&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;parole&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="22933" end="22947" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Chomsky&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q124880681" start="22968" end="23004" title="deep structure and surface structure" label="deep structure and surface structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="23059" end="23071" title="J. L. Austin" label="J. L. Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q311776" start="23121" end="23131" title="Paul Grice" label="Paul Grice"/>
<link wikidata="Q979096" start="23139" end="23160" title="cooperative principle" label="cooperative principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210152" start="23189" end="23232" title="Politeness theory" label="Brown and Levinson&amp;#x27;s politeness theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503023" start="23235" end="23249" title="Geoffrey Leech" label="Geoffrey Leech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210151" start="23257" end="23274" title="politeness maxims" label="politeness maxims"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608833" start="23276" end="23291" title="Stephen Levinson" label="Levinson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q76357" start="23315" end="23330" title="Jürgen Habermas" label="Jürgen Habermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495618" start="23338" end="23358" title="universal pragmatics" label="universal pragmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q187363" start="23361" end="23372" title="Dan Sperber" label="Dan Sperber"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994836" start="23377" end="23391" title="Deirdre Wilson" label="Deirdre Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548396" start="23399" end="23415" title="relevance theory" label="relevance theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962551" start="23647" end="23658" title="Nancy Bauer (philosopher)" label="Nancy Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="23927" end="23940" title="J. L. Austin" label="Austin, J. L."/>
<link wikidata="Q272615" start="23954" end="23981" title="How to Do Things With Words" label="How to Do Things With Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608833" start="24134" end="24153" title="Stephen C. Levinson" label="Stephen C. Levinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702712" start="24251" end="24265" title="Robyn Carston" label="Carston, Robyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734281" start="24373" end="24390" title="Herb Clark" label="Clark, Herbert H."/>
<link wikidata="Q704638" start="24560" end="24578" title="Teun A. van Dijk" label="Dijk, Teun A. van."/>
<link wikidata="Q311776" start="24694" end="24708" title="H. Paul Grice" label="Grice, H. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608833" start="24980" end="25000" title="Stephen C. Levinson" label="Levinson, Stephen C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7608833" start="25062" end="25082" title="Stephen C. Levinson" label="Levinson, Stephen C."/>
<link wikidata="Q6118900" start="25393" end="25406" title="Jacob L. Mey" label="Mey, Jacob L."/>
<link wikidata="Q5301940" start="25648" end="25665" title="Douglas Robinson (academic)" label="Robinson, Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q93781" start="26207" end="26217" title="Watzlawick" label="Watzlawick"/>
<link wikidata="Q29642788" start="26225" end="26245" title="Janet Beavin Bavelas" label="Janet Helmick Beavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q262474" start="26402" end="26418" title="Anna Wierzbicka" label="Wierzbicka, Anna"/>
</links>
</doc>
