<doc id="46591" wikidata="Q160311" url="?curid=46591" title="Henry III of England">
<text>Henry III (1 October 1207 – 16 November 1272), also known as Henry of Winchester, was King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitaine from 1216 until his death in 1272. The son of King John and Isabella of Angoulême, Henry assumed the throne when he was only nine in the middle of the First Barons&#x27; War. Cardinal Guala Bicchieri declared the war against the rebel barons to be a religious crusade and Henry&#x27;s forces, led by William Marshal, defeated the rebels at the battles of Lincoln and Sandwich in 1217. Henry promised to abide by the Great Charter of 1225, a later version of the 1215 Magna Carta, which limited royal power and protected the rights of the major barons. Henry&#x27;s early reign was dominated first by William Marshall, and after his death in 1219 by the magnate Hubert de Burgh. In 1230, the King attempted to reconquer the provinces of France that had once belonged to his father, but the invasion was a debacle. A revolt led by William Marshal&#x27;s son Richard broke out in 1232, ending in a peace settlement negotiated by the Church.

Following the revolt, Henry ruled England personally, rather than governing through senior ministers. He travelled less than previous monarchs, investing heavily in a handful of his favourite palaces and castles. He married Eleanor of Provence, with whom he had five children. Henry was known for his piety, holding lavish religious ceremonies and giving generously to charities; the King was particularly devoted to the figure of Edward the Confessor, whom he adopted as his patron saint. He extracted huge sums of money from the Jews in England, ultimately crippling their ability to do business, and as attitudes towards the Jews hardened, he introduced the Statute of Jewry, attempting to segregate the community. In a fresh attempt to reclaim his family&#x27;s lands in France, he invaded Poitou in 1242, leading to the disastrous Battle of Taillebourg. After this, Henry relied on diplomacy, cultivating an alliance with Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor. Henry supported his brother Richard of Cornwall in his successful bid to become King of the Romans in 1256, but was unable to place his own son Edmund Crouchback on the throne of Sicily, despite investing large amounts of money. He planned to go on crusade to the Levant but was prevented from doing so by rebellions in Gascony.

By 1258, Henry&#x27;s rule was increasingly unpopular, the result of the failure of his expensive foreign policies and the notoriety of his Poitevin half-brothers, the Lusignans, as well as the role of his local officials in collecting taxes and debts. A coalition of his barons, initially probably backed by Eleanor, seized power in a coup d&#x27;état and expelled the Poitevins from England, reforming the royal government through a process called the Provisions of Oxford. Henry and the baronial government enacted a peace with France in 1259, under which Henry gave up his rights to his other lands in France in return for King Louis IX recognising him as the rightful ruler of Gascony. The baronial regime collapsed, but Henry was unable to reform a stable government, and instability across England continued.

In 1263, one of the more radical barons, Simon de Montfort, seized power, resulting in the Second Barons&#x27; War. Henry persuaded Louis to support his cause and mobilised an army. The Battle of Lewes was fought in 1264 when Henry was defeated and taken prisoner. Henry&#x27;s eldest son, Edward, escaped from captivity to defeat de Montfort at the Battle of Evesham the following year and freed his father. Henry initially exacted a harsh revenge on the remaining rebels but was persuaded by the Church to mollify his policies through the Dictum of Kenilworth. Reconstruction was slow, and Henry had to acquiesce to several measures, including further suppression of the Jews, to maintain baronial and popular support. Henry died in 1272, leaving Edward as his successor. He was buried in Westminster Abbey, which he had rebuilt in the second half of his reign, and was moved to his current tomb in 1290. Some miracles were declared after his death, but he was not canonised. Henry&#x27;s reign of 56 years was the longest in medieval English history and would not be surpassed by an English, or later British, monarch until that of George III in the 18th and 19th centuries.
== Background and childhood ==
Henry was born in Winchester Castle on 1 October 1207. He was the eldest son of King John and Isabella of Angoulême. Little is known of Henry&#x27;s early life. He was initially looked after by a wet nurse called Ellen in the south of England, away from John&#x27;s itinerant court, and probably had close ties to his mother. Henry had four legitimate younger brothers and sisters – Richard, Joan, Isabella, and Eleanor – and various older illegitimate siblings. In 1212 his education was entrusted to Peter des Roches, the bishop of Winchester; under his direction, Henry was given military training by Philip d&#x27;Aubigny and taught to ride, probably by Ralph of St Samson.

Little is known about Henry&#x27;s appearance; he was probably around tall, and accounts recorded after his death suggested that he had a strong build, with a drooping eyelid. Henry grew up to occasionally show flashes of a fierce temper, but mostly, as historian David Carpenter describes, he had an &quot;amiable, easy-going, and sympathetic&quot; personality. He was unaffected and honest, and showed his emotions readily, easily being moved to tears by religious sermons.

At the start of the 13th century, the Kingdom of England formed part of the Angevin Empire spreading across Western Europe. Henry was named after his grandfather Henry II, who had built up this vast network of lands stretching from Scotland and Wales, through England, across the English Channel to the territories of Normandy, Brittany, Maine, and Anjou in north-west France, and on to Poitou and Gascony in the south-west. For many years the French Crown was relatively weak, enabling first Henry II, and then his sons Richard I and John, to dominate France.

In 1204, John lost Normandy, Brittany, Maine, and Anjou to Philip II of France, leaving English power on the continent limited to Gascony and Poitou. John raised taxes to pay for military campaigns to regain his lands, but unrest grew among many of the English barons; John sought new allies by declaring England a papal fiefdom, owing allegiance to the Pope. In 1215, John and the rebel barons negotiated Magna Carta as potential peace treaty. The treaty would have limited potential abuses of royal power, demobilised the rebel armies and set up a power-sharing arrangement, but in practice, neither side complied with its conditions. John and the loyalist barons firmly rejected Magna Carta and the First Barons&#x27; War erupted, with the rebel barons aided by Philip&#x27;s son Louis (later Louis VIII), who claimed the English throne for himself. The war soon settled into a stalemate, with neither side able to claim victory. The king became ill and died on the night of 18 October, leaving the nine-year-old Henry as his heir.

== Minority (1216–1226) ==
=== Coronation ===
Henry was staying safely at Corfe Castle in Dorset with his mother when King John died. On his deathbed, John appointed a council of thirteen executors to help Henry reclaim the kingdom and requested that his son be placed into the guardianship of William Marshal, one of the most famous knights in England. The loyalist leaders decided to crown Henry immediately to reinforce his claim to the throne. William knighted the boy, and Cardinal Guala Bicchieri, the papal legate to England, then oversaw his coronation at Gloucester Cathedral on 28 October 1216. 

In the absence of Archbishops Stephen Langton of Canterbury and Walter de Gray of York, Henry was anointed by Bishops Sylvester of Worcester and Simon of Exeter, and crowned by Peter des Roches. The royal crown had been either lost or sold during the civil war or possibly lost in The Wash, so instead the ceremony used a simple gold corolla belonging to Queen Isabella. Henry later underwent a second coronation at Westminster Abbey on 17 May 1220.

The young king inherited a difficult situation, with over half of England occupied by the rebels and most of his father&#x27;s continental possessions still in French hands. He had substantial support from Cardinal Guala, who intended to win the civil war for Henry and punish the rebels. Guala set about strengthening the ties between England and the Papacy, starting with the coronation itself, where Henry gave homage to the Papacy, recognising Pope Honorius III as his feudal lord. Honorius declared that Henry was his vassal and ward, and that the legate had complete authority to protect Henry and his kingdom. As an additional measure, Henry took the cross, declaring himself a crusader and so entitled to special protection from Rome.

Two senior nobles stood out as candidates to head Henry&#x27;s regency government. The first was William Marshal, who, although elderly, was renowned for his personal loyalty and could help support the war with his own men and material. The second was Ranulf de Blondeville, 6th Earl of Chester, one of the most powerful loyalist barons. William diplomatically waited until both Guala and Ranulf had requested him to take up the post before assuming power. William then appointed des Roches to be Henry&#x27;s guardian, freeing himself up to lead the military effort.

=== End of the Barons&#x27; War ===
The war was not going well for the loyalists and the new regency government considered retreating to Ireland. Prince Louis and the rebel barons were also finding it difficult to make further progress. Despite Louis controlling Westminster Abbey, he could not be crowned king because the English Church and the Papacy backed Henry. John&#x27;s death had defused some of the rebel concerns, and the royal castles were still holding out in the occupied parts of the country. In a bid to take advantage of this, Henry encouraged the rebel barons to come back to his cause in exchange for the return of their lands, and reissued a version of Magna Carta, albeit having first removed some of the clauses, including those unfavourable to the Papacy. The move was not successful and opposition to Henry&#x27;s new government hardened.

In February 1217, Louis set sail for France to gather reinforcements. In his absence, arguments broke out between Louis&#x27;s French and English followers, and Cardinal Guala declared that Henry&#x27;s war against the rebels was a religious crusade. This resulted in a series of defections from the rebel movement, and the tide of the conflict swung in Henry&#x27;s favour. Louis returned at the end of April and reinvigorated his campaign, splitting his forces into two groups, sending one north to besiege Lincoln Castle and keeping one in the south to capture Dover Castle. When he learnt that Louis had divided his army, William Marshal gambled on defeating the rebels in a single battle. William marched north and attacked Lincoln on 20 May 1217; entering through a side gate, he took the city in a sequence of fierce street battles and sacked the buildings. Large numbers of senior rebels were captured, and historian David Carpenter considers the battle to be &quot;one of the most decisive in English history&quot;.

In the aftermath of Lincoln, the loyalist campaign stalled and only recommenced in late June when the victors had arranged the ransoming of their prisoners. Meanwhile, support for Louis&#x27;s campaign was diminishing in France, and he concluded that the war in England was lost. Louis negotiated terms with Cardinal Guala, under which he would renounce his claim to the English throne; in return, his followers would be given back their lands, any sentences of excommunication would be lifted and Henry&#x27;s government would promise to enforce Magna Carta. The proposed agreement soon began to unravel amid claims from some loyalists that it was too generous towards the rebels, particularly the clergy who had joined the rebellion. In the absence of a settlement, Louis remained in London with his remaining forces.

On 24 August 1217, a French fleet arrived off the coast of Sandwich, bringing soldiers, siege engines, and fresh supplies to Louis. Hubert de Burgh, Henry&#x27;s justiciar, set sail to intercept it, resulting in the Battle of Sandwich. De Burgh&#x27;s fleet scattered the French and captured their flagship, commanded by Eustace the Monk, who was promptly executed. When the news reached Louis, he entered into renewed peace negotiations.

Henry and Louis, together with Henry&#x27;s mother, Cardinal Guala and William Marshal, came to an agreement on the final Treaty of Lambeth on 12 and 13 September 1217. The treaty was similar to the first peace offer but excluded the rebel clergy, whose lands and appointments remained forfeit. Louis accepted a gift of ~£6,700 to speed his departure from England, and promised to try to persuade King Philip to return Henry&#x27;s lands in France. Louis left England as agreed and joined the Albigensian Crusade in the south of France.

=== Restoring royal authority ===
With the end of the civil war, Henry&#x27;s government faced the task of rebuilding royal authority across large parts of the country. By the end of 1217, many former rebels were routinely ignoring instructions and even Henry&#x27;s loyalist supporters jealously maintained their independent control over royal castles while illegally constructed fortifications, called adulterine castles, had sprung up across much of the country. The network of county sheriffs had collapsed and with it the ability to raise taxes and collect royal revenues. The powerful Prince Llywelyn posed a major threat in Wales and along the Welsh Marches.

Despite his success in winning the war, William had far less favourable results when attempting to restore royal power following the peace. This was in part because he was unable to offer significant patronage, despite the expectations from the loyalist barons that they would be rewarded. William attempted to enforce the traditional rights of the Crown to approve marriages and wardships, but with little success. Nonetheless, he was able to reconstitute the royal bench of judges and reopen the royal exchequer. The government issued the Charter of the Forest, which attempted to reform the governance of the royal forest. The regency and Llywelyn came to an agreement on the Treaty of Worcester in 1218, but its generous terms–which saw Llywelyn effectively become Henry&#x27;s justiciar across Wales–underlined the weakness of the English Crown.

Henry&#x27;s mother was unable to establish a role for herself in the regency government and she returned to France in 1217, marrying Hugh X de Lusignan, a powerful Poitevin noble. William Marshal fell ill and died in April 1219. The replacement government was formed around a grouping of three senior ministers: Pandulf Verraccio, the replacement Papal legate; Peter des Roches; and Hubert de Burgh, a former justiciar. The three were appointed by a great council of the nobility at Oxford, and their government came to depend on these councils for authority. Hubert and des Roches were political rivals, with Hubert supported by a network of English barons, and des Roches backed by nobles from the royal territories in Poitou and Touraine. Hubert moved decisively against des Roches in 1221, accusing him of treason and removing him as the King&#x27;s guardian; the Bishop left England for the crusades. Pandulf was recalled by Rome the same year, leaving Hubert as the dominant force in Henry&#x27;s government.

Initially, the new government had little success, but in 1220, the fortunes of Henry&#x27;s government began to improve. The Pope allowed Henry to be crowned for a second time, using a new set of regalia. The fresh coronation was intended to affirm the authority of the King; Henry promised to restore the powers of the Crown, and the barons swore that they would give back the royal castles and pay their debts to the Crown, on the threat of excommunication. Hubert, accompanied by Henry, moved into Wales to suppress Llywelyn in 1223, and in England his forces steadily reclaimed Henry&#x27;s castles. The effort against the remaining recalcitrant barons came to a head in 1224 with the siege of Bedford Castle, which Henry and Hubert besieged for eight weeks; when it finally fell, almost the entire garrison was executed and the castle was slighted.

Meanwhile, Louis VIII of France allied himself with Hugh de Lusignan and invaded Poitou and Gascony. Henry&#x27;s army in Poitou was poorly supplied and lacked support from the Poitevin barons, many of whom felt abandoned during the years of Henry&#x27;s minority; as a result, the province fell quickly. It became clear that Gascony would also fall unless reinforcements were sent from England. In early 1225 a great council approved a tax of £40,000 to dispatch an army, which managed to retake Gascony. In exchange for agreeing to support Henry, the barons demanded that he reissue Magna Carta as well as the &quot;Charter of the Forest&quot;. This time the King declared that the charters were issued of his own &quot;spontaneous and free will&quot; and confirmed them with the royal seal, giving the new Magna Carta and the Charter of the Forest of 1225 far more authority than their previous iterations. The barons assumed that the King would act in accordance with these definitive charters, as he would be subject to the law and his decisions moderated by the advice of the nobility.

== Early rule (1227–1234) ==
=== Invasion of France ===

Henry assumed formal control of his government in January 1227, although some contemporaries argued that he was legally still a minor until his 21st birthday the following year. The King richly rewarded Hubert de Burgh for his service during his minority years, making him the Earl of Kent and giving him extensive lands across England and Wales. Despite coming of age, Henry remained deeply influenced by his advisers for the first few years of his rule and retained Hubert as his justiciar to run the government, granting him the position for life.

The fate of Henry&#x27;s family lands in France still remained uncertain. Reclaiming these lands was extremely important to Henry, who used terms such as &quot;reclaiming his inheritance&quot;, &quot;restoring his rights&quot;, and &quot;defending his legal claims&quot; to the territories in diplomatic correspondence. The French kings had an increasing financial, and thus military, advantage over Henry. Even under John, the French Crown had enjoyed a considerable, although not overwhelming, advantage in resources, but since then, the balance had shifted further, with the annual income of the French kings almost doubling between 1204 and 1221.

Louis VIII died in 1226, leaving his 12-year-old son, Louis IX, to inherit the throne, supported by a regency government. The young French king was in a far weaker position than his father and faced opposition from many of the French nobility who still maintained ties with England, leading to a sequence of revolts across the country. Against this background, in late 1228 a group of potential Norman and Angevin rebels called upon Henry to invade and reclaim his inheritance, and Peter I, Duke of Brittany, openly revolted against Louis and gave homage to Henry.

Henry&#x27;s preparations for an invasion progressed slowly, and when he finally arrived in Brittany with an army in May 1230, the campaign did not go well. Possibly on the advice of Hubert, the King decided to avoid battle with the French by not invading Normandy and instead marching south into Poitou, where he campaigned ineffectually over the summer, before finally progressing safely into Gascony. He then made a truce with Louis which was to last until 1234 and returned to England having achieved nothing; historian Huw Ridgeway describes the expedition as a &quot;costly fiasco&quot;.

=== Richard Marshal&#x27;s revolt ===
Henry&#x27;s chief minister, Hubert, fell from power in 1232. His old rival, Peter des Roches, had returned to England from the crusades in August 1231 and allied himself with the growing number of Hubert&#x27;s political opponents. He put the case to Henry that the Justiciar had squandered royal money and lands, and was responsible for a series of riots against foreign clerics. As the political climate became increasingly hostile, Hubert decided to seek sanctuary in Merton Priory, but Henry had him arrested and imprisoned in the Tower of London. Des Roches took over the King&#x27;s government, backed by the Poitevin baronial faction in England, who saw this as a chance to take back lands that had been seized and given to Hubert&#x27;s followers over the previous decades.

Des Roches used his new authority to begin stripping his opponents of their estates while circumventing the courts and legal process. Complaints from powerful barons such as William Marshal&#x27;s son Richard Marshal, 3rd Earl of Pembroke, grew, and they argued that Henry was failing to protect their legal rights as described in the charters of 1225. A civil war erupted between the followers of des Roches and Marshal. Des Roches began by sending his armies into Richard&#x27;s lands in both Ireland and South Wales. In response, Marshal allied himself with Prince Llywelyn, and his supporters rose up in rebellion in England. Henry was unable to gain a clear military advantage and became concerned that Louis of France might seize the opportunity to invade Brittany – as their truce was about to expire – while he was distracted at home.

Edmund of Abingdon, the Archbishop of Canterbury, intervened in 1234 and held several great councils, advising Henry to accept the dismissal of des Roches. Henry agreed to make peace, but, before the negotiations were completed, Richard died of wounds suffered in battle, leaving his younger brother Gilbert to inherit his lands. The final settlement was confirmed in May, and Henry was widely praised for his humility in submitting to the slightly embarrassing peace. Meanwhile, the truce with France regarding Brittany expired, and Henry&#x27;s ally Duke Peter quickly found himself subjected to French military pressure. Henry could only send a small force of soldiers to assist his vassal, and Brittany fell to Louis in November. And after the dismissal of des Roches, for the next 24 years, Henry ruled the kingdom personally, rather than through senior ministers.

== Henry as king ==
=== Kingship, government and law ===
Royal government in England had traditionally centred on several great offices of state, filled by powerful, independent members of the baronage. Henry abandoned this policy, leaving the post of justiciar vacant and turning the position of chancellor into a more junior role. A small royal council was formed but its role was ill-defined; appointments, patronage, and policy were decided personally by Henry and his immediate advisers, rather than through the larger councils that had marked his early years. The changes made it much harder for those outside Henry&#x27;s inner circle to influence policy or to pursue legitimate grievances, particularly against the King&#x27;s friends.

Henry believed that kings should rule England in a dignified manner, surrounded by ceremony and ecclesiastical ritual. He thought that his predecessors had allowed the status of the Crown to decline, and sought to correct this during his reign. The events of the civil war in Henry&#x27;s youth deeply affected him, and he adopted Anglo-Saxon king Edward the Confessor as his patron saint, hoping to emulate the way in which Edward had brought peace to England and reunited his people in order and harmony. Henry tried to use his royal authority leniently, hoping to appease the more hostile barons and maintain peace in England.

As a result, despite a symbolic emphasis on royal power, Henry&#x27;s rule was relatively circumscribed and constitutional. He generally acted within the terms of the charters, which prevented the Crown from taking extrajudicial action against the barons, including the fines and expropriations that had been common under John. The charters did not address the sensitive issues of the appointment of royal advisers and the distribution of patronage, and they lacked any means of enforcement if the King chose to ignore them. Henry&#x27;s rule became lax and careless, resulting in a reduction in royal authority in the provinces and, ultimately, the collapse of his authority at court. The inconsistency with which he applied the charters over the course of his rule alienated many barons, even those within his own faction.

The term &quot;parliament&quot; first appeared in the 1230s and 1240s to describe large gatherings of the royal court and parliamentary gatherings were held periodically throughout Henry&#x27;s reign. They were used to agree upon the raising of taxes which, in the 13th century, were single, one-off levies, typically on movable property, and intended to support the King&#x27;s normal revenues for particular projects. During Henry&#x27;s reign, the counties began to send regular delegations to these parliaments and came to represent a broader cross-section of the community than simply the major barons.

Despite the various charters, the provision of royal justice was inconsistent and driven by the needs of immediate politics: sometimes action would be taken to address a legitimate baronial complaint, and on other occasions, the problem would simply be ignored. The royal eyres, courts which toured the country to provide justice at the local level, typically for those lesser barons and the gentry claiming grievances against the major lords, had little power, allowing the major barons to dominate the local justice system.

The power of royal sheriffs also declined during Henry&#x27;s reign. They were now often lesser men appointed by the exchequer, rather than coming from important local families, and they focused on generating revenue for the King. Their robust attempts to enforce fines and collect debts generated much unpopularity among the lower classes. Unlike his father, Henry did not exploit the large debts that the barons frequently owed to the Crown, and was slow to collect any sums of money due to him.

=== Court ===

The royal court was formed round Henry&#x27;s trusted friends, such as Richard de Clare, 6th Earl of Gloucester; the brothers Hugh Bigod and Roger Bigod, 4th Earl of Norfolk; Humphrey de Bohun, 2nd Earl of Hereford; and Henry&#x27;s brother, Richard. Henry wanted to use his court to unite his English and continental subjects, and it included the originally French knight Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester, who had married Henry&#x27;s sister Eleanor, in addition to the later influxes of Henry&#x27;s Savoyard and Lusignan relatives. The court followed European styles and traditions, and was heavily influenced by Henry&#x27;s Angevin family traditions: French was the spoken language, it had close links to the royal courts of France, Castile, the Holy Roman Empire and Sicily, and Henry sponsored the same writers as the other European rulers.

Henry travelled less than previous kings, seeking a tranquil, more sedate life and staying at each of his palaces for prolonged periods before moving on. Possibly as a result, he focused more attention on his palaces and houses; Henry was, according to architectural historian John Goodall, &quot;the most obsessive patron of art and architecture ever to have occupied the throne of England&quot;. Henry extended the royal complex at Westminster in London, one of his favourite homes, rebuilding the palace and the abbey at a cost of almost £55,000. He spent more time in Westminster than any of his predecessors, shaping the formation of England&#x27;s capital city.

He spent £58,000 on his royal castles, carrying out major works at the Tower of London, Lincoln and Dover. Both the military defences and the internal accommodation of these castles were significantly improved. A huge overhaul of Windsor Castle produced a lavish palace complex, whose style and detail inspired many subsequent designs in England and Wales. The Tower of London was extended to form a concentric fortress with extensive living quarters, although Henry primarily used the castle as a secure retreat in the event of war or civil strife. He also kept a menagerie at the Tower, a tradition begun by his father, and his exotic specimens included an elephant, a leopard, and a camel.
Henry reformed the system of silver coins in England in 1247, replacing the older Short Cross silver pennies with a new Long Cross design. Due to the initial costs of the transition, he required the financial help of his brother Richard to undertake this reform, but the recoinage occurred quickly and efficiently. Between 1243 and 1258, the King assembled two great hoards, or stockpiles, of gold. In 1257, Henry needed to spend the second of these hoards urgently and, rather than selling the gold quickly and depressing its value, he decided to introduce gold pennies into England, following the popular trend in Italy. The gold pennies resembled the gold coins issued by Edward the Confessor, but the overvalued currency attracted complaints from the City of London and was ultimately abandoned.

=== Religion ===
Henry was known for his public demonstrations of piety and appears to have been genuinely devout. He promoted rich, luxurious Church services, and, unusually for the period, attended mass at least once a day. He gave generously to religious causes, paid for the feeding of 500 paupers each day, and helped orphans. He fasted before commemorating Edward the Confessor&#x27;s feasts and may have washed the feet of lepers. Henry regularly went on pilgrimages, particularly to the abbeys of Bromholm, St Albans and Walsingham Priory, although he appears to have sometimes used pilgrimages as an excuse to avoid dealing with pressing political problems.

Henry shared many of his religious views with Louis of France, and the two men appear to have been slightly competitive in their piety. Towards the end of his reign, Henry may have taken up the practice of curing sufferers of scrofula, often called &quot;the King&#x27;s evil&quot;, by touching them, possibly emulating Louis, who also took up the practice. Louis had a famous collection of Passion Relics which he kept in the Sainte-Chapelle in Paris, and he paraded the Holy Cross through Paris in 1241; Henry took possession of the Relic of the Holy Blood in 1247, marching it through Westminster to be installed in Westminster Abbey, which he promoted as an alternative to the Sainte-Chapelle.

Henry was particularly supportive of the mendicant orders; his confessors were drawn from the Dominican friars, and he built mendicant houses in Canterbury, Norwich, Oxford, Reading, and York, helping to find valuable space for new buildings in what were already crowded towns and cities. He supported the military crusading orders and became a patron of the Teutonic Order in 1235. The emerging universities of Oxford and Cambridge also received royal attention: Henry reinforced and regulated their powers, and encouraged scholars to migrate from Paris to teach at them. A rival institution at Northampton was declared by the King to be a mere school and not a true university.

The support given to Henry by the Papacy during his early years had a lasting influence on his attitude towards Rome, and he defended the mother church diligently throughout his reign. Rome in the 13th century was at once both the centre of the Europe-wide Church and a political power in central Italy, threatened militarily by the Holy Roman Empire. During Henry&#x27;s reign, the Papacy developed a strong, central bureaucracy, supported by benefices granted to absent churchmen working in Rome. Tensions grew between this practice and the needs of local parishioners, exemplified by the dispute between Robert Grosseteste, the bishop of Lincoln, and the Papacy in 1250.

Although the Scottish Church became more independent of England during the period, the Papal Legates helped Henry continue to apply influence over its activities at a distance. Pope Innocent IV&#x27;s attempts to raise funds began to face opposition from within the English Church during Henry&#x27;s reign. In 1240, the Papal emissary&#x27;s collection of taxes to pay for the Papacy&#x27;s war with Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II resulted in protests, ultimately overcome with the help of Henry and the Pope, and in the 1250s Henry&#x27;s crusading tithes faced similar resistance.

=== Jewish policies ===
The Jews in England were considered the property of the Crown, and they had traditionally been used as a source of cheap loans and easy taxation, in exchange for royal protection against antisemitism. The Jews had suffered considerable oppression during the First Barons&#x27; War, but during Henry&#x27;s early years the community had flourished and became one of the most prosperous in Europe. This was primarily the result of the stance taken by the regency government, which took a range of measures to protect the Jews and encourage lending. This was driven by financial self-interest, as they stood to profit considerably from a strong Jewish community in England. Their policy ran counter to the instructions being sent from the Pope, who had laid out strong anti-Jewish measures at the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215; William Marshal continued with his policy despite complaints from the Church.

In 1239 Henry introduced different policies, possibly trying to imitate those of Louis of France: Jewish leaders across England were imprisoned and forced to pay fines equivalent to a third of their goods, and any outstanding loans were to be released. Further huge demands for cash followed – £40,000 was demanded in 1244, for example, of which around two-thirds was collected within five years – destroying the ability of the Jewish community to lend money commercially. The financial pressure Henry placed on the Jews caused them to force repayment or sale of loans, fuelling anti-Jewish resentment. The sale of Jewish bonds was a particular grievance among smaller landowners such as knights, as bonds were bought at low prices and used by richer barons and members of Henry&#x27;s royal circle as a means to acquire lands of lesser landholders, through payment defaults.

Henry had built the &quot;Domus Conversorum&quot; in London in 1232 in an attempt to convert Jews to Christianity, and efforts intensified after 1239. As many as 10 per cent of the Jews in England had been converted by the late 1250s in large part due to their deteriorating economic conditions. Many anti-Jewish stories involving tales of child sacrifice circulated in the 1230s–50s, including the account of &quot;Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln&quot; in 1255. The event is considered particularly significant, as the first such accusation endorsed by the Crown. Henry intervened to order the execution of Copin, who had confessed to the murder in return for his life, and removed 91 Jews to the Tower of London. 18 were executed, and their property expropriated by the Crown. At the time, the Jews were mortgaged to Richard of Cornwall, who intervened to release the Jews that were not executed, probably also with the backing of Dominican or Franciscan friars.

Henry passed the Statute of Jewry in 1253, which attempted to stop the construction of synagogues and enforce the wearing of Jewish badges, in line with existing Church pronouncements; it remains unclear to what extent the King actually implemented the statute. By 1258, Henry&#x27;s Jewish policies were regarded as confused and were increasingly unpopular amongst the barons. Taken together, Henry&#x27;s policies up to 1258 of excessive Jewish taxation, anti-Jewish legislation, and propaganda caused a very important and negative change to the status and security of Jews in England.

== Personal rule (1234–1258) ==
=== Marriage ===
Henry investigated a range of potential marriage partners in his youth, but they all proved unsuitable for reasons of European and domestic politics. In 1236 he finally married Eleanor of Provence, the daughter of Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Provence, and Beatrice of Savoy. Eleanor was well-mannered, cultured and articulate, but the primary reason for the marriage was political, as Henry stood to create a valuable set of alliances with the rulers of the south and south-east of France. Over the coming years, Eleanor emerged as a hard-headed, firm politician. Historians Margaret Howell and David Carpenter describe her as being &quot;more combative&quot; and &quot;far tougher and more determined&quot; than her husband.

The marriage contract was confirmed in 1235 and Eleanor travelled to England to meet Henry for the first time. The pair were married at Canterbury Cathedral in January 1236, and Eleanor was crowned queen at Westminster shortly afterwards in a lavish ceremony planned by Henry. There was a substantial age gap between the couple – Henry was 28, Eleanor only 12 – but historian Margaret Howell observes that the King &quot;was generous and warm-hearted and prepared to lavish care and affection on his wife&quot;. Henry gave Eleanor extensive gifts and paid personal attention to establishing and equipping her household. He also brought her fully into his religious life, including involving her in his devotion to Edward the Confessor.

Despite initial concerns that the Queen might be barren, Henry and Eleanor had five children together. In 1239 Eleanor gave birth to their first child, Edward, named after the Confessor. Henry was overjoyed and held huge celebrations, giving lavishly to the Church and to the poor to encourage God to protect his young son. Their first daughter, Margaret, named after Eleanor&#x27;s sister, followed in 1240, her birth also accompanied by celebrations and donations to the poor. The third child, Beatrice, was named after Eleanor&#x27;s mother, and born in 1242 during a campaign in Poitou. 

Their fourth child, Edmund, arrived in 1245 and was named after the 9th century saint. Concerned about Eleanor&#x27;s health, Henry donated large amounts of money to the Church throughout the pregnancy. A third daughter, Katherine, was born in 1253 but soon fell ill, possibly the result of a degenerative disorder such as Rett syndrome, and was unable to speak. She died in 1257 and Henry was distraught. His children spent most of their childhood at Windsor Castle and he appears to have been extremely attached to them, rarely spending extended periods of time apart from his family.

After Eleanor&#x27;s marriage, many of her Savoyard relatives joined her in England. At least 170 Savoyards arrived in England after 1236, coming from Savoy, Burgundy, and Flanders, including Eleanor&#x27;s uncles, the later Archbishop Boniface of Canterbury and William of Savoy, Henry&#x27;s chief adviser for a short period. Henry arranged marriages for many of them into the English nobility, a practice that initially caused friction with the English barons, who resisted landed estates passing into the hands of foreigners. The Savoyards were careful not to exacerbate the situation and became increasingly integrated into English baronial society, forming an important power base for Eleanor in England.

=== Poitou and the Lusignans ===

In 1241, the barons in Poitou, including Henry&#x27;s step-father Hugh de Lusignan, rebelled against the rule of Louis of France. The rebels had counted on aid from Henry, but he lacked domestic support and was slow to mobilise an army, not arriving in France until the next summer. His campaign was hesitant and was further undermined by Hugh switching sides and returning to support Louis. On 21–22 July 1242, Henry&#x27;s army was surrounded by the French at Taillebourg. Henry&#x27;s brother Richard persuaded the French to delay their attack and the King took the opportunity to escape to Bordeaux.

Simon de Montfort, who fought a successful rearguard action during the withdrawal, was furious with the King&#x27;s incompetence and told Henry that he should be locked up like the 10th-century Carolingian king Charles the Simple. The Poitou rebellion collapsed and Henry entered into a fresh five-year truce. His campaign had been a disastrous failure and had cost over £80,000.

In the aftermath of the revolt, French power extended throughout Poitou, threatening the interests of the Lusignan family. In 1247, Henry encouraged his relatives to travel to England, where they were rewarded with large estates, largely at the expense of the English barons. More Poitevins followed, until around 100 had settled in England, around two-thirds of them being granted substantial incomes worth £66 or more by Henry. Henry encouraged some to help him on the continent; others acted as mercenaries and diplomatic agents or fought on Henry&#x27;s behalf in European campaigns. Many were given estates along the contested Welsh Marches, or in Ireland, where they protected the frontiers. For Henry, the community was an important symbol of his hopes to one day reconquer Poitou and the rest of his French lands, and many of the Lusignans became close friends with his son Edward.

The presence of Henry&#x27;s extended family in England proved controversial. Concerns were raised by contemporary chroniclers – especially in the works of Roger de Wendover and Matthew Paris – about the number of foreigners in England and historian Martin Aurell notes the xenophobic overtones of their commentary. The term &quot;Poitevins&quot; became loosely applied to this grouping, although many came from Anjou and other parts of France, and by the 1250s there was a fierce rivalry between the relatively well established Savoyards and the newly arrived Poitevins. The Lusignans began to break the law with impunity, pursuing personal grievances against other barons and the Savoyards, and Henry took little or no action to restrain them. By 1258, the general dislike of the Poitevins had turned into hatred, with Simon de Montfort one of their strongest critics.

=== Scotland, Wales and Ireland ===
Henry&#x27;s position in Wales was strengthened during the first two decades of his personal rule. Following the death of Llywelyn the Great in 1240, Henry&#x27;s power in Wales expanded. Three military campaigns were carried out in the 1240s, new castles were constructed, and the royal lands in the County of Chester were expanded, increasing Henry&#x27;s dominance over the Welsh princes. Dafydd, Llywelyn&#x27;s son, resisted the incursions but died in 1246, and Henry confirmed the Treaty of Woodstock the following year with Owain and Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Llywelyn the Great&#x27;s grandsons, under which they ceded land to the King but retained the heart of their princedom in Gwynedd.

In South Wales, Henry gradually extended his authority across the region, but the campaigns were not pursued with vigour and the King did little to stop the Marcher territories along the border becoming increasingly independent of the Crown. In 1256, Llywelyn ap Gruffudd rebelled against Henry and widespread violence spread across Wales. Henry promised a swift military response but did not carry through on his threats.

Ireland was important to Henry, both as a source of royal revenue – an average of £1,150 was sent from Ireland to the Crown each year during the middle of his reign – and as a source of estates that could be granted to his supporters. The major landowners looked eastwards towards Henry&#x27;s court for political leadership, and many also possessed estates in Wales and England. The 1240s saw major upheavals in land ownership due to deaths among the barons, enabling Henry to redistribute Irish lands to his supporters.

In the 1250s, the King gave out numerous grants of land along the frontier in Ireland to his supporters, creating a buffer zone against the native Irish. The local Irish kings began to suffer increased harassment as English power increased across the region. These lands were in many cases unprofitable for the barons to hold and English power reached its zenith under Henry for the medieval period. In 1254, Henry granted Ireland to his son, Edward, on condition that it would never be separated from the Crown.

Henry maintained peace with Scotland during his reign, where he was the feudal lord of Alexander II. Henry assumed that he had the right to interfere in Scottish affairs and brought up the issue of his authority with the Scottish kings at key moments, but he lacked the inclination or the resources to do much more. Alexander had occupied parts of northern England during the First Barons&#x27; War but had been excommunicated and forced to retreat. Alexander married Henry&#x27;s sister Joan in 1221, and after he and Henry signed the Treaty of York in 1237, Henry had a secure northern frontier. Henry knighted Alexander III before the young king married Henry&#x27;s daughter Margaret in 1251 and, despite Alexander&#x27;s refusal to give homage to Henry for Scotland, the two enjoyed a good relationship. Henry had Alexander and Margaret rescued from Edinburgh Castle when they were imprisoned there by a rebellious Scottish baron in 1255 and took additional measures to manage Alexander&#x27;s government during the rest of his minority years.

=== European strategy ===
Henry had no further opportunities to reconquer his possessions in France after the collapse of his military campaign at the Battle of Taillebourg. Henry&#x27;s resources were quite inadequate in comparison to those of the French Crown, and by the end of the 1240s it was clear that King Louis had become the preeminent power across France. Henry instead adopted what historian Michael Clanchy has described as a &quot;European strategy&quot;, attempting to regain his lands in France through diplomacy rather than force, building alliances with other states prepared to put military pressure on the French King. In particular, Henry cultivated Frederick II, hoping he would turn against Louis or allow his nobility to join Henry&#x27;s campaigns. In the process, Henry&#x27;s attention became increasingly focused on European politics and events rather than domestic affairs.

Crusading was a popular cause in the 13th century, and in 1248 Louis joined the ill-fated Seventh Crusade, having first made a fresh truce with England and received assurances from the Pope that he would protect his lands against any attack by Henry. Henry might have joined this crusade himself, but the rivalry between the two kings made this impossible and, after Louis&#x27;s defeat at the Battle of Al Mansurah in 1250, Henry instead announced that he would be undertaking his own crusade to the Levant. He began to make arrangements for passage with friendly rulers around the Levant, imposing efficiency savings on the royal household and arranging for ships and transport: he appeared almost over-eager to take part. Henry&#x27;s plans reflected his strong religious beliefs, but they also stood to give him additional international credibility when arguing for the return of his possessions in France.

Henry&#x27;s crusade never departed, as he was forced to deal with problems in Gascony, where the harsh policies of his lieutenant, Simon de Montfort, had provoked a violent uprising in 1252, which was supported by King Alfonso X of neighbouring Castile. The English court was split over the problem: Simon and Eleanor argued that the Gascons were to blame for the crisis, while Henry, backed by the Lusignans, blamed Simon&#x27;s misjudgment. Henry and Eleanor quarrelled over the issue and were not reconciled until the following year. Forced to intervene personally, Henry carried out an effective, if expensive, campaign with the help of the Lusignans and stabilised the province. Alfonso signed a treaty of alliance in 1254, and Gascony was given to Henry&#x27;s son Edward, who married Alfonso&#x27;s half-sister Eleanor, delivering a long-lasting peace with Castile.

On the way back from Gascony, Henry met with Louis for the first time in an arrangement brokered by their wives, and the two kings became close friends. The Gascon campaign cost more than £200,000 and used up all the money intended for Henry&#x27;s crusade, leaving him heavily in debt and reliant on loans from his brother Richard and the Lusignans.

=== The Sicilian business ===

Henry did not give up on his hopes for a crusade but became increasingly absorbed in a bid to acquire the wealthy Kingdom of Sicily for his son Edmund. Sicily had been controlled by Frederick II of the Holy Roman Empire, for many years a rival of Pope Innocent IV. On Frederick&#x27;s death in 1250, Innocent started to look for a new ruler, one more amenable to the Papacy. Henry saw Sicily as both a valuable prize for his son and as an excellent base for his crusading plans in the east. With minimal consultation within his court, Henry came to an agreement with the Pope in 1254 that Edmund should be the next king. Innocent urged Henry to send Edmund with an army to reclaim Sicily from Frederick&#x27;s son Manfred, offering to contribute to the expenses of the campaign.

Innocent was succeeded by Pope Alexander IV, who was facing increasing military pressure from the Empire. He could no longer afford to pay Henry&#x27;s expenses, instead demanding that Henry compensate the Papacy for the £90,000 spent on the war so far. This was a huge sum, and Henry turned to parliament for help in 1255, only to be rebuffed. Further attempts followed, but by 1257 only partial parliamentary assistance had been offered.

Alexander grew increasingly unhappy about Henry&#x27;s procrastinations and in 1258 sent an envoy to England, threatening to excommunicate Henry if he did not first pay his debts to the Papacy and then send the promised army to Sicily. Parliament again refused to assist the King in raising this money. Instead Henry turned to extorting money from the senior clergy, who were forced to sign blank charters, promising to pay effectively unlimited sums of money in support of the King&#x27;s efforts, raising around £40,000. The English Church felt the money was wasted, vanishing into the long-running war in Italy.

Meanwhile, Henry attempted to influence the outcomes of the elections in the Holy Roman Empire, which would appoint a new King of the Romans. When the more prominent German candidates failed to gain traction, Henry began to back his brother Richard&#x27;s candidature, giving donations to his potential supporters in the Empire. Richard was elected in 1256 with expectations of possibly being crowned the Holy Roman Emperor, but continued to play a major role in English politics. His election faced a mixed response in England; Richard was believed to provide moderate, sensible counsel and his presence was missed by the English barons, but he also faced criticism, probably incorrectly, for funding his German campaign at England&#x27;s expense. Although Henry now had increased support in the Empire for a potential alliance against Louis of France, the two kings were now moving towards potentially settling their disputes peacefully; for Henry, a peace treaty could allow him to focus on Sicily and his crusade.

== Later reign (1258–1272) ==
=== Revolution ===
In 1258, Henry faced a revolt among the English barons. Anger had grown about the way the King&#x27;s officials were raising funds, the influence of the Poitevins at court, and his unpopular Sicilian policy, and resentment of abuse of purchased Jewish loans. Even the English Church had grievances over its treatment by the King. The Welsh were still in open revolt and now allied themselves with Scotland.

Henry was also critically short of money. Although he still had some reserves of gold and silver, they were totally insufficient to cover his potential expenditures, including the campaign for Sicily and his debts to the Papacy. Critics suggested darkly that he had never really intended to join the crusades, and was simply intending to profit from the crusading tithes. To compound the situation, the harvests in England failed. Within Henry&#x27;s court there was a strong feeling that the King would be unable to lead the country through these problems.

The discontent finally erupted in April, when seven of the major English and Savoyard barons – Simon de Montfort, Roger and Hugh Bigod, John Fitzgeoffrey, Peter de Montfort, Peter de Savoy, and Richard de Clare – secretly formed an alliance to expel the Lusignans from the court, a move probably quietly supported by the Queen. On 30 April, Roger Bigod marched into Westminster in the middle of the King&#x27;s parliament, backed by his co-conspirators, and carried out a coup d&#x27;état. Henry, fearful that he was about to be arrested and imprisoned, agreed to abandon his policy of personal rule and instead govern through a council of 24 barons and churchmen, half chosen by the King and half by the barons. His own nominees to the council drew heavily on the hated Lusignans.

The pressure for reform continued unabated and a fresh parliament met in June, passing a set of measures known as the Provisions of Oxford, which Henry swore to uphold. These provisions created a smaller council of 15 members, elected solely by the barons, which then had the power to appoint England&#x27;s justiciar, chancellor, and treasurer, and which would be monitored through triannual parliaments. Pressure from the lesser barons and the gentry present at Oxford also helped to push through wider reform, intended to limit the abuse of power by both Henry&#x27;s officials and the major barons. The elected council included representatives of the Savoyard faction but no Poitevins, and the new government immediately took steps to exile the leading Lusignans and to seize key castles across the country.

The disagreements between the leading barons involved in the revolt soon became evident. Simon championed radical reforms that would place further limitations on the authority and power of the major barons as well as the Crown; others, such as Hugh Bigod, promoted only moderate change, while the conservative barons, such as Richard, expressed concerns about the existing limitations on the King&#x27;s powers. Henry&#x27;s son, Edward, initially opposed the revolution, but then allied himself with de Montfort, helping him to pass the radical Provisions of Westminster in 1259, which introduced further limits on the major barons and local royal officials.

=== Crisis ===

Over the next four years, neither Henry nor the barons were able to restore stability in England, and power swung back and forth between the different factions. One of the priorities for the new regime was to settle the long-running dispute with France and, at the end of 1259, Henry and Eleanor left for Paris to negotiate the final details of a peace treaty with King Louis, escorted by Simon de Montfort and much of the baronial government. Under the treaty, Henry gave up any claim to his family&#x27;s lands in the north of France but was confirmed as the legitimate ruler of Gascony and various neighbouring territories in the south, giving homage and recognising Louis as his feudal lord for these possessions.

When Simon de Montfort returned to England, Henry, supported by Eleanor, remained in Paris, where he seized the opportunity to reassert royal authority and began to issue royal orders independently of the barons. Henry finally returned to retake power in England in April 1260, where conflict was brewing between Richard de Clare&#x27;s forces and those of Simon and Edward. Henry&#x27;s brother Richard mediated between the parties and averted a military confrontation; Edward was reconciled with his father and Simon was put on trial for his actions against the King. Henry was unable to maintain his grip on power, and in October a coalition headed by Simon, Richard, and Edward briefly seized back control; within months their baronial council had collapsed into chaos as well.

Henry continued publicly to support the Provisions of Oxford, but he secretly opened discussions with Pope Urban IV, hoping to be absolved from the oath he had made at Oxford. In June 1261, the King announced that Rome had released him from his promises and he promptly held a counter-coup with the support of Edward. He purged the ranks of the sheriffs of his enemies and seized back control of many of the royal castles. The baronial opposition, led by Simon and Richard, were temporarily reunited in their opposition to Henry&#x27;s actions, convening their own parliament, independent of the King, and establishing a rival system of local government across England. Henry and Eleanor mobilised their own supporters and raised a foreign mercenary army. Facing the threat of open civil war, the barons backed down: de Clare switched sides once again, Simon left for exile in France and the baronial resistance collapsed.

Henry&#x27;s government relied primarily on Eleanor and her Savoyard supporters, and it proved short-lived. He attempted to settle the crisis permanently by forcing the barons to agree to the Treaty of Kingston. This treaty introduced a system of arbitration to settle outstanding disputes between the King and the barons, using Richard as an initial adjudicator, backed up by Louis of France should Richard fail to generate a compromise. Henry softened some of his policies in response to the concerns of the barons, but he soon began to target his political enemies and recommence his unpopular Sicilian policy. He had done nothing significant to deal with the concerns over Baronial and royal abuse of Jewish debts. 

Henry&#x27;s government was weakened by the death of Richard, as his heir, Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester, sided with the radicals; the King&#x27;s position was further undermined by major Welsh incursions along the Marches and the Pope&#x27;s decision to reverse his judgment on the Provisions, this time confirming them as legitimate. By early 1263, Henry&#x27;s authority had disintegrated and the country slipped back towards open civil war.

=== Second Barons&#x27; War ===

Simon returned to England in April 1263 and convened a council of rebel barons in Oxford to pursue a renewed anti-Poitevin agenda. Revolt broke out shortly afterwards in the Welsh Marches and, by October, England faced a likely civil war between Henry, backed by Edward, Hugh Bigod, and the conservative barons, and Simon, Gilbert de Clare, and the radicals. The rebels leveraged concern among knights over abuse of Jewish loans, who feared losing their lands, a problem Henry had done much to create and nothing to solve. In each case following, the rebels employed violence and killings in a deliberate attempt to destroy the records of their debts to Jewish lenders.

Simon marched east with an army and London rose up in revolt, where 500 Jews died. Henry and Eleanor were trapped in the Tower of London by the rebels. The Queen attempted to escape up the River Thames to join Edward&#x27;s army at Windsor but was forced to retreat by the London crowds. Simon took the pair prisoners, and although he maintained a fiction of ruling in Henry&#x27;s name, the rebels completely replaced the royal government and household with their own trusted men.

Simon&#x27;s coalition quickly began to fragment, Henry regained his freedom of movement and renewed chaos spread across England. Henry appealed to Louis of France for arbitration in the dispute, as had been laid out in the Treaty of Kingston; Simon was initially hostile to this idea, but, as war became more likely again, he decided to agree to French arbitration as well. Henry went to Paris in person, accompanied by Simon&#x27;s representatives. Initially Simon&#x27;s legal arguments held sway, but in January 1264, Louis announced the Mise of Amiens, condemning the rebels, upholding the King&#x27;s rights and annulling the Provisions of Oxford. Louis had strong views of his own on the rights of kings over those of barons, but was also influenced by his wife, Margaret, who was Eleanor&#x27;s sister, and by the Pope. Leaving Eleanor in Paris to assemble mercenary reinforcements, Henry returned to England in February 1264, where violence was brewing in response to the unpopular French decision.

The Second Barons&#x27; War finally broke out in April 1264, when Henry led an army into Simon&#x27;s territories in the Midlands, and then advanced south-east to re-occupy the important route to France. Becoming desperate, Simon marched in pursuit of Henry and the two armies met at the Battle of Lewes on 14 May. Despite their numerical superiority, Henry&#x27;s forces were overwhelmed. His brother Richard was captured, and Henry and Edward retreated to the local priory and surrendered the following day. Henry was forced to pardon the rebel barons and reinstate the Provisions of Oxford, leaving him, as historian Adrian Jobson describes, &quot;little more than a figurehead&quot;. With Henry&#x27;s power diminished, Simon cancelled many debts and interest owed to Jews, including those held by his baronial supporters.

Simon was unable to consolidate his victory and widespread disorder persisted across the country. In France, Eleanor made plans for an invasion of England with the support of Louis, while Edward escaped his captors in May and formed a new army with Gilbert de Clare, who switched sides to the royal government. He pursued Simon&#x27;s forces through the Marches, before striking east to attack his fortress at Kenilworth and then turning once more on the rebel leader himself. Simon, accompanied by the captive Henry, was unable to retreat and the Battle of Evesham ensued.

Edward was triumphant and Simon&#x27;s corpse was mutilated by the victors. Henry, who was wearing borrowed armour, was almost killed by Edward&#x27;s forces during the fighting before they recognised the King and escorted him to safety. In places the now leaderless rebellion dragged on, with some rebels gathering at Kenilworth Castle, which Henry and Edward took after a long siege in 1266. They continued targeting Jews and their debt records. The remaining pockets of resistance were mopped up, and the final rebels, holed up in the Isle of Ely, surrendered in July 1267, marking the end of the war.

=== Reconciliation and reconstruction ===
Henry quickly took revenge on his enemies after the Battle of Evesham. He immediately ordered the sequestration of all the rebel lands, triggering a wave of chaotic looting across the country. Henry initially rejected any calls for moderation, but in October 1266 he was persuaded by Papal Legate Ottobuono de&#x27; Fieschi to issue a less draconian policy, called the Dictum of Kenilworth, which allowed for the return of the rebels&#x27; lands, in exchange for the payment of harsh fines. The Statute of Marlborough followed in November 1267, which effectively reissued much of the Provisions of Westminster, placing limitations on the powers of local royal officials and the major barons, but without restricting central royal authority. Most of the exiled Poitevins began to return to England after the war. In September 1267 Henry made the Treaty of Montgomery with Llywelyn, recognising him as the Prince of Wales and giving substantial land concessions.

In the final years of his reign, Henry was increasingly infirm and focused on securing peace within the kingdom and his own religious devotions. Edward became the Steward of England and began to play a more prominent role in government. Henry&#x27;s finances were in a precarious state as a result of the war, and when Edward decided to join the crusades in 1268 it became clear that fresh taxes were necessary. Henry was concerned that Edward&#x27;s absence might encourage further revolts but was swayed by his son to negotiate with multiple parliaments over the next two years to raise the money.

Although Henry had initially reversed Simon de Montfort&#x27;s anti-Jewish policies, including attempting to restore the debts owed to Jews where these could be proven, he faced pressure from parliament to introduce restrictions on Jewish bonds, particularly their sale to Christians, in the final years of his reign in return for financing. Henry continued to invest in Westminster Abbey, which became a replacement for the Angevin mausoleum at Fontevraud Abbey, and in 1269 he oversaw a grand ceremony to rebury Edward the Confessor in a lavish new shrine, personally helping to carry the body to its new resting place.

== Death ==
Edward left for the Eighth Crusade, led by Louis of France, in 1270, but Henry became increasingly ill; concerns about a fresh rebellion grew and the next year the King wrote to his son asking him to return to England, but Edward did not turn back. Henry recovered slightly and announced his renewed intention to join the crusades himself, but he never regained his full health and on the evening of 16 November 1272, he died in Westminster, probably with Eleanor in attendance. He was succeeded by Edward, who slowly made his way back to England via Gascony, finally arriving in August 1274.

At his request, Henry was buried in Westminster Abbey in front of the church&#x27;s high altar, in the former resting place of Edward the Confessor. A few years later, work began on a grander tomb for Henry, and in 1290 Edward moved his father&#x27;s body to its current location in Westminster Abbey. His gilt-brass tomb effigy was designed and forged within the abbey grounds by William Torell; unlike other effigies of the period, it is particularly naturalistic in style, but it is probably not a close likeness of Henry himself.

Eleanor probably hoped that Henry would be recognised as a saint, as his contemporary Louis IX of France had been; indeed, Henry&#x27;s final tomb resembled the shrine of a saint, complete with niches possibly intended to hold relics. When the King&#x27;s body was exhumed in 1290, contemporaries noted that the body was in perfect condition and that Henry&#x27;s long beard remained well preserved, which at the time was considered to be an indication of saintly purity. Miracles began to be reported at the tomb, but Edward was sceptical about these stories. The reports ceased, and Henry was never canonised. In 1292, his heart was removed from his tomb and reburied at Fontevraud Abbey in Anjou, France with the bodies of his Angevin family.

== Legacy ==
=== Historiography ===
The first histories of Henry&#x27;s reign emerged in the 16th and 17th centuries, relying primarily on the accounts of medieval chroniclers, in particular writings of Roger of Wendover and Matthew Paris. These early historians, including Archbishop Matthew Parker, were influenced by contemporary concerns about the roles of the Church and state, and examined the changing nature of kingship under Henry, the emergence of English nationalism during the period, and what they perceived to be the malign influence of the Papacy. During the English Civil War, historians also drew parallels between Henry&#x27;s experiences and those of the deposed Charles I.

By the 19th century, Victorian scholars such as William Stubbs, James Ramsay, and William Hunt sought to understand how the English political system had evolved under Henry. They explored the emergence of Parliamentary institutions during his reign and sympathized with the concerns of the chroniclers over the role of the Poitevins in England. This focus carried on into early 20th-century research into Henry, such as Kate Norgate&#x27;s 1913 volume, which continued to make heavy use of the chronicler accounts and focused primarily on constitutional issues, with a distinctive nationalistic bias.

After 1900, the financial and official records from Henry&#x27;s reign began to become accessible to historians, including the pipe rolls, court records, correspondence, and records of administration of the royal forests. Thomas Frederick Tout made extensive use of these new sources in the 1920s, and post-war historians brought a particular focus on the finances of Henry&#x27;s government, highlighting his fiscal difficulties. This wave of research culminated in Sir Maurice Powicke&#x27;s two major biographical works on Henry, published in 1948 and 1953, which formed the established history of the King for the next three decades.

Henry&#x27;s reign did not receive much attention from general historians for many years after the 1950s: no substantial biographies of Henry were written after Powicke&#x27;s, and the historian John Beeler observed in the 1970s that the coverage of Henry&#x27;s reign by military historians remained particularly thin. At the end of the 20th century, there was a renewed interest in 13th century English history, resulting in the publication of various specialist works on aspects of Henry&#x27;s reign, including government finance and the period of his minority. Current historiography notes both Henry&#x27;s positive and negative qualities: historian David Carpenter judges him to have been a decent man, who failed as a ruler because of his naivety and inability to produce realistic plans for reform, a theme echoed by Huw Ridgeway, who also notes his unworldliness and inability to manage his court, but who considers him to have been &quot;essentially a man of peace, kind and merciful&quot;. The descriptions of his characteristics as devout, kind, and innocent king is also however under doubt. Despite his occasional generosities towards his innocent cousin Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany and order that she and her younger brother Arthur I of Brittany be commemorated along with all late kings and queens in 1268, during her lifetime he was resolved to maintain her confinement. Eleanor had already passed the reproductive age when he took power, and she would be highly unlikely to bring any risk to his regime. No longer simply depicted as an incompetent but innocent fool, it is believed by many historians that he possesses wisdom and determination in certain aspects.

Henry III has received considerable attention from historians of Anglo-Jewish England. They note similar questions of lack of competence and credulity. His role in lending credibility to false charges against Jews of ritual sacrifice of Christian children is highlighted as especially damaging. Barrie Dobson and Robert Stacey judge his later reign as a &quot;watershed&quot; in the way Jews were seen and treated by Christians, through his over-taxation, and exploitation of the loans system to leverage lands from his subjects. They judge that he created the conditions for increasing antisemitism, developing themes of supposed Jewish magic and conspiracy to explain measures taken against Jews, leading to the pogroms of the de Montfort rebellions, and later, to the 1290 Edict of Expulsion.

=== Popular culture ===
The chronicler Matthew Paris depicted Henry&#x27;s life in a series of illustrations, which he sketched and, in some cases, water-coloured, in the margins of the . Paris first met Henry in 1236 and enjoyed an extended relationship with the King, although he disliked many of Henry&#x27;s actions and the illustrations are frequently unflattering.

Henry is a character in , the second part of Dante&#x27;s &quot;Divine Comedy&quot; (completed in 1320). The King is depicted sitting alone in purgatory, to one side of other failed rulers: Rudolf I of Germany, Ottokar II of Bohemia, Philip III of France, and Henry I of Navarre, as well as Charles I of Naples and Peter III of Aragon. Dante&#x27;s symbolic intent in depicting Henry sitting separately is unclear; possible explanations include it being a reference to England not being part of the Holy Roman Empire and/or indicating that Dante had a favourable opinion of Henry, due to his unusual piety. His son, Edward, is also saluted by Dante in this work (Canto VII. 132).

Henry appears in &quot;King John&quot; by William Shakespeare as a minor character referred to as Prince Henry but within modern popular culture, Henry has a minimal presence and has not been a prominent subject of films, theatre or television. Historical novels which feature him as a character include &quot;Longsword, Earl of Salisbury: An Historical Romance&quot; (1762) by Thomas Leland, &quot;The Red Saint&quot; (1909) by Warwick Deeping, &quot;The Outlaw of Torn&quot; (1927) by Edgar Rice Burroughs, &quot;The De Montfort Legacy&quot; (1973) by Pamela Bennetts, &quot;The Queen from Provence&quot; (1979) by Jean Plaidy, &quot;The Marriage of Meggotta&quot; (1979) by Edith Pargeter and &quot;Falls the Shadow&quot; (1988) by Sharon Kay Penman.

== Issue ==
Henry and Eleanor had five children:
# Edward I (17/18 June 1239 – 7 July 1307);
# Margaret (29 September 1240 – 26 February 1275);
# Beatrice (25 June 1242 – 24 March 1275);
# Edmund (16 January 1245 – 5 June 1296);
# Katherine (25 November 1253 – 3 May 1257).

Henry had no known illegitimate children.

== Family tree ==









== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
*: 
*: 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*: 
* 
*: 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*: 
* 
*: 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* Henry III at the official website of the British monarchy
* Henry III at &quot;BBC History&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="0" end="9" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="61" end="80" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="86" end="101" title="King of England" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q844250" start="103" end="118" title="Lord of Ireland" label="Lord of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q429599" start="124" end="141" title="Duke of Aquitaine" label="Duke of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="188" end="197" title="John, King of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q231788" start="202" end="223" title="Isabella of Angoulême" label="Isabella of Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="293" end="315" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292457" start="326" end="341" title="Guala Bicchieri" label="Guala Bicchieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q348911" start="442" end="457" title="William Marshal" label="William Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855461" start="497" end="504" title="Battle of Lincoln (1217)" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136870" start="509" end="517" title="Battle of Sandwich (1217)" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="558" end="579" title="Magna Carta#Great Charter of 1225" label="Great Charter of 1225"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="609" end="620" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381324" start="803" end="818" title="Hubert de Burgh" label="Hubert de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q538677" start="865" end="884" title="Angevin Empire" label="provinces of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768194" start="927" end="939" title="English invasion of France (1230)" label="the invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q966269" start="998" end="1005" title="Richard Marshal" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1068" end="1078" title="Catholic Church" label="the Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1273" end="1292" title="Castles in Great Britain and Ireland#Palace-fortresses" label="palaces and castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q228885" start="1305" end="1324" title="Eleanor of Provence" label="Eleanor of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411871" start="1382" end="1387" title="piety" label="piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="1512" end="1532" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="1557" end="1569" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889725" start="1612" end="1627" title="Jews in England" label="Jews in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933040" start="1742" end="1758" title="Statute of Jewry" label="Statute of Jewry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445341" start="1867" end="1881" title="Saintonge War" label="invaded Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669489" start="1917" end="1938" title="Battle of Taillebourg" label="Battle of Taillebourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="2008" end="2040" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q314527" start="2070" end="2089" title="Richard of Cornwall" label="Richard of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="2122" end="2140" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q447802" start="2186" end="2203" title="Edmund Crouchback" label="Edmund Crouchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="2221" end="2227" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="2291" end="2298" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="2306" end="2312" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="2362" end="2369" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616" start="2512" end="2520" title="Poitiers" label="Poitevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q378193" start="2540" end="2549" title="Lusignans" label="Lusignans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630360" start="2826" end="2846" title="Provisions of Oxford" label="Provisions of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q394387" start="2892" end="2909" title="Treaty of Paris (1259)" label="peace with France"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="2999" end="3012" title="King Louis IX" label="King Louis IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q310092" start="3230" end="3247" title="Simon de Montfort" label="Simon de Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q657967" start="3280" end="3303" title="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164009" start="3375" end="3390" title="Battle of Lewes" label="Battle of Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="3479" end="3485" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339928" start="3539" end="3556" title="Battle of Evesham" label="Battle of Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254422" start="3730" end="3750" title="Dictum of Kenilworth" label="Dictum of Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="3980" end="3997" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q170774" start="4101" end="4108" title="miracle" label="miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="4156" end="4165" title="canonised" label="canonised"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486670" start="4206" end="4241" title="List of monarchs in Britain by length of reign" label="longest in medieval English history"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="4324" end="4334" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704670" start="4416" end="4433" title="Winchester Castle" label="Winchester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="4478" end="4487" title="John, King of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q231788" start="4492" end="4513" title="Isabella of Angoulême" label="Isabella of Angoulême"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="4594" end="4603" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q314527" start="4781" end="4788" title="Richard of Cornwall" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q242287" start="4790" end="4794" title="Joan of England, Queen of Scotland" label="Joan"/>
<link wikidata="Q237858" start="4796" end="4804" title="Isabella of England" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q271382" start="4810" end="4817" title="Eleanor of England, Countess of Leicester" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648032" start="4900" end="4916" title="Peter des Roches" label="Peter des Roches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271558" start="4922" end="4942" title="bishop of Winchester" label="bishop of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q18759374" start="5002" end="5023" title="Philip d&amp;#x27;Aubigny" label="Philip d&amp;#x27;Aubigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q622427" start="5236" end="5251" title="drooping eyelid" label="drooping eyelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232178" start="5341" end="5356" title="David Carpenter (historian)" label="David Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="5592" end="5610" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q538677" start="5630" end="5644" title="Angevin Empire" label="Angevin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="5662" end="5676" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="5716" end="5724" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="5786" end="5794" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="5799" end="5804" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="5814" end="5821" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="5834" end="5849" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="5872" end="5880" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q71747" start="5882" end="5890" title="Duchy of Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q732738" start="5892" end="5897" title="Maine (province)" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991084" start="5903" end="5908" title="County of Anjou" label="Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="5941" end="5947" title="Poitou" label="Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="5952" end="5959" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="6075" end="6084" title="Richard I" label="Richard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="6175" end="6194" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="6431" end="6436" title="papal" label="papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="6437" end="6444" title="fiefdom" label="fiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="6522" end="6533" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086498" start="6818" end="6840" title="First Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="First Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165284" start="6899" end="6904" title="Louis VIII of France" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236511" start="7226" end="7238" title="Corfe Castle" label="Corfe Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q348911" start="7446" end="7461" title="William Marshal" label="William Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292457" start="7639" end="7654" title="Guala Bicchieri" label="Guala Bicchieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q740369" start="7660" end="7672" title="papal legate" label="papal legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q262500" start="7716" end="7736" title="Gloucester Cathedral" label="Gloucester Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q465329" start="7789" end="7804" title="Stephen Langton" label="Stephen Langton"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="7808" end="7818" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546913" start="7823" end="7837" title="Walter de Gray" label="Walter de Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363910" start="7841" end="7845" title="Archbishop of York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660850" start="7877" end="7899" title="Sylvester of Worcester" label="Sylvester of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662603" start="7904" end="7919" title="Simon of Exeter" label="Simon of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648032" start="7936" end="7952" title="Peter des Roches" label="Peter des Roches"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8040" end="8048" title="The Wash#King John and his jewels" label="The Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172092" start="8093" end="8100" title="Corolla (chaplet)" label="corolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="8175" end="8192" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292457" start="8416" end="8430" title="Cardinal Guala" label="Cardinal Guala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187484" start="8624" end="8630" title="Homage (feudal)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q160182" start="8658" end="8675" title="Pope Honorius III" label="Pope Honorius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="8733" end="8739" title="vassal" label="vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q831704" start="8744" end="8748" title="Ward (law)" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="8895" end="8903" title="Crusades" label="crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q984430" start="9206" end="9248" title="Ranulf de Blondeville, 6th Earl of Chester" label="Ranulf de Blondeville, 6th Earl of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="9660" end="9667" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="9786" end="9803" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311180" start="9846" end="9860" title="Christianity in England" label="English Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q727760" start="10896" end="10910" title="Lincoln Castle" label="Lincoln Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="10951" end="10963" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="11116" end="11123" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855461" start="11173" end="11186" title="Battle of Lincoln (1217)" label="took the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="11875" end="11890" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q26163" start="12293" end="12301" title="Sandwich, Kent" label="Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="12322" end="12334" title="siege engine" label="siege engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381324" start="12366" end="12381" title="Hubert de Burgh" label="Hubert de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714329" start="12396" end="12405" title="justiciar" label="justiciar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136870" start="12450" end="12468" title="Battle of Sandwich (1217)" label="Battle of Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q967814" start="12555" end="12571" title="Eustace the Monk" label="Eustace the Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172884" start="12796" end="12813" title="Treaty of Lambeth" label="Treaty of Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51657" start="13167" end="13186" title="Albigensian Crusade" label="Albigensian Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970488" start="13616" end="13633" title="adulterine castle" label="adulterine castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="13700" end="13707" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q467685" start="13803" end="13818" title="Prince Llywelyn" label="Prince Llywelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q427862" start="13863" end="13876" title="Welsh Marches" label="Welsh Marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408803" start="14383" end="14392" title="exchequer" label="exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086779" start="14420" end="14441" title="Charter of the Forest" label="Charter of the Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975546" start="14491" end="14503" title="royal forest" label="royal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q467685" start="14558" end="14577" title="Treaty of Worcester" label="Treaty of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q257036" start="14865" end="14883" title="Hugh X de Lusignan" label="Hugh X de Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="14896" end="14904" title="Poitou" label="Poitevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130766" start="15044" end="15061" title="Pandulf Verraccio" label="Pandulf Verraccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648032" start="15093" end="15109" title="Peter des Roches" label="Peter des Roches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381324" start="15115" end="15130" title="Hubert de Burgh" label="Hubert de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="15215" end="15221" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="15453" end="15459" title="Poitou" label="Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q605051" start="15464" end="15472" title="Touraine" label="Touraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879112" start="16446" end="16460" title="Bedford Castle" label="Bedford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238935" start="16592" end="16600" title="slighted" label="slighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="17188" end="17199" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086779" start="17221" end="17242" title="Charter of the Forest" label="Charter of the Forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17412" end="17423" title="Magna Carta#The Great Charter 1225" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277321" start="18030" end="18042" title="Earl of Kent" label="Earl of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q346" start="19011" end="19019" title="Louis IX" label="Louis IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q465182" start="19439" end="19464" title="Peter I, Duke of Brittany" label="Peter I, Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="19615" end="19623" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="19779" end="19787" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q954076" start="19820" end="19826" title="Poitou" label="Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q191085" start="19918" end="19925" title="Gascony" label="Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q51659" start="20284" end="20292" title="Fifth Crusade" label="crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922141" start="20628" end="20641" title="Merton Priory" label="Merton Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="20692" end="20707" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q966269" start="21141" end="21178" title="Richard Marshal, 3rd Earl of Pembroke" label="Richard Marshal, 3rd Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="21435" end="21442" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="21447" end="21458" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235967" start="21784" end="21802" title="Edmund of Abingdon" label="Edmund of Abingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="21808" end="21832" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q448342" start="22084" end="22091" title="Gilbert Marshal, 4th Earl of Pembroke" label="Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="22952" end="22962" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="23731" end="23742" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="23748" end="23768" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="23776" end="23788" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="24872" end="24882" title="Parliament of England" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q499094" start="25178" end="25194" title="movable property" label="movable property"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422978" start="25738" end="25743" title="Eyre (legal term)" label="eyres"/>
<link wikidata="Q661604" start="26578" end="26618" title="Richard de Clare, 6th Earl of Gloucester" label="Richard de Clare, 6th Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q11710251" start="26633" end="26643" title="Hugh Bigod (Justiciar)" label="Hugh Bigod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788116" start="26648" end="26680" title="Roger Bigod, 4th Earl of Norfolk" label="Roger Bigod, 4th Earl of Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q445991" start="26682" end="26721" title="Humphrey de Bohun, 2nd Earl of Hereford" label="Humphrey de Bohun, 2nd Earl of Hereford"/>
<link wikidata="Q310092" start="26880" end="26920" title="Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester" label="Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232887" start="27017" end="27025" title="County of Savoy" label="Savoyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q921473" start="27030" end="27038" title="County of La Marche" label="Lusignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179293" start="27253" end="27260" title="Kingdom of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="27266" end="27283" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="27288" end="27294" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235684" start="27641" end="27653" title="John Goodall (author)" label="John Goodall"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="27798" end="27809" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="28104" end="28119" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090" start="28121" end="28128" title="Lincolnshire" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="28133" end="28138" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="28263" end="28277" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401536" start="28598" end="28607" title="menagerie" label="menagerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326204" start="28689" end="28700" title="Elephant of Henry III" label="an elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869390" start="28745" end="28767" title="History of the English penny (1154–1485)" label="system of silver coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869390" start="28808" end="28834" title="History of the English penny (1154–1485)" label="Short Cross silver pennies"/>
<link wikidata="Q164099" start="29093" end="29098" title="hoard" label="hoard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772911" start="29284" end="29296" title="gold penny" label="gold pennies"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="29342" end="29347" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29380" end="29390" title="History of the English penny (c. 600 – 1066)#Edgar&amp;#x27;s reform, c. 973 and the late Anglo-Saxon coinage" label="gold coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="29481" end="29495" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411871" start="29593" end="29598" title="piety" label="piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="29727" end="29731" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351369" start="29938" end="29953" title="Maundy (foot washing)" label="washed the feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="29957" end="29962" title="leper" label="leper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118145" start="29989" end="30000" title="Christian pilgrimage" label="pilgrimages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973637" start="30032" end="30040" title="Bromholm Priory" label="Bromholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q334377" start="30042" end="30051" title="St Albans Abbey" label="St Albans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963862" start="30056" end="30073" title="Walsingham Priory" label="Walsingham Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678337" start="30421" end="30429" title="scrofula" label="scrofula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932590" start="30481" end="30494" title="royal touch" label="touching them"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087471" start="30586" end="30600" title="Relics associated with Jesus" label="Passion Relics"/>
<link wikidata="Q193193" start="30622" end="30637" title="Sainte-Chapelle" label="Sainte-Chapelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="30667" end="30677" title="True Cross" label="Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966243" start="30730" end="30753" title="Westminster blood relic" label="Relic of the Holy Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q28653" start="30935" end="30951" title="mendicant orders" label="mendicant orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827718" start="30957" end="30966" title="confessor" label="confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="30988" end="31003" title="Dominican friar" label="Dominican friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="31039" end="31049" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q130191" start="31051" end="31058" title="Norwich" label="Norwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="31060" end="31066" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="31068" end="31075" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="31081" end="31085" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q474717" start="31200" end="31225" title="Military order (society)" label="military crusading orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="31253" end="31267" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="31306" end="31312" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="31317" end="31326" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496110" start="31469" end="31501" title="University of Northampton (13th century)" label="rival institution at Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q256541" start="32182" end="32200" title="Robert Grosseteste" label="Robert Grosseteste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837214" start="32206" end="32223" title="bishop of Lincoln" label="bishop of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q160609" start="32427" end="32443" title="Pope Innocent IV" label="Pope Innocent IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="32651" end="32682" title="Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II" label="Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="32802" end="32807" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40889725" start="32864" end="32879" title="Jews in England" label="Jews in England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32975" end="33004" title="Economy of England in the Middle Ages#Jewish contribution to the English economy" label="cheap loans and easy taxation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33047" end="33059" title="Antisemitism#Persecutions during the Middle Ages" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q719992" start="33654" end="33676" title="Fourth Lateran Council" label="Fourth Lateran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583335" start="34668" end="34685" title="Domus Conversorum" label="Domus Conversorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="34973" end="34997" title="Blood libel" label="tales of child sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080471" start="35058" end="35086" title="Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln" label="Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q314527" start="35458" end="35477" title="Richard of Cornwall" label="Richard of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="35572" end="35581" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="35585" end="35602" title="Franciscan friars" label="Franciscan friars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933040" start="35622" end="35638" title="Statute of Jewry" label="Statute of Jewry"/>
<link wikidata="Q329429" start="35730" end="35742" title="Jewish badge" label="Jewish badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q228885" start="36420" end="36439" title="Eleanor of Provence" label="Eleanor of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q381837" start="36457" end="36494" title="Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Provence" label="Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q254275" start="36500" end="36517" title="Beatrice of Savoy" label="Beatrice of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29265" start="37107" end="37127" title="Canterbury Cathedral" label="Canterbury Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="37860" end="37866" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q242317" start="38054" end="38062" title="Margaret of England" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q230889" start="38076" end="38097" title="Margaret of Provence" label="Eleanor&amp;#x27;s sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q242344" start="38204" end="38212" title="Beatrice of England" label="Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445341" start="38279" end="38297" title="Saintonge War" label="campaign in Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q447802" start="38321" end="38327" title="Edmund Crouchback" label="Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q381815" start="38365" end="38386" title="Edmund the Martyr" label="the 9th century saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4214826" start="38522" end="38531" title="Katherine of England" label="Katherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q954257" start="38594" end="38615" title="degenerative disorder" label="degenerative disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q917357" start="38624" end="38637" title="Rett syndrome" label="Rett syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="39040" end="39045" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="39047" end="39055" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="39061" end="39069" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174361" start="39114" end="39147" title="Archbishop Boniface of Canterbury" label="Archbishop Boniface of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q600156" start="39152" end="39168" title="William of Savoy" label="William of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669489" start="40069" end="40093" title="Battle of Taillebourg" label="surrounded by the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q669453" start="40097" end="40108" title="Taillebourg, Charente-Maritime" label="Taillebourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q187519" start="40451" end="40469" title="Charles the Simple" label="Charles the Simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q467685" start="42542" end="42560" title="Llywelyn the Great" label="Llywelyn the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q23064" start="42721" end="42738" title="County of Chester" label="County of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157156" start="42812" end="42818" title="Dafydd ap Llywelyn" label="Dafydd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739279" start="42951" end="42956" title="Owain Goch ap Gruffydd" label="Owain"/>
<link wikidata="Q369651" start="42961" end="42981" title="Llywelyn ap Gruffudd" label="Llywelyn ap Gruffudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q109128" start="43105" end="43112" title="Gwynedd" label="Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="43118" end="43129" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="43539" end="43546" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="44202" end="44214" title="Irish people" label="native Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340761" start="44226" end="44237" title="List of High Kings of Ireland" label="Irish kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="44604" end="44612" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q237889" start="44663" end="44675" title="Alexander II of Scotland" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230310" start="45112" end="45126" title="Treaty of York" label="Treaty of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="45189" end="45202" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q212065" start="45431" end="45447" title="Edinburgh Castle" label="Edinburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669489" start="45777" end="45798" title="Battle of Taillebourg" label="Battle of Taillebourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829274" start="46030" end="46045" title="Michael Clanchy" label="Michael Clanchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="46297" end="46309" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q51661" start="46620" end="46635" title="Seventh Crusade" label="Seventh Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528398" start="46924" end="46945" title="Battle of Mansurah (1250)" label="Battle of Al Mansurah"/>
<link wikidata="Q47595" start="47662" end="47671" title="Alfonso X" label="Alfonso X"/>
<link wikidata="Q59604" start="48261" end="48268" title="Eleanor of Castile" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="48814" end="48831" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q164889" start="49414" end="49421" title="Manfred, King of Sicily" label="Manfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q169915" start="49506" end="49523" title="Pope Alexander IV" label="Pope Alexander IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="50659" end="50677" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233297" start="52708" end="52725" title="John Fitzgeoffrey" label="John Fitzgeoffrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713435" start="52727" end="52744" title="Peter de Montfort" label="Peter de Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="53044" end="53060" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630360" start="53473" end="53493" title="Provisions of Oxford" label="Provisions of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297163" start="54714" end="54739" title="Provisions of Westminster" label="Provisions of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q394387" start="55192" end="55204" title="Treaty of Paris (1259)" label="peace treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q169305" start="56449" end="56462" title="Pope Urban IV" label="Pope Urban IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360375" start="58067" end="58107" title="Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester" label="Gilbert de Clare, 7th Earl of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="59342" end="59354" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285054" start="60178" end="60192" title="Mise of Amiens" label="Mise of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q657967" start="60649" end="60672" title="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War" label="Second Barons&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164009" start="60933" end="60948" title="Battle of Lewes" label="Battle of Lewes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281103" start="61883" end="61893" title="Kenilworth" label="Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339928" start="62021" end="62038" title="Battle of Evesham" label="Battle of Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738764" start="62367" end="62384" title="Kenilworth Castle" label="Kenilworth Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q935339" start="62586" end="62597" title="Isle of Ely" label="Isle of Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q661356" start="62794" end="62807" title="Sequestration (law)" label="sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q173000" start="62993" end="63019" title="Ottobuono de&amp;#x27; Fieschi" label="Ottobuono de&amp;#x27; Fieschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254422" start="63065" end="63085" title="Dictum of Kenilworth" label="Dictum of Kenilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604654" start="63191" end="63213" title="Statute of Marlborough" label="Statute of Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837154" start="63541" end="63561" title="Treaty of Montgomery" label="Treaty of Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q283254" start="64705" end="64721" title="Fontevraud Abbey" label="Fontevraud Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q243684" start="64914" end="64928" title="Eighth Crusade" label="Eighth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334300" start="65794" end="65798" title="gilding" label="gilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="65799" end="65804" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642845" start="65805" end="65816" title="tomb effigy" label="tomb effigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019470" start="65869" end="65883" title="William Torell" label="William Torell"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="65941" end="65953" title="Realism (arts)" label="naturalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="66624" end="66633" title="canonised" label="canonised"/>
<link wikidata="Q283254" start="66696" end="66712" title="Fontevraud Abbey" label="Fontevraud Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040803" start="66716" end="66721" title="Duchy of Anjou" label="Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q727241" start="66973" end="66990" title="Roger of Wendover" label="Roger of Wendover"/>
<link wikidata="Q369366" start="66995" end="67008" title="Matthew Paris" label="Matthew Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q711332" start="67055" end="67069" title="Matthew Parker" label="Matthew Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="67344" end="67361" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="67452" end="67461" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q443648" start="67512" end="67526" title="William Stubbs" label="William Stubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q249816" start="67546" end="67558" title="William Hunt (priest)" label="William Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193974" start="67884" end="67896" title="Kate Norgate" label="Kate Norgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q614407" start="68193" end="68203" title="pipe rolls" label="pipe rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789814" start="68288" end="68309" title="Thomas Frederick Tout" label="Thomas Frederick Tout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423969" start="68537" end="68552" title="Maurice Powicke" label="Maurice Powicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232178" start="69361" end="69376" title="David Carpenter (historian)" label="David Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091197" start="69875" end="69905" title="Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany" label="Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q363800" start="69949" end="69969" title="Arthur I of Brittany" label="Arthur I of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q124818467" start="70457" end="70477" title="Anglo-Jewish studies" label="Anglo-Jewish England"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070970" start="70687" end="70700" title="Barrie Dobson" label="Barrie Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="70979" end="70991" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="71106" end="71112" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29662" start="71168" end="71186" title="Edict of Expulsion" label="Edict of Expulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q369366" start="71228" end="71241" title="Matthew Paris" label="Matthew Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="71606" end="71611" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="71625" end="71638" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="71704" end="71713" title="purgatory" label="purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="71751" end="71770" title="Rudolf I of Germany" label="Rudolf I of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q150320" start="71772" end="71793" title="Ottokar II of Bohemia" label="Ottokar II of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172203" start="71795" end="71815" title="Philip III of France" label="Philip III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q366919" start="71821" end="71839" title="Henry I of Navarre" label="Henry I of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="71852" end="71871" title="Charles I of Naples" label="Charles I of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q312311" start="71876" end="71895" title="Peter III of Aragon" label="Peter III of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q661222" start="72265" end="72274" title="King John (play)" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="72284" end="72303" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791806" start="72620" end="72633" title="Thomas Leland" label="Thomas Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550081" start="72671" end="72686" title="Warwick Deeping" label="Warwick Deeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061884" start="72694" end="72712" title="The Outlaw of Torn" label="The Outlaw of Torn"/>
<link wikidata="Q148234" start="72729" end="72749" title="Edgar Rice Burroughs" label="Edgar Rice Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q142106" start="72859" end="72870" title="Jean Plaidy" label="Jean Plaidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q237235" start="72919" end="72933" title="Edith Pargeter" label="Edith Pargeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490109" start="72977" end="72994" title="Sharon Kay Penman" label="Sharon Kay Penman"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="73048" end="73056" title="Edward I" label="Edward I"/>
<link wikidata="Q242317" start="73092" end="73100" title="Margaret of England" label="Margaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q242344" start="73143" end="73151" title="Beatrice of England" label="Beatrice"/>
<link wikidata="Q447802" start="73186" end="73192" title="Edmund Crouchback" label="Edmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4214826" start="73228" end="73237" title="Katherine of England" label="Katherine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631715" start="73582" end="73593" title="BBC History" label="BBC History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46592" wikidata="Q158790" url="?curid=46592" title="Humulus">
<text>Humulus, or hop, is a small genus of flowering plants in the family Cannabaceae. The hop is native to temperate regions of the Northern Hemisphere. Hops are the female flowers (seed cones, strobiles) of the hop species &quot;H. lupulus&quot;; as a main flavor and aroma ingredient in many beer styles, &quot;H. lupulus&quot; is widely cultivated for use by the brewing industry.

==Description==
Although frequently referred to in American literature as the hops &quot;vine&quot;, it is technically a bine; unlike vines, which use tendrils, suckers, and other appendages for attaching themselves, bines have stout stems with stiff hairs to aid in climbing. In British literature the term &quot;vine&quot; is generally reserved for the grape genus &quot;Vitis&quot;. &quot;Humulus&quot; is described as a twining perennial herbaceous plant which sends up new shoots in early spring and dies back to the cold-hardy rhizome in autumn. Hop shoots grow very rapidly, and at the peak of growth can grow per week. Hop bines climb by wrapping clockwise (except for &quot;Humulus japonicus&quot;) around anything within reach, and individual bines typically grow between depending on what is available to grow on. The leaves are opposite, with a leafstalk and a heart-shaped, fan-lobed blade long and broad; the edges are coarsely toothed. When the hop bines run out of material to climb, horizontal shoots sprout between the leaves of the main stem to form a network of stems wound round each other.

Male and female flowers of the hop plant are dioecious, developing on separate plants. Female plants, which produce the hop flowers used in brewing beer, are often propagated vegetatively and grown in the absence of male plants. This prevents pollination and the development of viable seeds, which are sometimes considered undesirable for brewing beer owing to the potential for off-flavors arising from the introduction of fatty acids from the seeds.

The characteristic bitterness imparted by the addition of hops to the brewing process is mainly due to the presence of the bitter acids, which are prenylated acylphloroglucinol derivatives. Bitter acids are divided into the alpha-acids, with humulone the major compound, and the beta-acids, with lupulone the major compound; the alpha-acids isomerize during the brewing process to form iso-alpha acids, which themselves have a bitter taste. These hop acids are vinylogous acids, with acidic ring enols in conjugation with ring and substituent carbonyl groups. Plants in the genus &quot;Humulus&quot; produce terpenophenolic metabolites. Hops also contain xanthohumol, a prenylated chalcone, and other compounds.

==Taxonomy==

, the following species were accepted:

*&quot;Humulus americanus&quot; 
*&quot;Humulus cordifolius&quot; 
*&quot;Humulus lupulus&quot; 
*&quot;Humulus neomexicanus&quot; 
*&quot;Humulus pubescens&quot; 
*&quot;Humulus scandens&quot; (syn. &quot;Humulus japonicus )
*&quot;Humulus yunnanensis&quot; 

For brewers&#x27; hops, which are specific cultivars, and propagated by asexual reproduction, see the article, &quot;List of hop varieties&quot;.

==Uses==
Hops are boiled with the wort in brewing beer and sometimes added post-ferment; they impart a bitterness, flavor, as well as aroma to the finished product.

In pharmacy &quot;lupulus&quot; is the designation of hop. The dried catkins, commonly referred to as hop cones, of the female plant of &quot;H. lupulus&quot; are used to prepare infusion of hop, tincture of hop, and extract of hop.

Some of the compounds hops contain are under preliminary research for their potential health properties.

==References==
==External links==
* Jeanine S. DeNoma: &quot;Humulus Genetic Resources&quot; (USDA ARS National Clonal Germplasm Repository)
* Hops varieties research
* Plants for a Future: &quot;Humulus lupulus&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q158790" start="12" end="15" title="Humulus" label="hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="28" end="33" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="37" end="52" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="61" end="67" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q156338" start="68" end="79" title="Cannabaceae" label="Cannabaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="92" end="98" title="native plant" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="102" end="111" title="temperateness" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="148" end="152" title="Hops" label="Hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="211" end="218" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q104212" start="225" end="235" title="Humulus lupulus" label="H. lupulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="289" end="293" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="501" end="505" title="bine (botany)" label="bine"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="514" end="518" title="vine" label="vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165859" start="531" end="538" title="tendril" label="tendril"/>
<link wikidata="Q191019" start="753" end="758" title="Vitis" label="Vitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="812" end="821" title="perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="822" end="838" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="913" end="920" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q162736" start="1063" end="1080" title="Humulus japonicus" label="Humulus japonicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="1209" end="1215" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q148681" start="1538" end="1547" title="dioecious" label="dioecious"/>
<link wikidata="Q464666" start="1668" end="1680" title="vegetative reproduction" label="vegetatively"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="1778" end="1782" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q27107249" start="2242" end="2250" title="lupulone" label="lupulone"/>
<link wikidata="Q958860" start="2407" end="2423" title="vinylogy" label="vinylogous acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q407142" start="2554" end="2569" title="terpenophenolic" label="terpenophenolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q408088" start="2601" end="2612" title="xanthohumol" label="xanthohumol"/>
<link wikidata="Q901141" start="2616" end="2626" title="prenylated" label="prenylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q899416" start="2627" end="2635" title="chalcone" label="chalcone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2720" end="2738" title="Humulus americanus" label="Humulus americanus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2753" end="2772" title="Humulus cordifolius" label="Humulus cordifolius"/>
<link wikidata="Q104212" start="2787" end="2802" title="Humulus lupulus" label="Humulus lupulus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2817" end="2837" title="Humulus neomexicanus" label="Humulus neomexicanus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2852" end="2869" title="Humulus pubescens" label="Humulus pubescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q162736" start="2884" end="2900" title="Humulus scandens" label="Humulus scandens"/>
<link wikidata="Q162736" start="2919" end="2936" title="Humulus japonicus" label="Humulus japonicus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2946" end="2965" title="Humulus yunnanensis" label="Humulus yunnanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="3046" end="3066" title="asexual reproduction" label="asexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041767" start="3091" end="3112" title="List of hop varieties" label="List of hop varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q14404476" start="3155" end="3159" title="wort" label="wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="3163" end="3170" title="brewing" label="brewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="3290" end="3298" title="pharmacy" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217753" start="3356" end="3362" title="catkin" label="catkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61951" start="3466" end="3474" title="infusion" label="infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q969804" start="3483" end="3491" title="tincture" label="tincture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259977" start="3504" end="3511" title="extract" label="extract"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46593" wikidata="Q336989" url="?curid=46593" title="Hay">
<text>Hay is grass, legumes, or other herbaceous plants that have been cut and dried to be stored for use as animal fodder, either for large grazing animals raised as livestock, such as cattle, horses, goats, and sheep, or for smaller domesticated animals such as rabbits and guinea pigs. Pigs can eat hay, but do not digest it as efficiently as herbivores do.

Hay can be used as animal fodder when or where there is not enough pasture or rangeland on which to graze an animal, when grazing is not feasible due to weather (such as during the winter), or when lush pasture by itself would be too rich for the health of the animal. It is also fed when an animal cannot access any pastures—for example, when the animal is being kept in a stable or barn.

Hay production and harvest, commonly known as &quot;making hay&quot;, &quot;haymaking&quot;, &quot;haying&quot; or &quot;doing hay&quot;, involves a multiple step process: cutting, drying or &quot;curing&quot;, raking, processing, and storing. Hayfields do not have to be reseeded each year in the way that grain crops are, but regular fertilizing is usually desirable, and overseeding a field every few years helps increase yield.

== Composition ==

Commonly used plants for hay include mixtures of grasses such as ryegrass (&quot;Lolium&quot; species), timothy, brome, fescue, Bermuda grass, orchard grass, and other species, depending on region. Hay may also include legumes, such as alfalfa (lucerne) and clovers (red, white and subterranean). Legumes in hay are ideally cut pre-bloom. Other pasture forbs are also sometimes a part of the mix, though these plants are not necessarily desired as certain forbs are toxic to some animals.

In the UK some hay is harvested from traditionally managed hay meadows which have a highly diverse flora and which support a rich eco-system. The hay produced by these meadows is species rich and was traditionally used to feed horses.

Oat, barley, and wheat plant materials are occasionally cut green and made into hay for animal fodder, and more usually used in the form of straw, a harvest byproduct of stems and dead leaves that are baled after the grain has been harvested and threshed. Straw is used mainly for animal bedding. Although straw is also used as fodder, particularly as a source of dietary fiber, it has lower nutritional value than hay.

In agroforestry systems are developed to produce tree hay.

It is the leaf and seed material in the hay that determines its quality, because they contain more of the nutrition value for the animal than the stems do. Farmers try to harvest hay at the point when the seed heads are not quite ripe and the leaf is at its maximum when the grass is mowed in the field. The cut material is allowed to dry so that the bulk of the moisture is removed but the leafy material is still robust enough to be picked up from the ground by machinery and processed into storage in bales, stacks or pits. Methods of haymaking thus aim to minimize the shattering and falling away of the leaves during handling.

Hay production is highly sensitive to weather conditions, particularly during the harvest period. In drought conditions, both seed and leaf production are stunted, resulting in hay with a high ratio of dry, coarse stems that possess very low nutritional value. Conversely, excessively wet weather can cause cut hay to spoil in the field before it can be baled. Consequently, the primary challenge and risk for farmers in hay production is managing the weather, especially during the critical few weeks when the plants are at optimal maturity for harvesting. A lucky break in the weather often moves the haymaking tasks (such as mowing, tedding, and baling) to the top priority on the farm&#x27;s to-do list. This is reflected in the idiom &quot;to &quot;. Hay that was too wet at cutting may develop rot and mold after being baled, creating the potential for toxins to form in the feed, which could make the animals sick.

After harvest, hay also has to be stored in a manner to prevent it from getting wet. Mold and spoilage reduce nutritional value and may cause illness in animals. A symbiotic fungus in fescue may cause illness in horses and cattle.

The successful harvest of maximum yields of high-quality hay is entirely dependent on the coincident occurrence of optimum crop, field, and weather conditions. When this occurs, there may be a period of intense activity on the hay farm while harvest proceeds until weather conditions become unfavourable.

== Use ==


Hay or grass is the foundation of the diet for all grazing animals, and can provide as much as 100% of the fodder required for an animal. Hay is usually fed to an animal during times when winter, drought, or other conditions make pasture unavailable. Animals that can eat hay vary in the types of grasses suitable for consumption, the ways they consume hay, and how they digest it. Therefore, different types of animals require hay that consists of similar plants to what they would eat while grazing, and, likewise, plants that are toxic to an animal in pasture are generally also toxic if they are dried into hay.

Most animals are fed hay in two daily feedings, morning and evening, more for the convenience of humans, as most grazing animals on pasture naturally consume fodder in multiple feedings throughout the day. Some animals, especially those being raised for meat, may be given enough hay that they simply are able to eat all day. Other animals, especially those that are ridden or driven as working animals may be given a more limited amount of hay to prevent them from getting too fat. The proper amount of hay and the type of hay required varies somewhat between different species. Some animals are also fed concentrated feeds such as grain or vitamin supplements in addition to hay. In most cases, hay or pasture forage must make up 50% or more of the diet by weight.

One of the most significant differences in hay digestion is between ruminant animals, such as cattle and sheep, and nonruminant, hindgut fermentors, such as horses. Both types of animals can digest cellulose in grass and hay, but do so by different mechanisms. Because of the four-chambered stomach of cattle, they are often able to break down older forage and have more tolerance of mold and changes in diet. The single-chambered stomach and cecum or &quot;hindgut&quot; of the horse uses bacterial processes to break down cellulose that are more sensitive to changes in feeds and the presence of mold or other toxins, requiring horses to be fed hay of a more consistent type and quality.
Different animals also use hay in different ways: cattle evolved to eat forages in relatively large quantities at a single feeding, and then, due to the process of rumination, take a considerable amount of time for their stomachs to digest food, often accomplished while the animal is lying down, at rest. Thus quantity of hay is important for cattle, who can effectively digest hay of low quality if fed in sufficient amounts. Sheep will eat between two and four percent of their body weight per day in dry feed, such as hay, and are very efficient at obtaining the most nutrition possible from three to five pounds per day of hay or other forage. They require three to four hours per day to eat enough hay to meet their nutritional requirements.

Unlike ruminants, horses digest their food in small portions throughout the day and can utilize only about 2.5% of their body weight in feed within a 24-hour period. Horses evolved to graze continuously while on the move, covering up to 50 miles (80 km) per day in the wild. Their stomachs digest food quickly, allowing them to extract a higher nutritional value from smaller quantities of feed When horses are fed low-quality hay, they may develop an unhealthy, obese, &quot;hay belly&quot; due to over-consumption of &quot;empty&quot; calories. If their type of feed is changed dramatically, or if they are fed moldy hay or hay containing toxic plants, they can become ill; colic is the leading cause of death in horses. Contaminated hay can also lead to respiratory problems in horses. Hay can be soaked in water, sprinkled with water or subjected to steaming to reduce dust.

== Harvest and transport ==

Methods and the terminology to describe the steps of making hay have varied greatly throughout history, and many regional variations still exist today. Whether done by hand or by modern mechanized equipment, tall grass and legumes at the proper stage of maturity must be cut, then allowed to dry (preferably by the sun), then raked into long, narrow piles known as windrows. Next, the cured hay is gathered up in some form (usually by some type of baling process) and placed for storage into a haystack or into a barn or shed to protect it from moisture and rot.

During the growing season, which is spring and early summer in temperate climates, grass grows at a fast pace. Hay reaches its peak nutritional value when all leaves are fully developed and seed or flower heads are just shy of full maturity. At this stage of maximum growth in the pasture or field, if timed correctly, the hay is cut. Grass hay cut too early retains high moisture content, making it harder to cure and resulting in a lower yield per acre compared to more mature grass. However, hay cut too late becomes coarser, has a lower resale value, and loses some of its nutrients. Typically, there is a two-week &quot;window&quot; during which grass is at its ideal stage for harvesting hay. The time for cutting alfalfa hay is ideally done when plants reach maximum height and are producing flower buds or just beginning to bloom, cutting during or after full bloom results in lower nutritional value of the hay.

Hay can be raked into rows as it is cut, then turned periodically to dry, particularly if a modern swather is used. Or, especially with older equipment or methods, the hay is cut and allowed to lie spread out in the field until it is dry, then raked into rows for processing into bales afterwards. During the drying period, which can take several days, the process is usually sped up by turning the cut hay over with a hay rake or spreading it out with a tedder. If it rains while the hay is drying, turning the windrow can also allow it to dry faster. Turning the hay too often or too roughly can also cause drying leaf matter to fall off, reducing the nutrients available to animals. Drying can also be sped up by mechanized processes, such as the use of a hay conditioner, or by the use of chemicals sprayed onto the hay to speed evaporation of moisture, though these are more expensive techniques, not in general use except in areas where there is a combination of modern technology, high prices for hay, and too much rain for hay to dry properly.

Once hay is cut, dried and raked into windrows, it is usually gathered into bales or bundles, and then hauled to a central location for storage. In some places, depending on geography, region, climate, and culture, hay is gathered loose and stacked without being baled first.

== History ==

=== Early methods ===

Columella in his &quot;De re rustica&quot; describes the usual haying process of the early Roman Empire. Much hay was originally cut by scythe by teams of workers, dried in the field and gathered loose on wagons. Later, haying was accomplished with horse-drawn implements such as mowers.

After hay was cut and dried, it was raked or &quot;rowed up&quot; by raking it into a linear heap by hand or with a horse-drawn implement. Turning hay, when needed, originally was done by hand with a fork or rake. Once the dried hay was rowed up, pitchforks were used to pile it loose, originally onto a horse-drawn cart or wagon, later onto a truck or tractor-drawn trailer, for which a sweep could be used instead of pitch forks.

Loose hay was transported to a designated storage area, typically a slightly elevated location to ensure proper drainage, where it was constructed into a haystack. Building the stack was a skilled task, as it needed to be made waterproof during construction. The haystack would compress under its own weight, allowing the hay to cure through the release of heat generated by the residual moisture and compression forces. The haystack was usually enclosed in a fenced-off area, known as a rick yard, to separate it from the rest of the paddock, and was often thatched or covered with sheets to protect it from moisture. When needed, slices of hay would be cut using a hay knife and fed to animals each day.

On some farms, the loose hay was stored in a barrack, shed, or barn, normally in such a way that it would compress down and cure. Hay could be stored in a specially designed barn with little internal structure to allow more room for the hay loft. Alternatively, an upper storey of a cow-shed or stable was used, with hatches in the floor to allow hay to be thrown down into hay-racks below. Depending on the region, the term &quot;hay rick&quot; could refer to the machine for cutting hay, the haystack or the wagon used to collect the hay.
With the invention of agricultural machinery such as the tractor and the baler, most hay production became mechanized by the 1930s. Hay baling began with the invention of the first hay press in about 1850. Timothy grass and clover were the most common plants used for hay in the early 20th century in the United States, though both plants are native to Europe. Hay was baled for easier handling and to reduce space required for storage and shipment. The first bales weighed about 300 pounds. The original machines were of a vertical design similar to the one photographed by the Greene Co. Historical Society. They used a horse-driven screw-press mechanism or a dropped weight to compress the hay. The first patent went to HL Emery for a horse-powered, screw-operated hay press in 1853. Other models were reported as early as 1843 built by PK Dederick&#x27;s Sons of Albany, New York, or Samuel Hewitt of Switzerland County, Indiana. Later, horizontal machines were devised. One was the “Perpetual Press” made by PK Dederick of Albany in 1872. They could be powered by steam engines by about 1882. The continuous hay baler arrived in 1914.

=== Modern mechanized techniques ===


Modern mechanized hay production today is usually performed by a number of machines. While small operations use a tractor to pull various implements for mowing and raking, larger operations use specialized machines such as a mower or a swather, which are designed to cut the hay and arrange it into a windrow in one step. Balers are usually pulled by a tractor, with larger balers requiring more powerful tractors.

Mobile balers, machines that gather and bale hay in one process were first developed around 1940. The initial balers produced rectangular bales that were small enough for an individual to lift, typically weighing between 70 and 100 pounds (32 to 45 kg) each. The size and shape of these bales allowed for manual handling, including lifting, stacking on transport vehicles, and constructing a haystack by hand. To reduce labor and enhance safety, loaders and stackers were subsequently developed to mechanize the transportation of small bales from the field to the haystack or hay barn. Later in the 20th century, balers were developed capable of producing large bales that weigh up to .

Conditioning of hay crop during cutting or soon thereafter is popular. The basic idea is that it decreases drying time, particularly in humid climates or if rain threatens to interfere with haying. Usually, rollers or flails inside a mower conditioner crimp, crack or strip the alfalfa or grass stems to increase evaporation rate. Sometimes, a salt solution is sprayed over the top of the hay (generally alfalfa) that helps to dry the hay.

== Fertilization and weed control ==

Modern hay production often relies on artificial fertilizer and herbicides. Traditionally, manure has been used on hayfields, but modern chemical fertilizers are used today as well. Hay that is to be certified as weed-free for use in wilderness areas must often be sprayed with chemical herbicides to keep unwanted weeds from the field, and sometimes even non-certified hayfields are sprayed to limit the production of noxious weeds. Organic forms of fertilization and weed control are required for hay grown for consumption by animals whose meat will ultimately be certified organic. To that end, compost and field rotation can enhance soil fertility, and regular mowing of fields in the growth phase of the hay will often reduce the prevalence of undesired weeds. In recent times, some producers have experimented with human sewage sludge to grow hay. This is not a certified organic method and no warning labels are mandated by EPA. One concern with hay grown on human sewage sludge is that the hay can take up heavy metals, which are then consumed by animals. Molybdenum poisoning is a particular concern in ruminants such as cows and goats, and there have been animal deaths. Another concern is with a herbicide known as aminopyralid, which can pass through the digestive tract in animals, making their resulting manure toxic to many plants and thus unsuitable as fertilizer for food crops. Aminopyralid and related herbicides can persist in the environment for several years.

== Baling ==


Small square bales are made in two main variations. The smaller &quot;two-tie&quot; (two twines to hold the bale together) or larger &quot;three-tie&quot; (three twines to hold the bale together). They vary in size within both groups but are generally popular in different markets. The smaller two-tie bales are favored in the hobby animal market and are preferred for their convenient size. The larger, three-tie bales are favored by producers wanting to export bales because of the increase of efficiency in transportation and also by customers for a better price per ton. The two-tie small bales are the original form factor of hay bales. Balers for both types of small bales are still manufactured, as well as stackers, bundlers and bale accumulators for handling them. Some farms still use equipment manufactured over 50 years ago to produce small bales. The small bale remains part of overall ranch lore and tradition with &quot;hay bucking&quot; competitions still held for fun at many rodeos and county fairs. Small square bales are often stacked mechanically or by hand in a crisscrossed fashion sometimes called a &quot;haystack&quot;, &quot;rick&quot; or &quot;hayrick&quot;. Rain tends to wash nutrition out of hay and can cause spoilage or mold; hay in small square bales is particularly susceptible. Small bales are, therefore, often stored in a haymow or hayshed. Haystacks built outside are usually protected by tarpaulins. If this is not done, the top two layers of the stack are often lost to rot and mold, and if the stack is not arranged in a proper haystack, moisture can seep even deeper into the stack. The rounded shape and tighter compaction of round bales make them less susceptible to spoilage, as the water is less likely to penetrate the bale. Adding net wrap, which is not used on square bales, offers even more weather resistance. People who keep small numbers of animals may prefer small bales that one person can handle without machinery. There is also a risk that hay bales may be moldy or contain decaying carcasses of tiny creatures accidentally killed by baling equipment and swept up into the bale, producing toxins such as botulinum toxin. Both can be deadly to non-ruminant herbivores such as horses, and when this occurs, the entire contaminated bale generally is thrown out, another reason some people continue to support the market for small bales.

Farmers who need to make large amounts of hay will likely choose balers that produce much larger bales, maximizing the amount of hay protected from the elements. Large bales come in two types: round and square. Large square bales, which can weigh up to , can be stacked and easily transported on trucks. Large round bales, which typically weigh , are more moisture-resistant and pack the hay more densely (especially at the center). Round bales are quickly fed with the use of mechanized equipment. The volume-to-surface area ratio allows many dry-area farmers to leave large bales outside until consumed. Wet-area farmers and those in climates with heavy snowfall can stack round bales under a shed or tarp and use a light but durable plastic wrap that partially encloses outside bales. The wrap repels moisture but leaves the ends of the bale exposed so that the hay itself can &quot;breathe&quot; and does not begin to ferment. When it is possible to store round bales under a shed, they last longer, and less hay is lost to rot and moisture.

For animals that eat silage, a bale wrapper may be used to seal a round bale completely and trigger the fermentation process. It is a technique used as a money-saving process by producers who do not have access to a superior silo, and for producing silage that is transported to other locations. In very damp climates, it is a legitimate alternative to drying hay completely. When processed properly, the natural fermentation process prevents mold and rot. Round bale silage is also sometimes called &quot;haylage&quot;, and is seen more commonly in Europe than in either the United States or Australia. Hay stored in this fashion must remain completely sealed in plastic, as any holes or tears will allow the entrance of oxygen and can stop the preservation properties of fermentation and lead to spoilage.

== Stacking ==


Hay requires protection from the weather, and is optimally stored inside buildings, but weather protection is also provided in other ways involving outdoor storage, either in haystacks or in large tight bales (round or rectangular); these methods all depend on the surface of an outdoor mass of hay (stack or bale) taking the hit of the weather and thereby preserving the main body of hay underneath.

Traditionally, outdoor hay storage was done with haystacks of loose hay, where most of the hay was sufficiently preserved to last through the winter, and the top surface of the stack (being weathered) was consigned to become compost the next summer. The term &quot;loose&quot; means not pressed or baled but does not necessarily mean a light, fluffy lay of randomly oriented stems. Especially in wet climates, such as those of Britain, the degree of shedding of rainwater by the stack&#x27;s outer surface is an important factor, and the stacking of loose hay was developed into a skilled-labor task that in its more advanced forms even involved thatching the top. In many stacking methods (with or without thatched tops), stems were oriented in sheaves, which were laid in oriented sequence.

With the advent of large bales since the 1960s, today hay is often stored outdoors because the outer surface of the large bale performs the weather-shedding function. The large bales can also be stacked, which allows a given degree of exposed surface area to count for a larger volume of protected interior hay. Plastic tarpaulins are sometimes used to shed the rain, with the goal of reduced hay wastage, but the cost of the tarpaulins must be weighed against the cost of the hay spoilage percentage difference; it may not be worth the cost, or the plastic&#x27;s environmental footprint.

After World War II, British farmers found that the demand outstripped supply for skilled farm laborers experienced in the thatching of haystacks. This no doubt contributed to the pressure for baling in large bales to increasingly replace stacking, which was happening anyway as haymaking technology (like other farm technology) continued toward extensive mechanization with one-person operation of many tasks. Today tons of hay can be cut, conditioned, dried, raked, and baled by one person, as long as the right equipment is at hand (although that equipment is expensive). These tons of hay can also be moved by one person, again with the right (expensive) equipment, as loaders with long spikes run by hydraulic circuits pick up each large bale and move it to its feeding location.

A fence may be built to enclose a haystack and prevent roaming animals from eating it, or animals may feed directly from a field-constructed stack as part of their winter feeding.

Haystacks are also sometimes called haycocks; among some users this term refers more specifically to small piles of cut-and-gathered hay awaiting stacking into larger stacks. The words (&quot;haystack, haycock&quot;) are usually styled as solid compounds, but not always. Haystacks are also sometimes called stooks, , or .

Loose stacks are built to prevent the accumulation of moisture and promote drying or curing. In some places, this is accomplished by constructing stacks with a conical or ridged top. The exterior may look gray on the surface after weathering, but the inner hay retains traces of its fresh-cut aroma and maintains a faded green tint. They can be covered with thatch, or kept within a protective structure. One such structure is a moveable roof supported by four posts, historically called a Dutch roof, hay barrack, or hay cap. Haystacks may also be built on top of a foundation laid on the ground to reduce spoilage, in some places made of wood or brush. In other areas, hay is stacked loose, built around a central pole, a tree, or within an area of three or four poles to add stability to the stack.

One loose hay stacking technique seen in the British Isles is to initially stack freshly cut hay into smaller mounds called foot cocks, hay coles, kyles, hayshocks or haycocks, to facilitate initial curing. These are sometimes built atop platforms or tripods formed of three poles, used to keep hay off the ground and let air into the center for better drying. The shape causes dew and rainwater to roll down the sides, allowing the hay within to cure. People who handle the hay may use hayforks or pitchforks to move or pitch the hay in building haycocks and haystacks. Construction of tall haystacks is sometimes aided with a ramp, ranging from simple poles to a device for building large loose stacks called a beaverslide.

== Safety ==

=== Mold ===
Hay is generally one of the safest feeds to provide to domesticated grazing herbivores. Amounts must be monitored so animals do not get too fat or too thin. Supplemental feed may be required for working animals with high energy requirements.

Animals who eat spoiled hay may develop a variety of illnesses, from coughs related to dust and mold, to various other illnesses, the most serious of which may be botulism, which can occur if a small animal, such as a rodent or snake, is killed by the baling equipment, then rots inside the bale, causing a toxin to form. Some animals are sensitive to particular fungi or molds that may grow on living plants. For example, an endophytic fungus that sometimes grows on fescue can cause abortion in pregnant mares. Some plants themselves may also be toxic to some animals. For example, &quot;Pimelea&quot;, a native Australian plant, also known as flax weed, is highly toxic to cattle.

Farmer&#x27;s lung is a hypersensitivity pneumonitis induced by the inhalation of biologic dusts coming from hay dust or mold spores or other agricultural products. Exposure to hay can also trigger allergic rhinitis for people who are hypersensitive to airborne allergens.

=== Spontaneous combustion ===

Hay must be fully dried when baled and kept dry in storage. If hay is baled while too moist or becomes wet while in storage, there is a significant risk of spontaneous combustion. Hay stored outside must be stacked in such a way that moisture contact is minimal. Some stacks are arranged in such a manner that the hay itself sheds water when it falls. Other methods of stacking use the first layers or bales of hay as a cover to protect the rest. To completely keep out moisture, outside haystacks can also be covered by tarps, and many round bales are partially wrapped in plastic as part of the baling process. Hay is also stored under a roof when resources permit. It is frequently placed inside sheds, or stacked inside of a barn. On the other hand, care must also be taken that hay is never exposed to any possible source of heat or flame, as dry hay and the dust it produces are highly flammable.

Hay baled before it is fully dry can produce enough heat to start a fire. Haystacks produce internal heat due to bacterial fermentation. If hay is stacked with wet grass, the heat produced can be sufficient to ignite the hay causing a fire. Farmers have to be careful about moisture levels to avoid spontaneous combustion, which is a leading cause of haystack fires. Heat is produced by the respiration process, which occurs until the moisture content of drying hay drops below 40%. Hay is considered fully dry when it reaches 20% moisture. Combustion problems typically occur within five to seven days of baling. A bale cooler than is in little danger, but bales between need to be removed from a barn or structure and separated so that they can cool off. If the temperature of a bale exceeds more than , it can combust.

To check hay moisture content, the farmer can use a hand, an oven or a moisture tester. The most efficient way is to use a moisture tester which shows the moisture content in a few seconds.

=== Weight ===
Due to its weight, hay can cause a number of injuries to humans, particularly those related to lifting and moving bales, as well as risks related to stacking and storing. Hazards include the danger of having a poorly constructed stack collapse, causing either falls to people on the stack or injuries to people on the ground who are struck by falling bales. Large round hay bales present a particular danger to those who handle them, because they can weigh over and cannot be moved without special equipment. Nonetheless, because they are cylindrical in shape, and thus can roll easily, it is not uncommon for them to fall from stacks or roll off the equipment used to handle them. From 1992 to 1998, 74 farm workers in the United States were killed in large round hay bale accidents, usually when bales were being moved from one location to another, such as when feeding animals.

== Chemical composition ==

== See also ==
* Export hay
* Hay lot
* National Hay Association

== References ==

== External links ==
* Hay Harvesting in the 1940s instructional films, Center for Digital Initiatives, University of Vermont Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="0" end="3" title="Hay" label="Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12363071" start="7" end="12" title="Graminoid" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="14" end="20" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="32" end="48" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="103" end="116" title="animal fodder" label="animal fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="135" end="142" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="161" end="170" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="180" end="186" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="188" end="193" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="196" end="201" title="domestic goat" label="goats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="207" end="212" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q149017" start="258" end="265" title="Domestic rabbit" label="rabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q79803" start="270" end="280" title="guinea pig" label="guinea pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="283" end="287" title="Domestic pig" label="Pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="340" end="349" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="423" end="430" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364870" start="434" end="443" title="rangeland" label="rangeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q214252" start="730" end="736" title="stable" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303167" start="740" end="744" title="barn" label="barn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="1054" end="1059" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="1248" end="1255" title="pasture" label="grasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q158509" start="1264" end="1272" title="ryegrass" label="ryegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q256508" start="1303" end="1310" title="Timothy-grass" label="timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q147621" start="1312" end="1317" title="Bromus" label="brome"/>
<link wikidata="Q157337" start="1319" end="1325" title="fescue" label="fescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q959222" start="1327" end="1340" title="Cynodon" label="Bermuda grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047931" start="1342" end="1355" title="orchard grass" label="orchard grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="1418" end="1424" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q156106" start="1435" end="1442" title="alfalfa" label="alfalfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q101538" start="1457" end="1463" title="clover" label="clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q156635" start="1466" end="1469" title="Trifolium pratense" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q148675" start="1471" end="1476" title="Trifolium repens" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q889526" start="1481" end="1493" title="Subterranean clover" label="subterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="1496" end="1502" title="Legume" label="Legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467207" start="1552" end="1556" title="forb" label="forb"/>
<link wikidata="Q119606435" start="1748" end="1758" title="hay meadow" label="hay meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="1788" end="1793" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="1925" end="1928" title="Oat" label="Oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="1930" end="1936" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="1942" end="1947" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="2020" end="2026" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="2065" end="2070" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369140" start="2171" end="2179" title="Threshing" label="threshed"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="2181" end="2186" title="Straw" label="Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="2289" end="2302" title="dietary fiber" label="dietary fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q397350" start="2349" end="2361" title="agroforestry" label="agroforestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q122182003" start="2395" end="2403" title="tree hay" label="tree hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="2512" end="2521" title="nutrition" label="nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q97219557" start="3675" end="3682" title="tedding" label="tedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q184511" start="3772" end="3777" title="idiom" label="idiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="4126" end="4135" title="symbiotic" label="symbiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q157337" start="4146" end="4152" title="fescue" label="fescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="4619" end="4625" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="4742" end="4749" title="pasture" label="pasture"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="5287" end="5293" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q228534" start="5516" end="5530" title="working animal" label="working animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="5762" end="5767" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377214" start="5841" end="5847" title="forage" label="forage"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="5965" end="5973" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="5991" end="5997" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="6002" end="6007" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765998" start="6026" end="6044" title="hindgut fermentation" label="hindgut fermentors"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="6054" end="6059" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="6095" end="6104" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q185317" start="6340" end="6345" title="cecum" label="cecum"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="6751" end="6761" title="ruminant" label="rumination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569563" start="8012" end="8017" title="horse colic" label="colic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55999860" start="8190" end="8198" title="Hay steaming" label="steaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610560" start="8610" end="8617" title="windrow" label="windrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303167" start="8758" end="8762" title="barn" label="barn"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="8872" end="8881" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="8882" end="8889" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156106" start="9529" end="9536" title="alfalfa" label="alfalfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461556" start="9830" end="9837" title="swather" label="swather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937285" start="10150" end="10158" title="hay rake" label="hay rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q967186" start="10186" end="10192" title="tedder (machine)" label="tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q138774" start="10490" end="10505" title="Conditioner (farming)" label="hay conditioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="10564" end="10575" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130912" start="11235" end="11241" title="scythe" label="scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="11304" end="11309" title="wagon" label="wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930361" start="11379" end="11384" title="mower" label="mower"/>
<link wikidata="Q107293" start="11635" end="11644" title="pitchfork" label="pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q234668" start="11704" end="11708" title="cart" label="cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="11712" end="11717" title="wagon" label="wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="11732" end="11737" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615747" start="12488" end="12497" title="hay knife" label="hay knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q743560" start="12573" end="12580" title="hay barrack" label="barrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q721931" start="12582" end="12586" title="shed" label="shed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303167" start="12591" end="12595" title="barn" label="barn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12765" end="12773" title="Barn#Uses" label="hay loft"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000047" start="13091" end="13113" title="agricultural machinery" label="agricultural machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="13126" end="13133" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="13142" end="13147" title="baler" label="baler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160362" start="13176" end="13186" title="mechanization" label="mechanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="13250" end="13259" title="hay press" label="hay press"/>
<link wikidata="Q256508" start="13275" end="13288" title="Timothy grass" label="Timothy grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q101538" start="13293" end="13299" title="clover" label="clover"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13374" end="13387" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="13422" end="13428" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13648" end="13677" title="Greene Co. Historical Society" label="Greene Co. Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="13936" end="13952" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q507459" start="13974" end="14001" title="Switzerland County" label="Switzerland County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="14363" end="14370" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930361" start="14474" end="14479" title="mower" label="mower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461556" start="14485" end="14492" title="swather" label="swather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="14571" end="14576" title="Baler" label="Baler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="14672" end="14677" title="baler" label="baler"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="15923" end="15929" title="manure" label="manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="16066" end="16081" title="wilderness area" label="wilderness area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067310" start="16251" end="16263" title="noxious weed" label="noxious weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q899944" start="16659" end="16672" title="sewage sludge" label="sewage sludge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="16896" end="16906" title="Molybdenum" label="Molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="16944" end="16952" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746469" start="17058" end="17070" title="aminopyralid" label="aminopyralid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="17972" end="17977" title="Baler" label="Baler"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="18229" end="18234" title="ranch" label="ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685895" start="18259" end="18282" title="Hay buck" label="&amp;quot;hay bucking&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="18323" end="18328" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q288514" start="18341" end="18345" title="fair" label="fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347026" start="18758" end="18767" title="tarpaulin" label="tarpaulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208413" start="19492" end="19507" title="botulinum toxin" label="botulinum toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192164" start="19535" end="19543" title="ruminant" label="ruminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="19563" end="19568" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q660071" start="20791" end="20797" title="silage" label="silage"/>
<link wikidata="Q805203" start="20801" end="20813" title="bale wrapper" label="bale wrapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q213643" start="20995" end="20999" title="Storage silo" label="silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="21320" end="21326" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="21363" end="21372" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="22644" end="22653" title="thatching" label="thatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379273" start="23035" end="23047" title="surface area" label="surface area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347026" start="23112" end="23121" title="tarpaulin" label="tarpaulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="23389" end="23401" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q166656" start="23434" end="23459" title="supply and demand" label="demand outstripped supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972552" start="24087" end="24104" title="hydraulic circuit" label="hydraulic circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="24588" end="24603" title="compound (linguistics)" label="solid compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q371827" start="24657" end="24662" title="stook" label="stook"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="25031" end="25037" title="thatch" label="thatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878259" start="26189" end="26200" title="beaverslide" label="beaverslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="26285" end="26297" title="domesticated" label="domesticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="26306" end="26315" title="herbivore" label="herbivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q228534" start="26425" end="26439" title="working animal" label="working animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="26569" end="26573" title="Mold (fungus)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q154865" start="26636" end="26644" title="botulism" label="botulism"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="26836" end="26841" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q260335" start="26899" end="26909" title="endophytic" label="endophytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="26910" end="26916" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157337" start="26941" end="26947" title="fescue" label="fescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="26958" end="26966" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104034" start="26979" end="26984" title="mare (horse)" label="mares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708065" start="27063" end="27070" title="Pimelea" label="Pimelea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396859" start="27158" end="27176" title="Farmer&amp;#x27;s lung" label="Farmer&amp;#x27;s lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q35890" start="27182" end="27210" title="hypersensitivity pneumonitis" label="hypersensitivity pneumonitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="27279" end="27283" title="Mold (fungus)" label="mold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="27300" end="27312" title="agricultural" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="27356" end="27373" title="allergic rhinitis" label="allergic rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q369012" start="27620" end="27642" title="spontaneous combustion" label="spontaneous combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303167" start="28193" end="28197" title="barn" label="barn"/>
<link wikidata="Q910035" start="28356" end="28365" title="flammable" label="flammable"/>
<link wikidata="Q369012" start="28667" end="28689" title="spontaneous combustion" label="spontaneous combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="30121" end="30134" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421560" start="30324" end="30334" title="Export hay" label="Export hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685835" start="30337" end="30344" title="Hay lot" label="Hay lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972988" start="30347" end="30371" title="National Hay Association" label="National Hay Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46594" wikidata="Q160066" url="?curid=46594" title="Straw">
<text>Straw is an agricultural byproduct consisting of the dry s of cereal plants after the grain and chaff have been removed. It makes up about half of the yield by weight of cereal crops such as barley, oats, rice, rye and wheat. It has a number of different uses, including fuel, livestock bedding and fodder, thatching and basket making.

Straw is usually gathered and stored in a straw bale, which is a , or bundle, of straw tightly bound with twine, wire, or string. Straw bales may be square, rectangular, star shaped or round, and can be very large, depending on the type of baler used.

== Uses==

Current and historic uses of straw include:

===Animal feed===
Straw may be fed as part of the roughage component of the diet to cattle or horses that are on a near maintenance level of energy requirement. It has a low digestible energy and nutrient content (as opposed to hay, which is much more nutritious). The heat generated when microorganisms in a herbivore&#x27;s gut digest straw can be useful in maintaining body temperature in cold climates. Due to the risk of impaction and its poor nutrient profile, it should always be restricted to part of the diet. It may be fed as it is, or chopped into short lengths, known as chaff.

===Basketry===

Bee skeps and linen baskets are made from coiled and bound together continuous lengths of straw. The technique is known as lip work.

===Bedding===

Straw is commonly used as bedding for ruminants and horses. It may be used as bedding and food for small animals, but this often leads to injuries to mouth, nose and eyes as straw is quite sharp.

The straw-filled mattress, also known as a palliasse, is still used by people in many parts of the world.

===Bioplastic===

Rice straw, an agricultural waste which is not usually recovered, can be turned into bioplastic with mechanical properties akin to polystyrene in its dry state.

===Chemicals===
Straw is being investigated as a source of fine chemicals including alkaloids, flavonoids, lignins, phenols, and steroids.

===Construction material===

In many parts of the world, straw is used to bind clay and concrete. A mixture of clay and straw, known as cob, can be used as a building material. There are many recipes for making cob.

When baled, straw has moderate insulation characteristics (about R-1.5/inch according to Oak Ridge National Lab and Forest Product Lab testing). It can be used, alone or in a post-and-beam construction, to build straw bale houses. When bales are used to build or insulate buildings, the straw bales are commonly finished with earthen plaster. The plastered walls provide some thermal mass, compressive and ductile structural strength, and acceptable fire resistance as well as thermal resistance (insulation), somewhat in excess of North American building code. Straw is an abundant agricultural waste product, and requires little energy to bale and transport for construction. For these reasons, straw bale construction is gaining popularity as part of passive solar and other renewable energy projects.

Wheat straw can be used as a fibrous filler combined with polymers to produce composite lumber. 

Enviroboard can be made from straw.

Strawblocks are strawbales that have been recompressed to the density of woodblocks, for compact cargo container shipment, or for straw-bale construction of load-bearing walls that support roof-loads, such as a &quot;living&quot; or green roofs.

===Crafts===

Craft usages of straw include:
*Corn dollies
*Straw marquetry
*Straw mobile (straw art)
*Straw painting
*Straw plaiting
*Scarecrows
*Japanese Traditional Cat&#x27;s House
*Japanese wara art

===Construction site sediment control===

Straw bales are sometimes used for sediment control at construction sites. However, bales are often ineffective in protecting water quality and are maintenance-intensive. For these reasons the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and various state agencies recommend use of alternative sediment control practices where possible, such as silt fences, fiber rolls and geotextiles.

They can also be used as burned area emergency response, as ground cover or as in-stream check dams.

===Fuel source===

The use of straw as a carbon-neutral energy source is increasing rapidly, especially for biobutanol. Straw or hay briquettes are a biofuel substitute to coal.

Straw, processed first as briquettes, has been fed into a biogas plant in Aarhus University, Denmark, in a test to see if higher gas yields could be attained.

The use of straw in large-scale biomass power plants is becoming mainstream in the EU, with several facilities already online. The straw is either used directly in the form of bales, or densified into pellets which allows for the feedstock to be transported over longer distances. Finally, torrefaction of straw with pelletisation is gaining attention, because it increases the energy density of the resource, making it possible to transport it still further. This processing step also makes storage much easier, because torrefied straw pellets are hydrophobic. Torrefied straw in the form of pellets can be directly co-fired with coal or natural gas at very high rates and make use of the processing infrastructures at existing coal and gas plants. Because the torrefied straw pellets have superior structural, chemical and combustion properties to coal, they can replace all coal and turn a coal plant into an entirely biomass-fed power station. First generation pellets are limited to a co-firing rate of 15% in modern IGCC plants.

===Gardening===

Straw bale gardening is also popular among gardeners who do not have enough space for soil gardening. When properly conditioned, straw bales can be used as a perfect soil substitute.

===Hats===

There are several styles of straw hats that are made of woven straw.

Many thousands of women and children in England (primarily in the Luton district of Bedfordshire), and large numbers in the United States (mostly Massachusetts), were employed in plaiting straw for making hats. By the late 19th century, vast quantities of plaits were being imported to England from Canton in China, and in the United States most of the straw plait was imported.

A fiber analogous to straw is obtained from the plant &quot;Carludovica palmata&quot;, and is used to make Panama hats.

Traditional Japanese rain protection consisted of a straw hat and a mino cape.

===Horticulture===

Straw is used in cucumber houses and for mushroom growing.

In Japan, certain trees are wrapped with straw to protect them from the effects of a hard winter as well as to use them as a trap for parasite insects. (see Komomaki)

It is also used in ponds to reduce algae by changing the nutrient ratios in the water.

The soil under strawberries is covered with straw to protect the ripe berries from dirt, and straw is also used to cover the plants during winter to prevent the cold from killing them.

Straw also makes an excellent mulch.

===Packaging===

Straw is resistant to being crushed and therefore makes a good packing material. A company in France makes a straw mat sealed in thin plastic sheets.

Straw envelopes for wine bottles have become rarer, but are still to be found at some wine merchants.

Wheat straw is also used in compostable food packaging such as compostable plates. Packaging made from wheat straw can be certified compostable and will biodegrade in a commercial composting environment.

===Paper===

Straw can be pulped to make paper.

===Rope===

Rope made from straw was used by thatchers, in the packaging industry and even in iron foundries.

Saekki is a traditional Korean rope made of woven straw.

===Shoes===

The Chinese wore cailu or caixie, shoes and sandals made of straw, well into modernity.

Koreans wear jipsin, sandals made of straw.

Several types of traditional Japanese shoes, such as waraji and zōri, are made of straw.

In some parts of Germany like Black Forest and Hunsrück people wear straw shoes at home or at carnival.

===Targets===

Heavy-gauge straw rope is coiled and sewn tightly together to make archery targets. This is no longer done entirely by hand, but is partially mechanised. Sometimes a paper or plastic target is set up in front of straw bales, which serve to support the target and provide a safe backdrop.

===Thatching===

Thatching uses straw, reed or similar materials to make a waterproof, lightweight roof with good insulation properties. Straw for this purpose (often wheat straw) is grown specially and harvested using a reaper-binder.

== Health and safety ==
Dried straw presents a fire hazard that can ignite easily if exposed to sparks or an open flame. It can also trigger allergic rhinitis in people who are hypersensitive to airborne allergens such as straw dust.

==See also==

* Corn stover (corn straw)
* Crop residue
* Drinking straw
* Hay
* Straw (colour)
* Sheaf (agriculture), a bundle of straw
* Stook, a stack of straw
* Straw dog
* Wood wool
* Yule Goat

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="0" end="5" title="Straw" label="Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="25" end="34" title="byproduct" label="byproduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="62" end="68" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="86" end="91" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30470787" start="96" end="101" title="chaff" label="chaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="151" end="156" title="crop yield" label="yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="191" end="197" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="199" end="202" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="205" end="209" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="211" end="214" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="219" end="224" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="271" end="275" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938096" start="277" end="294" title="livestock bedding" label="livestock bedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="299" end="305" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="307" end="316" title="thatching" label="thatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q373017" start="321" end="334" title="basket making" label="basket making"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="379" end="389" title="Straw" label="straw bale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="577" end="582" title="baler" label="baler"/>
<link wikidata="Q215210" start="696" end="704" title="roughage" label="roughage"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="874" end="877" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005940" start="1072" end="1081" title="impaction (animals)" label="impaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q30470787" start="1229" end="1234" title="chaff" label="chaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q165107" start="1253" end="1261" title="Bee skep" label="Bee skep"/>
<link wikidata="Q201097" start="1273" end="1279" title="basket" label="basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907584" start="1642" end="1651" title="palliasse" label="palliasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q413458" start="1809" end="1819" title="bioplastic" label="bioplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q146243" start="1855" end="1866" title="polystyrene" label="polystyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q909003" start="1945" end="1958" title="fine chemical" label="fine chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="1970" end="1978" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561192" start="1981" end="1990" title="flavonoid" label="flavonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184817" start="1993" end="1999" title="lignin" label="lignin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407142" start="2002" end="2009" title="phenols" label="phenols"/>
<link wikidata="Q177911" start="2015" end="2022" title="steroid" label="steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="2114" end="2122" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q54802" start="2162" end="2165" title="cob (building)" label="cob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="2248" end="2253" title="Baler" label="baled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255891" start="2455" end="2472" title="straw-bale construction" label="straw bale houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="2497" end="2502" title="Building construction" label="build"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="2506" end="2514" title="Thermal insulation" label="insulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327213" start="2569" end="2584" title="earthen plaster" label="earthen plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150682" start="2619" end="2631" title="thermal mass" label="thermal mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="2790" end="2803" title="building code" label="building code"/>
<link wikidata="Q385817" start="2997" end="3010" title="passive solar" label="passive solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="3021" end="3037" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156762" start="3127" end="3143" title="composite lumber" label="composite lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380983" start="3147" end="3158" title="Enviroboard" label="Enviroboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q187956" start="3281" end="3296" title="cargo container" label="cargo container"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255891" start="3314" end="3337" title="straw-bale construction" label="straw-bale construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313934" start="3341" end="3358" title="load-bearing wall" label="load-bearing wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741" start="3417" end="3427" title="green roof" label="green roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485699" start="3477" end="3489" title="Corn dolly" label="Corn dollies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622383" start="3491" end="3506" title="Straw marquetry" label="Straw marquetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153868" start="3508" end="3520" title="Straw mobile" label="Straw mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622385" start="3534" end="3548" title="Straw painting" label="Straw painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622387" start="3550" end="3564" title="Straw plaiting" label="Straw plaiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990797" start="3566" end="3576" title="Scarecrows" label="Scarecrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11571969" start="3578" end="3615" title="Neko chigura" label="Japanese Traditional Cat&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q96414273" start="3626" end="3634" title="wara art" label="wara art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445301" start="3713" end="3729" title="sediment control" label="sediment control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="3733" end="3745" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q625376" start="3804" end="3817" title="water quality" label="water quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="3871" end="3907" title="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency" label="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515601" start="4021" end="4031" title="silt fence" label="silt fence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446370" start="4034" end="4044" title="fiber roll" label="fiber roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048148" start="4050" end="4061" title="geotextiles" label="geotextiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999639" start="4089" end="4119" title="burned area emergency response" label="burned area emergency response"/>
<link wikidata="Q864224" start="4274" end="4284" title="biobutanol" label="biobutanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="4316" end="4323" title="biofuel" label="biofuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q153022" start="4371" end="4380" title="briquette" label="briquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="4403" end="4415" title="Anaerobic digestion" label="biogas plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q924265" start="4419" end="4436" title="Aarhus University" label="Aarhus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="4474" end="4477" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q587926" start="4537" end="4557" title="Energy crop" label="biomass power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q908322" start="4795" end="4807" title="torrefaction" label="torrefaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141051" start="5495" end="5504" title="co-firing" label="co-firing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11183581" start="5527" end="5531" title="Integrated gasification combined cycle" label="IGCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="5724" end="5728" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q204390" start="5782" end="5791" title="straw hat" label="straw hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q203889" start="5890" end="5895" title="Luton" label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="5970" end="5983" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622387" start="6003" end="6017" title="Straw Plaiting" label="plaiting straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745262" start="6264" end="6283" title="Carludovica palmata" label="Carludovica palmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q741814" start="6311" end="6322" title="Panama hats" label="Panama hats"/>
<link wikidata="Q708965" start="6393" end="6402" title="mino (straw cape)" label="mino cape"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="6442" end="6450" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q83093" start="6466" end="6474" title="mushroom" label="mushroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6488" end="6493" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11266897" start="6642" end="6650" title="Komomaki" label="Komomaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="6688" end="6692" title="alga" label="alga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="6756" end="6768" title="strawberry" label="strawberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395337" start="6957" end="6962" title="mulch" label="mulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q207822" start="7045" end="7061" title="packing material" label="packing material"/>
<link wikidata="Q25380418" start="7276" end="7290" title="food packaging" label="food packaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="7482" end="7487" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q47035653" start="7601" end="7607" title="Saekki" label="Saekki"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610395" start="7689" end="7694" title="cailu" label="cailu"/>
<link wikidata="Q106610395" start="7698" end="7704" title="caixie" label="caixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037865" start="7774" end="7780" title="jipsin" label="jipsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q696696" start="7859" end="7865" title="waraji" label="waraji"/>
<link wikidata="Q249181" start="7870" end="7874" title="zōri" label="zōri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204" start="7926" end="7938" title="Black Forest" label="Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q311234" start="7943" end="7951" title="Hunsrück" label="Hunsrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="8083" end="8090" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="8322" end="8331" title="Thatching" label="Thatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734060" start="8344" end="8348" title="Reed (plant)" label="reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="8472" end="8477" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290617" start="8526" end="8539" title="reaper-binder" label="reaper-binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="8683" end="8700" title="allergic rhinitis" label="allergic rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12208391" start="8793" end="8804" title="Corn stover" label="Corn stover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187955" start="8820" end="8832" title="Crop residue" label="Crop residue"/>
<link wikidata="Q189211" start="8835" end="8849" title="Drinking straw" label="Drinking straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="8852" end="8855" title="Hay" label="Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622361" start="8858" end="8872" title="Straw (colour)" label="Straw (colour)"/>
<link wikidata="Q942040" start="8875" end="8894" title="Sheaf (agriculture)" label="Sheaf (agriculture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q371827" start="8916" end="8921" title="Stook" label="Stook"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164398" start="8942" end="8951" title="Straw dog" label="Straw dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625803" start="8954" end="8963" title="Wood wool" label="Wood wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q522413" start="8966" end="8975" title="Yule Goat" label="Yule Goat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46595" wikidata="Q173056" url="?curid=46595" title="Loom">
<text>A loom is a device used to weave cloth and tapestry. The basic purpose of any loom is to hold the warp threads under tension to facilitate the interweaving of the weft threads. The precise shape of the loom and its mechanics may vary, but the basic function is the same.

==Etymology and usage==
The word &quot;loom&quot; derives from the Old English &quot;geloma&quot;, formed from &quot;ge-&quot; (perfective prefix) and &quot;loma&quot;, a root of unknown origin; the whole word &quot;geloma&quot; meant a utensil, tool, or machine of any kind. In 1404 &quot;lome&quot; was used to mean a machine to enable weaving thread into cloth.
By 1838 &quot;loom&quot; had gained the additional meaning of a machine for interlacing thread.

==Components and actions==
===Basic structure===


Weaving is done on two sets of threads or yarns, which cross one another. The warp threads are the ones stretched on the loom (from the Proto-Indo-European *&quot;werp&quot;, &quot;to bend&quot;). Each thread of the weft (i.e. &quot;that which is woven&quot;) is inserted so that it passes over and under the warp threads.

The ends of the warp threads are usually fastened to beams. One end is fastened to one beam, the other end to a second beam, so that the warp threads all lie parallel and are all the same length. The beams are held apart to keep the warp threads taut. 

The textile is woven starting at one end of the warp threads, and progressing towards the other end. The beam on the finished-fabric end is called the &quot;cloth beam&quot;. The other beam is called the &quot;warp beam&quot;. 

Beams may be used as rollers to allow the weaver to weave a piece of cloth longer than the loom. As the cloth is woven, the warp threads are gradually unrolled from the warp beam, and the woven portion of the cloth is rolled up onto the cloth beam (which is also called the &quot;takeup roll&quot;). The portion of the fabric that has already been formed but not yet rolled up on the takeup roll is called the &quot;fell&quot;. 

Not all looms have two beams. For instance, warp-weighted looms have only one beam; the warp yarns hang from this beam. The bottom ends of the warp yarns are tied to dangling loom weights.

===Motions===

A loom has to perform three principal motions: shedding, picking, and battening. 

*Shedding. Shedding is pulling part of the warp threads aside to form a shed (the space between the raised and unraised warp yarns). The shed is the space through which the filling yarn, carried by the shuttle, can be inserted, forming the weft. 
**Sheds may be simple: for instance, lifting all the odd threads and all the even threads alternately produces a tabby weave (the two sheds are called the shed and countershed). More intricate shedding sequences can produce more complex weaves, such as twill.
*Picking. A single crossing of the weft thread from one side of the loom to the other, through the shed, is known as a pick. Picking is passing the weft through the shed. A new shed is then formed before a new pick is inserted. 
**Conventional shuttle looms can operate at speeds of about 150 to 160 picks per minute.
*Battening. After the pick, the new pass of weft thread has to be tamped up against the fell, to avoid making a fabric with large, irregular gaps between the weft threads. This compression of the weft threads is called battening.

There are also usually two secondary motions, because the newly constructed fabric must be wound onto cloth beam. This process is called taking up. At the same time, the warp yarns must be let off or released from the warp beam, unwinding from it. To become fully automatic, a loom needs a tertiary motion, the filling stop motion. This will brake the loom if the weft thread breaks. An automatic loom requires 0.125 hp to 0.5 hp to operate (100W to 400W).

===Components===
A loom, then, usually needs two beams, and some way to hold them apart. It generally has additional components to make shedding, picking, and battening faster and easier. There are also often components to help take up the fell.

The nature of the loom frame and the shedding, picking, and battening devices vary. Looms come in a wide variety of types, many of them specialized for specific types of weaving. They are also specialized for the lifestyle of the weaver. For instance, nomadic weavers tend to use lighter, more portable looms, while weavers living in cramped city dwellings are more likely to use a tall upright loom, or a loom that folds into a narrow space when not in use.

==Shedding methods==
It is possible to weave by manually threading the weft over and under the warp threads, but this is slow. Some tapestry techniques use manual shedding. Pin looms and peg looms also generally have no shedding devices. Pile carpets generally do not use shedding for the pile, because each pile thread is individually knotted onto the warps, but there may be shedding for the weft holding the carpet together.

Usually weaving uses shedding devices. These devices pull some of the warp threads to each side, so that a shed is formed between them, and the weft is passed through the shed. There are a variety of methods for forming the shed. At least two sheds must be formed, the shed and the countershed. Two sheds is enough for tabby weave; more complex weaves, such as twill weaves, satin weaves, diaper weaves, and figured (picture-forming) weaves, require more sheds.

===Heddle-bar and shed-rod===
Heddle-rods and shedding-sticks are not the fastest way to weave, but they are very simple to make, needing only sticks and yarn. They are often used on vertical and backstrap looms. They allow the creation of elaborate supplementary-weft brocades. They are also used on modern tapestry looms; the frequent changing of weft colour in tapestry makes weaving tapestry slow, so using faster, more complex shedding systems isn&#x27;t worthwhile. The same is true of looms for handmade knotted-pile carpet; hand-knotting each pile thread to the warp takes far more time than weaving a couple of weft threads to hold the pile in place.

At its simplest, a heddle-bar is simply a stick placed across the warp and tied to individual warp threads. It is not tied to &quot;all&quot; of the warp threads; for a plain tabby weave, it is tied to every other thread. The little loops of string used to tie the wraps to the heddle bar are called &quot;heddles&quot; or &quot;leashes&quot;. When the heddle-bar is pulled perpendicular to the warp, it pulls the warp threads it is tied to out of position, creating a shed.

A warp-weighted loom (see diagram) typically uses a heddle-bar, or several. It has two upright &quot;posts&quot; (C); they support a horizontal &quot;beam&quot; (D), which is cylindrical so that the finished cloth can be rolled around it, allowing the loom to be used to weave a piece of cloth taller than the loom, and preserving an ergonomic working height. The warp threads (F, and A and B) hang from the beam and rest against the &quot;shed rod&quot; (E). The &quot;heddle-bar&quot; (G) is tied to some of the warp threads (A, but not B), using loops of string called &quot;leashes&quot; (H). So when the heddle rod is pulled out and placed in the forked sticks protruding from the posts (not lettered, no technical term given in citation), the &quot;shed&quot; (1) is replaced by the &quot;counter-shed&quot; (2). By passing the weft through the shed and the counter-shed, alternately, cloth is woven.

Several heddle-bars can be used side-by-side; three or more can be used to weave twill weaves, for instance.

There are also other ways to create counter-sheds. A shed-rod is simpler and easier to set up than a heddle-bar, and can make a counter-shed. A shed-rod (shedding stick, shed roll) is simply a stick woven through the warp threads. When pulled perpendicular to the threads (or rotated to stand on edge, for wide, flat shedding rods), it creates a counter shed. The combination of a heddle-bar and a shedding-stick can create the shed and countershed needed for a plain tabby weave, as in the video.

There are also slitted heddle-rods, which are sawn partway through, with evenly-placed slits. Each warp thread goes in a slit. The odd-numbered slits are at 90 degrees to the even slits. The rod is rotated back and forth to create the shed and countershed, so it is often large-diameter.

===Tablet weaving===
Tablet weaving uses cards punched with holes. The warp threads pass through the holes, and the cards are twisted and shifted to created varied sheds. This shedding technique is used for narrow work. It is also used to finish edges, weaving decorative selvage bands instead of hemming.

===Rotating-hook heddles===
There are heddles made of flip-flopping rotating hooks, which raise and lower the warp, creating sheds. The hooks, when vertical, have the weft threads looped around them horizontally. If the hooks are flopped over on side or another, the loop of weft twists, raising one or the other side of the loop, which creates the shed and countershed.
===Rigid heddles===
Rigid heddles are generally used on single-shaft looms. Odd warp threads go through the slots, and even ones through the circular holes, or vice versa. The shed is formed by lifting the heddle, and the countershed by depressing it. The warp threads in the slots stay where they are, and the ones in the circular holes are pulled back and forth. A single rigid heddle can hold all the warp threads, though sometimes multiple rigid heddles are used.

Treadles may be used to drive the rigid heddle up and down.

===Non-rigid heddles===

Rigid heddles or (above) are called &quot;rigid&quot; to distinguish them from string and wire heddles. Rigid heddles are one-piece, by non-rigid ones are multi-piece. Each warp thread has its own heald (also, confusingly, called a heddle). The heald has an eyelet at each end (for the staves, also called shafts) and one in the middle, called the mail, (for the warp thread). A row of these healds is slid onto two staves, the upper and lower staves; the staves together, or the staves together with the healds, may be called a &quot;heald frame&quot;, which is, confusingly, also called a shaft and a harness. Replaceable, interchangeable healds can be smaller, allowing finer weaves.

Unlike a rigid heddle, a flexible heddle cannot push the warp thread. This means that two heald frames are needed even for a plain tabby weave. Twill weaves require three or more heald frames (depending on the type of twill), and more complex figured weaves require still more frames. 

The different heald frames must be controlled by some mechanism, and the mechanism must be able to pull them in both directions. They are mostly controlled by treadles; creating the shed with the feet leaves the hands free to ply the shuttle. However in some tabletop looms, heald frames are also controlled by levers.

====Treadle-controlled looms====
In treadle looms, the weaver controls the shedding with their feet, by treading on treadles. Different treadles and combinations of treadles produce different sheds. The weaver must remember the sequence of treadling needed to produce the pattern.

The precise mechanism by which the treadles control the heddles varies. Rigid-heddle treadle looms do exist, but the heddles are usually flexible. Sometimes, the treadles are tied directly to the staves (with a Y-shaped bridle so they stay level). Alternately, they may be tied to a stick called a &quot;lamm&quot;, which in turn is tied to the stave, to make the motion more controlled and regular. The lamm may pivot or slide.

Counterbalance looms are the most common type of treadle loom globally, as they are simple and give a smooth, quiet, quick motion. The heald frames are joined together in pairs, by a cord running over heddle pulleys or a heddle roller. When one heald frame rises, the other falls. It takes a pair of treadles to control a pair of frames. Counterbalance looms are usually used with two or four frames, though some have as many as ten. 

In theory each pair of heald frames has to have an equal number to warps pulled by each frame, so the patterns that can be made on them are limited. In practice, fairly unbalanced tie-ups just make the shed a bit smaller, and as the shed on a counterbalance loom is adjustable in size and quite large to start with (compared to other types of loom), so it is entirely possible to weave good cloth on a counterbalance loom with unbalanced heald frames, unless the loom is extremely shallow (that is, the length of warp being pulled on is short, less than 1 meter or 3 feet), which exacerbates the slightly uneven tension. Limited patterns are not, of course, a disadvantage when weaving plainer patterns, such as tabbies and twills.

Jack looms (also called single-tieup-looms and rising-shed looms), have their treadles connected to jacks, levers that push or pull the heald frames up; the harnesses are weighted to fall back into place by gravity. Several frames can be connected to a single treadle. Frames can also be raised by more than one treadle. This allows treadles to control arbitrary combinations of frames, which vastly increases the number of different sheds that can be created from the same number of frames. Any number of treadles can also be engaged at once, meaning that the number of different sheds that can be selected is two to the power of the number of treadles. Eight is a large but reasonable number of treadles, giving a maximum of 28=256 sheds (some of which will probably not have enough threads on one side to be useful). Having more possible sheds allows more complex patterns, such as diaper weaves.

Jack looms are easy to make and to tie up (if not quite as easy as counterbalance looms). The gravity return makes jack looms heavy to operate. The shed of a jack loom is smaller for a given length of warp being pulled aside by the heddles (loom depth). The warp threads being pulled up by the jacks are also tauter than the other warp threads (unlike a counter balance loom, where the threads are pulled an equal amount in opposite directions). Uneven tension makes weaving evenly harder. It also lowers the maximum tension at which one can practically weave. If the threads are rough, closely-spaced, very long or numerous, it can be hard to open the sheds on the jack loom. Jack looms without castles (the superstructure above the weft) have to lift the heald frames from below, and are noiser due to the impact of wood on wood; elastomer pads can reduce the noise.

In countermarch looms, the treadles are tied to lamms, which may pivot at one end or slide up and down. Half of the lamms in turn connect to jacks, which also pivot, and push or pull the staves up or down. Some countermarches have two horizontal jacks per shaft, others a single vertical jack. Each treadle is tied to &quot;all&quot; of the heald frames, moving some of them up and the rest of them down. This allows the complex combinatorial treadles of a jack loom, with the large shed and balanced, even tension of a counterbalance loom, with its quiet, light operation. Unfortunately, countermarch looms are more complex, harder to build, slower to tie up, and more prone to malfunction.
====Figure harness and the drawloom====
A drawloom is for weaving figured cloth. In a drawloom, a &quot;figure harness&quot; is used to control each warp thread separately, allowing very complex patterns. A drawloom requires two operators, the weaver, and an assistant called a &quot;drawboy&quot; to manage the figure harness.

The earliest confirmed drawloom fabrics come from the State of Chu and date c. 400 BC. Some scholars speculate an independent invention in ancient Syria, since drawloom fabrics found in Dura-Europas are thought to date before 256 AD. The draw loom was invented in China during the Han dynasty (State of Liu?); foot-powered multi-harness looms and jacquard looms were used for silk weaving and embroidery, both of which were cottage industries with imperial workshops. The drawloom enhanced and sped up the production of silk and played a significant role in Chinese silk weaving. The loom was introduced to Persia, India, and Europe.

====Dobby head====
A dobby head is a device that replaces the drawboy, the weaver&#x27;s helper who used to control the warp threads by pulling on draw threads. &quot;Dobby&quot; is a corruption of &quot;draw boy&quot;. Mechanical dobbies pull on the draw threads using pegs in bars to lift a set of levers. The placement of the pegs determines which levers are lifted. The sequence of bars (they are strung together) effectively remembers the sequence for the weaver. Computer-controlled dobbies use solenoids instead of pegs.

====Jacquard head====

The Jacquard loom is a mechanical loom, invented by Joseph Marie Jacquard in 1801, which simplifies the process of manufacturing figured textiles with complex patterns such as brocade, damask, and matelasse. The loom is controlled by punched cards with punched holes, each row of which corresponds to one row of the design. Multiple rows of holes are punched on each card and the many cards that compose the design of the textile are strung together in order. It is based on earlier inventions by the Frenchmen Basile Bouchon (1725), Jean Baptiste Falcon (1728), and Jacques Vaucanson (1740). To call it a loom is a misnomer. A Jacquard head could be attached to a power loom or a handloom, the head controlling which warp thread was raised during shedding. Multiple shuttles could be used to control the colour of the weft during picking. The Jacquard loom is the predecessor to the computer punched card readers of the 19th and 20th centuries.

==Picking (weft insertion)==


The weft may be passed across the shed as a ball of yarn, but usually this is too bulky and unergonomic. Shuttles are designed to be slim, so they pass through the shed; to carry a lot of yarn, so the weaver does not need to refill them too often; and to be an ergonomic size and shape for the particular weaver, loom, and yarn. They may also be designed for low friction.

===Stick shuttles===
====Unnotched stick shuttles====
At their simplest, these are just sticks wrapped with yarn. They may be specially shaped, as with the bobbins and bones used in tapestry-making (bobbins are used on vertical warps, and bones on horizontal ones).
===Notched stick shuttles, rag shuttles, and ski shuttles===

===Boat shuttles===
Boat shuttles may be closed (central hollow with a solid bottom) or open (central hole goes right through). The yarn may be side-feed or end-feed. They are commonly made for 10-cm (4-inch) and 15-cm (6-inch) bobbin lengths.

===Flying shuttle===
Hand weavers who threw a shuttle could only weave a cloth as wide as their armspan. If cloth needed to be wider, two people would do the task (often this would be an adult with a child). John Kay (1704–1779) patented the flying shuttle in 1733. The weaver held a picking stick that was attached by cords to a device at both ends of the shed. With a flick of the wrist, one cord was pulled and the shuttle was propelled through the shed to the other end with considerable force, speed and efficiency. A flick in the opposite direction and the shuttle was propelled back. A single weaver had control of this motion but the flying shuttle could weave much wider fabric than an arm&#x27;s length at much greater speeds than had been achieved with the hand thrown shuttle.

The &quot;flying shuttle&quot; was one of the key developments in weaving that helped fuel the Industrial Revolution. The whole picking motion no longer relied on manual skill and it was just a matter of time before it could be powered by something other than a human.

===Weft insertion in power looms===

Different types of power looms are most often defined by the way that the weft, or pick, is inserted into the warp. Many advances in weft insertion have been made in order to make manufactured cloth more cost effective. Weft insertion rate is a limiting factor in production speed. , industrial looms can weave at 2,000 weft insertions per minute.

There are five main types of weft insertion and they are as follows:
* Shuttle: The first-ever powered looms were shuttle-type looms. Spools of weft are unravelled as the shuttle travels across the shed. This is very similar to projectile methods of weaving, except that the weft spool is stored on the shuttle. These looms are considered obsolete in modern industrial fabric manufacturing because they can only reach a maximum of 300 picks per minute.
* Air jet: An air-jet loom uses short quick bursts of compressed air to propel the weft through the shed in order to complete the weave. Air jets are the fastest traditional method of weaving in modern manufacturing and they are able to achieve up to 1,500 picks per minute. However, the amounts of compressed air required to run these looms, as well as the complexity in the way the air jets are positioned, make them more costly than other looms. 
* Water jet: Water-jet looms use the same principle as air-jet looms, but they take advantage of pressurized water to propel the weft. The advantage of this type of weaving is that water power is cheaper where water is directly available on site. Picks per minute can reach as high as 1,000. 
* Rapier loom: This type of weaving is very versatile, in that rapier looms can weave using a large variety of threads. There are several types of rapiers, but they all use a hook system attached to a rod or metal band to pass the pick across the shed. These machines regularly reach 700 picks per minute in normal production.
* Projectile: Projectile looms utilize an object that is propelled across the shed, usually by spring power, and is guided across the width of the cloth by a series of reeds. The projectile is then removed from the weft fibre and it is returned to the opposite side of the machine so it can be reused. Multiple projectiles are in use in order to increase the pick speed. Maximum speeds on these machines can be as high as 1,050 ppm.
* Circular: Modern circular looms use up to ten shuttles, driven in a circular motion from below by electromagnets, for the weft yarns, and cams to control the warp threads. The warps rise and fall with each shuttle passage, unlike the common practice of lifting all of them at once. Circular looms are used to create seamless tubes of fabric for products such as hosiery, sacks, clothing, fabric hoses (such as fire hoses) and the like.
==Battening==


The newest weft thread must be beaten against the fell. Battening can be done with a long stick placed in the shed parallel to the weft (a sword batten), a shorter stick threaded between the warp threads perpendicular to warp and weft (a pin batten), a comb, or a reed (a comb with both ends closed, so that it has to be sleyed, that is have the warp threads threaded through it, when the loom is warped). For rigid-heddle looms, the heddle may be used as a reed.

==Secondary motions==
===Dandy mechanism===

Patented in 1802, dandy looms automatically rolled up the finished cloth, keeping the fell always the same length. They significantly speeded up hand weaving (still a major part of the textile industry in the 1800s). Similar mechanisms were used in power looms.

===Temples===
The temples act to keep the cloth from shrinking sideways as it is woven. Some warp-weighted looms had temples made of loom weights, suspended by strings so that they pulled the cloth breadthwise. Other looms may have temples tied to the frame, or temples that are hooks with an adjustable shaft between them. Power looms may use temple cylinders. Pins can leave a series of holes in the selvages (these may be from stenter pins used in post-processing).

==Frames==
Loom frames can be roughly divided, by the orientation of the warp threads, into horizontal looms and vertical looms. There are many finer divisions. Most handloom frame designs can be constructed fairly simply.

===Backstrap loom===
The back-strap loom (also known as belt loom) is a simple loom with ancient roots, still used in many cultures around the world (such as Andean textiles, and in Central, East and South Asia). It consists of two sticks or bars between which the warps are stretched. One bar is attached to a fixed object and the other to the weaver, usually by means of a strap around the weaver&#x27;s back. The weaver leans back and uses their body weight to tension the loom.

Both simple and complex textiles can be woven on backstrap looms. They produce narrowcloth: width is limited to the weaver&#x27;s armspan. They can readily produce warp-faced textiles, often decorated with intricate pick-up patterns woven in complementary and supplementary warp techniques, and brocading. Balanced weaves are also possible on the backstrap loom.

===Warp-weighted loom===
The warp-weighted loom is a vertical loom that may have originated in the Neolithic period. Its defining characteristic is hanging weights (loom weights) which keep bundles of the warp threads taut. Frequently, extra warp thread is wound around the weights. When a weaver has woven far enough down, the completed section (fell) can be rolled around the top beam, and additional lengths of warp threads can be unwound from the weights to continue. This frees the weaver from vertical size constraint. Horizontally, breadth is limited by armspan; making broadwoven cloth requires two weavers, standing side by side at the loom.

Simple weaves, and complex weaves that need more than two different sheds, can both be woven on a warp-weighted loom. They can also be used to produce tapestries.
===Pegged or floor loom===
In pegged looms, the beams can be simply held apart by hooking them behind pegs driven into the ground, with wedges or lashings used to adjust the tension. Pegged looms may, however, also have horizontal sidepieces holding the beams apart.

Such looms are easy to set up and dismantle, and are easy to transport, so they are popular with nomadic weavers. They are generally only used for comparatively small woven articles. Urbanites are unlikely to use horizontal floor looms as they take up a lot of floor space, and full-time professional weavers are unlikely to use them as they are unergonomic. Their cheapness and portability is less valuable to urban professional weavers.


===Treadle loom===
In a treadle loom, the shedding is controlled by the feet, which tread on the treadles.

The earliest evidence of a horizontal loom is found on a pottery dish in ancient Egypt, dated to 4400 BC. It was a frame loom, equipped with treadles to lift the warp threads, leaving the weaver&#x27;s hands free to pass and beat the weft thread.

A pit loom has a pit for the treadles, reducing the stress transmitted through the much shorter frame.

In a wooden vertical-shaft loom, the heddles are fixed in place in the shaft. The warp threads pass alternately through a heddle, and through a space between the heddles (the shed), so that raising the shaft raises half the threads (those passing through the heddles), and lowering the shaft lowers the same threads — the threads passing through the spaces between the heddles remain in place.

A treadle loom for figured weaving may have a large number of harnesses or a control head. It can, for instance, have a Jacquard machine attached to it .


===Tapestry looms===
Tapestry can have extremely complex wefts, as different strands of wefts of different colours are used to form the pattern. Speed is lower, and shedding and picking devices may be simpler. Looms used for weaving traditional tapestry are called not as &quot;vertical-warp&quot; and &quot;horizontal-warp&quot;, but as &quot;high-warp&quot; or &quot;low-warp&quot; (the French terms &quot;haute-lisse&quot; and are also used in English).

===Ribbon, Band, and Inkle weaving===

Inkle looms are narrow looms used for narrow work. They are used to make narrow warp-faced strips such as ribbons, bands, or tape. They are often quite small; some are used on a tabletop. others are backstraps looms with a rigid heddle, and very portable.

===Darning looms===

There exist very small hand-held looms known as darning looms. They are made to fit under the fabric being mended, and are often held in place by an elastic band on one side of the cloth and a groove around the loom&#x27;s darning-egg portion on the other. They may have heddles made of flip-flopping rotating hooks . Other devices sold as darning looms are just a darning egg and a separate comb-like piece with teeth to hook the warp over; these are used for repairing knitted garments and are like a linear knitting spool. Darning looms were sold during World War Two clothing rationing in the United Kingdom and Canada, and some are homemade.

===Circular handlooms===
Circular looms are used to create seamless tubes of fabric for products such as hosiery, sacks, clothing, fabric hoses (such as fire hoses) and the like. Tablet weaving can be used to knit tubes, including tubes that split and join.

Small jigs also used for circular knitting are also sometimes called circular looms, but they are used for knitting, not weaving.

==Handlooms to power looms==

A power loom is a loom powered by a source of energy other than the weaver&#x27;s muscles. When power looms were developed, other looms came to be referred to as &quot;handlooms&quot;. Most cloth is now woven on power looms, but some is still woven on handlooms.

The development of power looms was gradual. The capabilities of power looms gradually expanded, but handlooms remained the most cost-effective way to make some types of textiles for most of the 1800s. Many improvements in loom mechanisms were first applied to hand looms (like the dandy loom), and only later integrated into power looms.

Edmund Cartwright built and patented a power loom in 1785, and it was this that was adopted by the nascent cotton industry in England. The silk loom made by Jacques Vaucanson in 1745 operated on the same principles but was not developed further. The invention of the flying shuttle by John Kay allowed a hand weaver to weave broadwoven cloth without an assistant, and was also critical to the development of a commercially successful power loom. Cartwright&#x27;s loom was impractical but the ideas behind it were developed by numerous inventors in the Manchester area of England. By 1818, there were 32 factories containing 5,732 looms in the region.

The Horrocks loom was viable, but it was the Roberts Loom in 1830 that marked the turning point. Incremental changes to the three motions continued to be made. The problems of sizing, stop-motions, consistent take-up, and a temple to maintain the width remained. In 1841, Kenworthy and Bullough produced the Lancashire Loom which was self-acting or semi-automatic. This enabled a youngster to run six looms at the same time. Thus, for simple calicos, the power loom became more economical to run than the handloom – with complex patterning that used a dobby or Jacquard head, jobs were still put out to handloom weavers until the 1870s. Incremental changes were made such as the Dickinson Loom, culminating in the fully automatic Northrop Loom, developed by the Keighley-born inventor Northrop, who was working for the Draper Corporation in Hopedale. This loom recharged the shuttle when the pirn was empty. The Draper E and X models became the leading products from 1909. They were challenged by synthetic fibres such as rayon.

By 1942, faster, more efficient, and shuttleless Sulzer and rapier looms had been introduced.

== Symbolism and cultural significance ==

The loom is a symbol of cosmic creation and the structure upon which individual destiny is woven. This symbolism is encapsulated in the classical myth of Arachne who was changed into a spider by the goddess Athena, who was jealous of her skill at the godlike craft of weaving. In Maya civilization the goddess Ixchel taught the first woman how to weave at the beginning of time.

==Gallery==


==See also==
*&quot;&quot; (documentary film)
*Fashion and Textile Museum
*Textile manufacturing
*Timeline of clothing and textiles technology
*Weaving (mythology)
*Luddite

== References ==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
* 

==External links==

* Loom demonstration video
* &quot;Caring for your loom&quot; article
* &quot;The Art and History of Weaving&quot;
* The Medieval Technology Pages: &quot;The Horizontal Loom&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173056" start="2" end="6" title="Loom" label="loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="27" end="32" title="weaving" label="weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q184296" start="43" end="51" title="tapestry" label="tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="98" end="102" title="Warp (weaving)" label="warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="117" end="124" title="tension (mechanics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="163" end="167" title="weft" label="weft"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="339" end="350" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="863" end="867" title="Warp (weaving)" label="warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="921" end="940" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="948" end="952" title=":wiktionary:warp" label="werp"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="1001" end="1005" title="weft" label="weft"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="2353" end="2357" title="warp (weaving)" label="warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391023" start="2382" end="2386" title="shed (weaving)" label="shed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153946" start="2670" end="2681" title="tabby weave" label="tabby weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152241" start="2810" end="2815" title="twill weave" label="twill"/>
<link wikidata="Q116312154" start="4704" end="4712" title="Pin loom" label="Pin loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q60753464" start="4718" end="4726" title="peg loom" label="peg loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29886501" start="4769" end="4780" title="Pile carpet" label="Pile carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153946" start="5279" end="5290" title="tabby weave" label="tabby weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152241" start="5321" end="5332" title="twill weave" label="twill weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q14298" start="5335" end="5346" title="satin weave" label="satin weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q107240893" start="5349" end="5361" title="diaper weave" label="diaper weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q649022" start="5692" end="5699" title="brocade" label="brocade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29886501" start="5934" end="5953" title="knotted-pile carpet" label="knotted-pile carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153946" start="6259" end="6270" title="tabby weave" label="tabby weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q627378" start="6562" end="6580" title="warp-weighted loom" label="warp-weighted loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152241" start="7549" end="7560" title="twill weave" label="twill weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q910914" start="8387" end="8401" title="Tablet weaving" label="Tablet weaving"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8573" end="8584" title="narrow work" label="narrow work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391023" start="8798" end="8803" title="shed (weaving)" label="sheds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391023" start="9022" end="9026" title="shed (weaving)" label="shed"/>
<link wikidata="Q39515" start="9070" end="9076" title="heddle" label="heddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153946" start="10418" end="10429" title="tabby weave" label="tabby weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152241" start="10431" end="10442" title="Twill weave" label="Twill weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836568" start="11010" end="11017" title="treadle" label="treadle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11606" end="11625" title="Counterbalance loom" label="Counterbalance loom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12775" end="12784" title="Jack loom" label="Jack loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="13138" end="13149" title="combination" label="combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="13390" end="13405" title="to the power of" label="to the power of"/>
<link wikidata="Q107240893" start="13660" end="13672" title="diaper weave" label="diaper weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q252266" start="14508" end="14517" title="elastomer" label="elastomer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14549" end="14566" title="countermarch loom" label="countermarch loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="14975" end="14988" title="combination" label="combinatorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="15621" end="15633" title="Chu (state)" label="State of Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="15714" end="15719" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q464266" start="15753" end="15765" title="Dura-Europas" label="Dura-Europas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15861" end="15873" title="State of Liu" label="State of Liu"/>
<link wikidata="Q245739" start="16703" end="16711" title="solenoid" label="solenoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q310833" start="16806" end="16827" title="Joseph Marie Jacquard" label="Joseph Marie Jacquard"/>
<link wikidata="Q649022" start="16930" end="16937" title="Brocade (fabric)" label="brocade"/>
<link wikidata="Q901382" start="16939" end="16945" title="damask" label="damask"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786427" start="16951" end="16960" title="matelasse" label="matelasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="16988" end="17000" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886850" start="17265" end="17279" title="Basile Bouchon" label="Basile Bouchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q454589" start="17321" end="17338" title="Jacques Vaucanson" label="Jacques Vaucanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867361" start="17638" end="17666" title="Punched card input/output" label="computer punched card reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030389" start="18750" end="18782" title="narrow cloth" label="a cloth as wide as their armspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q140683" start="18887" end="18895" title="John Kay (flying shuttle)" label="John Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202252" start="18921" end="18935" title="flying shuttle" label="flying shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="19535" end="19542" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="19564" end="19585" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="20096" end="20110" title="weft" label="weft insertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455806" start="20592" end="20604" title="Air jet loom" label="air-jet loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294267" start="21323" end="21334" title="Rapier loom" label="Rapier loom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21662" end="21677" title="Projectile loom" label="Projectile loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963156" start="23063" end="23073" title="dandy loom" label="dandy loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q627378" start="23441" end="23452" title="loom weight" label="loom weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1943467" start="23710" end="23717" title="selvage" label="selvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306972" start="23738" end="23749" title="stenter" label="stenter pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753669" start="24160" end="24175" title="Andean textiles" label="Andean textiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030389" start="24564" end="24575" title="narrowcloth" label="narrowcloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="24649" end="24659" title="warp-faced" label="warp-faced"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386486" start="24745" end="24763" title="supplementary warp" label="supplementary warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416493" start="24791" end="24805" title="Balanced weave" label="Balanced weave"/>
<link wikidata="Q627378" start="24878" end="24896" title="warp-weighted loom" label="warp-weighted loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="24948" end="24957" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="25054" end="25058" title="Warp (weaving)" label="warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030389" start="25426" end="25442" title="broadwoven cloth" label="broadwoven cloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836568" start="26470" end="26477" title="treadle" label="treadle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="26554" end="26567" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39515" start="26870" end="26876" title="heddle" label="heddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391023" start="27008" end="27012" title="shed (weaving)" label="shed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369967" start="27348" end="27364" title="Jacquard machine" label="Jacquard machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184296" start="27629" end="27637" title="tapestry" label="tapestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="27792" end="27803" title="Warp (weaving)" label="haute-lisse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27919" end="27930" title="narrow work" label="narrow work"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="27961" end="27971" title="warp-faced" label="warp-faced"/>
<link wikidata="Q39515" start="28110" end="28116" title="heddle" label="heddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228537" start="28669" end="28683" title="spool knitting" label="knitting spool"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28716" end="28748" title="Rationing in the United Kingdom#Clothing" label="World War Two clothing rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q910914" start="28986" end="29000" title="Tablet weaving" label="Tablet weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121669" start="29091" end="29108" title="circular knitting" label="circular knitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963156" start="29772" end="29782" title="dandy loom" label="dandy loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q455166" start="29830" end="29847" title="Edmund Cartwright" label="Edmund Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353185" start="29869" end="29879" title="power loom" label="power loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q454589" start="29987" end="30004" title="Jacques Vaucanson" label="Jacques Vaucanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202252" start="30097" end="30111" title="flying shuttle" label="flying shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q140683" start="30115" end="30123" title="John Kay (flying shuttle)" label="John Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030389" start="30155" end="30171" title="broadwoven cloth" label="broadwoven cloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984883" start="30487" end="30500" title="Horrocks loom" label="Horrocks loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352029" start="30528" end="30540" title="Roberts Loom" label="Roberts Loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983166" start="30707" end="30713" title="Temple (weaving)" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q15226107" start="30769" end="30777" title="Howard &amp;amp; Bullough" label="Bullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483025" start="30791" end="30806" title="Lancashire Loom" label="Lancashire Loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543799" start="31075" end="31082" title="domestic system" label="put out"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31162" end="31176" title="Dickinson Loom" label="Dickinson Loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059684" start="31213" end="31226" title="Northrop Loom" label="Northrop Loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q990168" start="31245" end="31253" title="Keighley" label="Keighley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305850" start="31302" end="31320" title="Draper Corporation" label="Draper Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q543560" start="31324" end="31332" title="Hopedale, Massachusetts" label="Hopedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198048" start="31375" end="31379" title="pirn" label="pirn"/>
<link wikidata="Q910194" start="31505" end="31510" title="rayon" label="rayon"/>
<link wikidata="Q670100" start="31562" end="31568" title="Sulzer (manufacturer)" label="Sulzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294267" start="31573" end="31584" title="rapier loom" label="rapier loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q215304" start="31675" end="31690" title="Creation myth" label="cosmic creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367434" start="31787" end="31801" title="Classical mythology" label="classical myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q190082" start="31805" end="31812" title="Arachne" label="Arachne"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="31858" end="31864" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="31931" end="31948" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772980" start="31961" end="31967" title="Ixchel" label="Ixchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436764" start="32092" end="32118" title="Fashion and Textile Museum" label="Fashion and Textile Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505660" start="32120" end="32141" title="Textile manufacturing" label="Textile manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698565" start="32143" end="32187" title="Timeline of clothing and textiles technology" label="Timeline of clothing and textiles technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978402" start="32189" end="32208" title="Weaving (mythology)" label="Weaving (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159675" start="32210" end="32217" title="Luddite" label="Luddite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46596" wikidata="Q7481320" url="?curid=46596" title="Drainage">
<text>Drainage is the natural or artificial removal of a surface&#x27;s water and sub-surface water from an area with excess water. The internal drainage of most agricultural soils can prevent severe waterlogging (anaerobic conditions that harm root growth), but many soils need artificial drainage to improve production or to manage water supplies.

==History==

===Early history===
The Indus Valley Civilization had sewerage and drainage systems. All houses in the major cities of Harappa and Mohenjo-daro had access to water and drainage facilities. Waste water was directed to covered gravity sewers, which lined the major streets.

===18th and 19th century===
The invention of hollow-pipe drainage is credited to Sir Hugh Dalrymple, who died in 1753.

==Current practices==
Simple infrastructure such as open drains, pipes, and berms are still common. In modern times, more complex structures involving substantial earthworks and new technologies have been common as well.

===Geotextiles===
New storm water drainage systems incorporate geotextile filters that retain and prevent fine grains of soil from passing into and clogging the drain. Geotextiles are synthetic textile fabrics specially manufactured for civil and environmental engineering applications. Geotextiles are designed to retain fine soil particles while allowing water to pass through. In a typical drainage system, they would be laid along a trench which would then be filled with coarse granular material: gravel, sea shells, stone or rock. The geotextile is then folded over the top of the stone and the trench is then covered by soil. Groundwater seeps through the geotextile and flows through the stone to an outfell. In high groundwater conditions a perforated plastic (PVC or PE) pipe is laid along the base of the drain to increase the volume of water transported in the drain.

Alternatively, a prefabricated plastic drainage system made of HDPE, often incorporating geotextile, coco fiber or rag filters can be considered. The use of these materials has become increasingly more common due to their ease of use, since they eliminate the need for transporting and laying stone drainage aggregate, which is invariably more expensive than a synthetic drain and concrete liners.

Over the past 30 years, geotextile, PVC filters, and HDPE filters have become the most commonly used soil filter media. They are cheap to produce and easy to lay, with factory controlled properties that ensure long term filtration performance even in fine silty soil conditions.

===21st century alternatives===
Seattle&#x27;s Public Utilities created a pilot program called Street Edge Alternatives Project. The project focuses on designing a system &quot;to provide drainage that more closely mimics the natural landscape prior to development than traditional piped systems&quot;.
The streets are characterized by ditches along the side of the roadway, with plantings designed throughout the area.
An emphasis on non-curbed sidewalks allows water to flow more freely into the areas of permeable surface on the side of the streets. Because of the plantings, the run off water from the urban area does not all directly go into the ground, but can also be absorbed into the surrounding environment.
Monitoring conducted by Seattle Public Utilities reports a 99 percent reduction of storm water leaving the drainage project.

Drainage has undergone a large-scale environmental review in the recent past in the United Kingdom. Sustainable urban drainage systems (SUDS) are designed to encourage contractors to install drainage system that more closely mimic the natural flow of water in nature. Since 2010 local and neighbourhood planning in the UK is required by law to factor SUDS into any development projects that they are responsible for.

Slot drainage is a channel drainage system designed to eliminate the need for further pipework systems to be installed in parallel to the drainage, reducing the environmental impact of production as well as improving water collection. Stainless steel, concrete channel, PVC and HDPE are all materials available for slot drainage which have become industry standards on construction projects.

===In the construction industry===
The civil engineer is responsible for drainage in construction projects. During the construction process, they set out all the necessary levels for roads, street gutters, drainage, culverts and sewers involved in construction operations.
Civil engineers and construction managers work alongside architects and supervisors, planners, quantity surveyors, and the general workforce, as well as subcontractors. Typically, most jurisdictions have some body of drainage law to govern to what degree a landowner can alter the drainage from their parcel.

Drainage options for the construction industry include: 
* Point drainage, which intercepts water at gullies (points). Gullies connect to drainage pipes beneath the ground surface, so deep excavation is required to facilitate this system. Support for deep trenches is required in the shape of planking, strutting or shoring.
* Channel drainage, which intercepts water along the entire run of the channel. Channel drainage is typically manufactured from concrete, steel, polymer or composites. The interception rate of channel drainage is greater than point drainage and the excavation required is usually much less deep.
The surface opening of channel drainage usually comes in the form of gratings (polymer, plastic, steel or iron) or a single slot (slot drain) that run along the ground surface (typically manufactured from steel or iron).

=== In retaining walls ===
Earth retaining structures such as retaining walls also need to have groundwater drainage considered during their construction. Typical retaining walls are constructed of impermeable material, which can block the path of groundwater. When groundwater flow is obstructed, hydrostatic water pressure buildups against the wall and may cause significant damage. If the water pressure is not drained appropriately, retaining walls can bow, move, and fracture, causing seams to separate. The water pressure can also erode soil particles, leading to voids behind the wall and sinkholes in the above soil. Traditional retaining wall drainage systems can include French drains, drain pipes or weep holes. To prevent soil erosion, geotextile filter fabrics are installed with the drainage system.

=== In planters ===
Drainage in planters refers to the implementation of effective drainage systems specifically designed for plant containers or pots. Proper drainage is crucial in planters to prevent waterlogging and promote healthy plant growth. Planter Drainage involves the incorporation of drainage holes, drainage layers, or specialized drainage systems to ensure excess water can escape from the planter. This helps to prevent root rot, water accumulation, and other issues that can negatively impact plant health. By providing adequate drainage in planters, it supports optimal plant growth and contributes to the overall success of gardening or landscaping projects.

Drainage options for the planter include: 
* Surface drains are typically used to manage runoff from paved surfaces, such as sidewalks and parking lots. Catch basins, which collect water and debris, are connected to underground pipes that carry the water away from the site.
* Subsurface drains, on the other hand, are designed to manage water that seeps into the soil beneath the planting surface. French drains, which are gravel-filled trenches with perforated pipes at the bottom, are the most common type of subsurface drain. Trench drains, which are similar but shallower and wider, are also used in some situations.

==Reasons for artificial drainage==
Wetland soils may need drainage to be used for agriculture. In the northern United States and Europe, glaciation created numerous small lakes, which gradually filled with humus to make marshes. Some of these were drained using open ditches and trenches to make mucklands, which are primarily used for high-value crops such as vegetables.

The world&#x27;s largest project of this type has been in process for centuries in the Netherlands. The area between Amsterdam, Haarlem and Leiden was, in prehistoric times, swampland and small lakes. Turf cutting (peat mining), subsidence and shoreline erosion gradually caused the formation of one large lake, the Haarlemmermeer, or lake of Haarlem. The invention of wind-powered pumping engines in the 15th century permitted some of the marginal land drainage. Still, the final drainage of the lake had to await the design of large steam-powered pumps and agreements between regional authorities. The lake was eliminated between 1849 and 1852, creating thousands of km2 of new land.

Coastal plains and river deltas may have seasonally or permanently high water tables and must have drainage improvements if they are to be used for agriculture. An example is the flatwoods citrus-growing region of Florida, United States. After periods of high rainfall, drainage pumps are employed to prevent damage to the citrus groves from overly wet soils. Rice production requires complete water control, as fields must be flooded or drained at different stages of the crop cycle. The Netherlands has also led the way in this type of drainage by draining lowlands along the shore and pushing back the sea until the original nation has been greatly enlarged.

In moist climates, soils may be adequate for cropping with the exception that they become waterlogged for brief periods each year, from snow melt or from heavy rains. Soils that are predominantly clay will pass water very slowly downward. Meanwhile, plant roots suffocate because the excessive water around the roots eliminates air movement through the soil.

Other soils may have an impervious layer of mineralized soil, called a hardpan, or relatively impervious rock layers may underlie shallow soils. Drainage is especially important in tree fruit production. Soils that are otherwise excellent may be waterlogged for a week of the year, which is sufficient to kill fruit trees and cost the productivity of the land until replacements can be established. In each of these cases, appropriate drainage carries off temporary flushes of water to prevent damage to annual or perennial crops.

Drier areas are often farmed by irrigation, and one would not consider drainage necessary. However, irrigation water always contains minerals and salts, which can be concentrated to toxic levels by evapotranspiration. Irrigated land may need periodic flushes with excessive irrigation water and drainage to control soil salinity.
==See also==
* Surface drainage of the land
** Drainage system (geomorphology), pattern of natural drains, streams, rivers, etc.
**Land drainage in the United Kingdom - a legal and operational term in the UK to define a range of functions and responsibilities of drainage boards.
** Surface runoff, surface runoff of excess rainfall from the land
** Drainage system (agriculture), land forming or land shaping to enhance the drainage from the soil surface in agricultural land
** Contour plowing, controlling runoff and soil erosion
* Subsurface (groundwater) drainage
** Horizontal drainage by pipes and ditches
*** Tile drainage
** Vertical drainage by wells
*** Well drainage
*** Watertable control

Otherwise:

* Bar ditch
* Building construction
* Deep drainage
* Drain commissioner
* Drain (plumbing)
* Drainage basin or watershed
* Drainage divide or watershed
* Drainage equation
* Drainage research
* Geomorphology
* Hydrologic Evaluation of Landfill Performance
* Hydrology
* John Johnston, who introduced land drainage to the United States.
* Plumbing
** Potable cold and hot water supply
** Septic systems
** Sewage traps, drains, and vents
* Rain gutter
* Retaining wall
* Sewage collection and disposal
* Soil salinity control by subsurface drainage
* Storm drain
* Stormwater
* Trench drain
* Trencher (machine)
* Urban exploration
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7481320" start="0" end="8" title="Drainage" label="Drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="76" end="93" title="groundwater" label="sub-surface water"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="156" end="168" title="agricultural" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430825" start="194" end="206" title="Waterlogging (agriculture)" label="waterlogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="262" end="267" title="Soil" label="soils"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="382" end="407" title="Indus Valley Civilization" label="Indus Valley Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q156849" start="412" end="420" title="sewerage" label="sewerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="477" end="484" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="489" end="501" title="Mohenjo-daro" label="Mohenjo-daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q30681114" start="583" end="596" title="gravity sewer" label="gravity sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81957" start="827" end="831" title="berm" label="berm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048148" start="1036" end="1046" title="geotextile" label="geotextile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140503" start="1084" end="1090" title="Particle size" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1094" end="1098" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="1210" end="1215" title="civil engineering" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q146326" start="1220" end="1245" title="environmental engineering" label="environmental engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155083" start="1456" end="1473" title="granular material" label="granular material"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="1475" end="1481" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213096" start="1483" end="1493" title="sea shells" label="sea shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="1504" end="1508" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="1606" end="1617" title="Groundwater" label="Groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="1743" end="1746" title="Polyvinyl chloride" label="PVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q143429" start="1750" end="1752" title="Polyethylene" label="PE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641430" start="1917" end="1921" title="High-density polyethylene" label="HDPE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029620" start="1955" end="1965" title="Coir" label="coco fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="1969" end="1972" title="Cloth" label="rag"/>
<link wikidata="Q605696" start="1973" end="1979" title="filter (water)" label="filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="2565" end="2579" title="Seattle" label="Seattle&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897115" start="3477" end="3511" title="Sustainable urban drainage systems" label="Sustainable urban drainage systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q25038234" start="3795" end="3805" title="Slot drain" label="Slot drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="4030" end="4045" title="Stainless steel" label="Stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="4047" end="4055" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582652" start="4227" end="4241" title="civil engineer" label="civil engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="4371" end="4375" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094134" start="4378" end="4391" title="street gutter" label="street gutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="4404" end="4411" title="culvert" label="culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="4436" end="4448" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="4518" end="4527" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067634" start="4556" end="4573" title="quantity surveyor" label="quantity surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515227" start="4678" end="4690" title="drainage law" label="drainage law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361400" start="4872" end="4879" title="gullies" label="gullies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527816" start="5461" end="5469" title="gratings" label="gratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076291" start="5676" end="5690" title="retaining wall" label="retaining wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="5710" end="5721" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="5924" end="5938" title="water pressure" label="water pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q188734" start="6210" end="6218" title="sinkhole" label="sinkhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492817" start="6295" end="6308" title="French drains" label="French drains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142287" start="6325" end="6335" title="Weep hole" label="weep holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442077" start="6864" end="6872" title="root rot" label="root rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492817" start="7506" end="7519" title="French drains" label="French drains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998866" start="7637" end="7650" title="Trench drain" label="Trench drains"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="7766" end="7773" title="Wetland" label="Wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="7813" end="7824" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="7868" end="7878" title="glaciation" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="7902" end="7906" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q172645" start="7937" end="7942" title="humus" label="humus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="7951" end="7956" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048319" start="7998" end="8003" title="ditch" label="ditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571727" start="8027" end="8035" title="muck (soil)" label="muckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="8092" end="8101" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="8192" end="8203" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="8222" end="8231" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9920" start="8233" end="8240" title="Haarlem" label="Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="8245" end="8251" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="8260" end="8271" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="8320" end="8324" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="8325" end="8331" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="8334" end="8344" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="8359" end="8366" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9924" start="8421" end="8435" title="Haarlemmermeer" label="Haarlemmermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730505" start="8487" end="8502" title="Windpump" label="pumping engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="8640" end="8653" title="steam-powered" label="steam-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q31566" start="8792" end="8806" title="Coastal plains" label="Coastal plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="8811" end="8823" title="river deltas" label="river deltas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="8864" end="8875" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458012" start="8971" end="8980" title="flatwoods" label="flatwoods"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="8981" end="8987" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="9006" end="9013" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="9152" end="9156" title="Rice" label="Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430825" start="9545" end="9556" title="Waterlogging (agriculture)" label="waterlogged"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="9591" end="9595" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="9615" end="9619" title="rain" label="rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="9651" end="9655" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q256699" start="9839" end="9849" title="impervious" label="impervious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268987" start="9886" end="9893" title="hardpan" label="hardpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q904653" start="9996" end="10006" title="Fruit tree" label="tree fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="10319" end="10325" title="annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="10329" end="10338" title="perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="10379" end="10389" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="10493" end="10497" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q828158" start="10545" end="10563" title="evapotranspiration" label="evapotranspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q754836" start="10662" end="10675" title="soil salinity" label="soil salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q285451" start="10724" end="10755" title="Drainage system (geomorphology)" label="Drainage system (geomorphology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119389669" start="10808" end="10843" title="Land drainage in the United Kingdom" label="Land drainage in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="10960" end="10974" title="Surface runoff" label="Surface runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7481418" start="11027" end="11056" title="Drainage system (agriculture)" label="Drainage system (agriculture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710448" start="11157" end="11172" title="Contour plowing" label="Contour plowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="11197" end="11209" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="11224" end="11235" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q56875480" start="11294" end="11307" title="Tile drainage" label="Tile drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047540" start="11342" end="11355" title="Well drainage" label="Well drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12208418" start="11360" end="11378" title="Watertable control" label="Watertable control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857983" start="11394" end="11403" title="Bar ditch" label="Bar ditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="11406" end="11427" title="Building construction" label="Building construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670986" start="11430" end="11443" title="Deep drainage" label="Deep drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305546" start="11446" end="11464" title="Drain commissioner" label="Drain commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951623" start="11467" end="11483" title="Drain (plumbing)" label="Drain (plumbing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="11486" end="11500" title="Drainage basin" label="Drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152005" start="11516" end="11531" title="Drainage divide" label="Drainage divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q574154" start="11547" end="11564" title="Drainage equation" label="Drainage equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305557" start="11567" end="11584" title="Drainage research" label="Drainage research"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="11587" end="11600" title="Geomorphology" label="Geomorphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955114" start="11603" end="11648" title="Hydrologic Evaluation of Landfill Performance" label="Hydrologic Evaluation of Landfill Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="11651" end="11660" title="Hydrology" label="Hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241963" start="11663" end="11676" title="John Johnston (farmer)" label="John Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11714" end="11727" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241671" start="11731" end="11739" title="Plumbing" label="Plumbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q506004" start="11743" end="11776" title="Domestic water system" label="Potable cold and hot water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047095" start="11780" end="11793" title="Septic system" label="Septic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365264" start="11798" end="11829" title="Plumbing drainage venting" label="Sewage traps, drains, and vents"/>
<link wikidata="Q152833" start="11832" end="11843" title="Rain gutter" label="Rain gutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076291" start="11846" end="11860" title="Retaining wall" label="Retaining wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="11863" end="11893" title="Sewage collection and disposal" label="Sewage collection and disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q661665" start="11896" end="11917" title="Soil salinity control" label="Soil salinity control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="11943" end="11954" title="Storm drain" label="Storm drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421263" start="11957" end="11967" title="Stormwater" label="Stormwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998866" start="11970" end="11982" title="Trench drain" label="Trench drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671268" start="11985" end="12003" title="Trencher (machine)" label="Trencher (machine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130439" start="12006" end="12023" title="Urban exploration" label="Urban exploration"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46597" wikidata="Q854845" url="?curid=46597" title="Earth observation satellite">
<text>An Earth observation satellite or Earth remote sensing satellite is a satellite used or designed for Earth observation (EO) from orbit, including spy satellites and similar ones intended for non-military uses such as environmental monitoring, meteorology, cartography and others. The most common type are Earth imaging satellites, that take satellite images, analogous to aerial photographs; some EO satellites may perform remote sensing without forming pictures, such as in GNSS radio occultation.

The first occurrence of satellite remote sensing can be dated to the launch of the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1, by the Soviet Union on October 4, 1957. Sputnik 1 sent back radio signals, which scientists used to study the ionosphere.
The United States Army Ballistic Missile Agency launched the first American satellite, Explorer 1, for NASA&#x27;s Jet Propulsion Laboratory on January 31, 1958. The information sent back from its radiation detector led to the discovery of the Earth&#x27;s Van Allen radiation belts. The TIROS-1 spacecraft, launched on April 1, 1960, as part of NASA&#x27;s Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS) program, sent back the first television footage of weather patterns to be taken from space.

In 2008, more than 150 Earth observation satellites were in orbit, recording data with both passive and active sensors and acquiring more than 10 terabits of data daily. By 2021, that total had grown to over 950, with the largest number of satellites operated by US-based company Planet Labs.

Most Earth observation satellites carry instruments that should be operated at a relatively low altitude. Most orbit at altitudes above . Lower orbits have significant air-drag, which makes frequent orbit reboost maneuvers necessary. The Earth observation satellites ERS-1, ERS-2 and Envisat of European Space Agency as well as the MetOp spacecraft of EUMETSAT are all operated at altitudes of about . The Proba-1, Proba-2 and SMOS spacecraft of European Space Agency are observing the Earth from an altitude of about . The Earth observation satellites of UAE, DubaiSat-1 &amp; DubaiSat-2 are also placed in Low Earth orbits (LEO) orbits and providing satellite imagery of various parts of the Earth.

To get global coverage with a low orbit, a polar orbit is used. A low orbit will have an orbital period of roughly 100 minutes and the Earth will rotate around its polar axis about 25° between successive orbits. The ground track moves towards the west 25° each orbit, allowing a different section of the globe to be scanned with each orbit. Most are in Sun-synchronous orbits.

A geostationary orbit, at , allows a satellite to hover over a constant spot on the earth since the orbital period at this altitude is 24 hours. This allows uninterrupted coverage of more than 1/3 of the Earth per satellite, so three satellites, spaced 120° apart, can cover the whole Earth. This type of orbit is mainly used for meteorological satellites.

== History ==
Herman Potočnik explored the idea of using orbiting spacecraft for detailed peaceful and military observation of the ground in his 1928 book, &quot;The Problem of Space Travel&quot;. He described how the special conditions of space could be useful for scientific experiments. The book described geostationary satellites (first put forward by Konstantin Tsiolkovsky) and discussed communication between them and the ground using radio, but fell short of the idea of using satellites for mass broadcasting and as telecommunications relays.

The onset of the Cold War prompted the rapid development of Satellite launch systems and camera technology capable of sufficient Earth observation to garner intelligence on enemy military infrastructure and evaluate nuclear posture. Following the U-2 incident in 1960, which highlighted the risks of aerial spying, the U.S. accelerated surveillance satellite programs like CORONA. Satellites largely replaced aircraft overflights for surveillance after 1960.

== Applications ==
=== Weather ===


A weather satellite is a type of satellite that is primarily used to monitor the weather and climate of the Earth. These meteorological satellites, however, see more than clouds and cloud systems. City lights, fires, effects of pollution, auroras, sand and dust storms, snow cover, ice mapping, boundaries of ocean currents, energy flows, etc., are other types of environmental information collected using weather satellites.

Weather satellite images helped in monitoring the volcanic ash cloud from Mount St. Helens and activity from other volcanoes such as Mount Etna. Smoke from fires in the western United States such as Colorado and Utah have also been monitored.

=== Environmental monitoring ===
Other environmental satellites can assist environmental monitoring by detecting changes in the Earth&#x27;s vegetation, atmospheric trace gas content, sea state, ocean color, and ice fields. By monitoring vegetation changes over time, droughts can be monitored by comparing the current vegetation state to its long term average. For example, the 2002 oil spill off the northwest coast of Spain was watched carefully by the European ENVISAT, which, though not a weather satellite, flies an instrument (ASAR) which can see changes in the sea surface. Anthropogenic emissions can be monitored by evaluating data of tropospheric NO2 and SO2.

These types of satellites are almost always in Sun-synchronous and &quot;frozen&quot; orbits. A Sun-synchronous orbit passes over each spot on the ground at the same time of day, so that observations from each pass can be more easily compared, since the Sun is in the same spot in each observation. A &quot;frozen&quot; orbit is the closest possible orbit to a circular orbit that is undisturbed by the oblateness of the Earth, gravitational attraction from the Sun and Moon, solar radiation pressure, and air drag.

=== Mapping ===
Terrain can be mapped from space with the use of satellites, such as Radarsat-1 and TerraSAR-X.

==International regulations==
According to the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Earth exploration-satellite service (also: Earth exploration-satellite radiocommunication service) is – according to &quot;Article 1.51&quot; of the ITU Radio Regulations (RR) – defined as:
A radiocommunication service between earth stations and one or more space stations, which may include links between space stations, in which:
*information relating to the characteristics of the Earth and its natural phenomena, including data relating to the state of the environment, is obtained from passive or active sensors on satellites; 
*similar information is collected from airborne or Earth-based platforms;
*such information may be distributed to earth stations within the system concerned;
*platform interrogation may be included.
This service may also include feeder links necessary for its operation.

===Classification===
This &quot;radiocommunication service&quot; is classified in accordance with &quot;ITU Radio Regulations&quot; (article 1) as follows: 
Fixed service (article 1.20)
*Fixed-satellite service (article 1.21)
*Inter-satellite service (article 1.22)
*Earth exploration-satellite service
**Meteorological-satellite service (article 1.52)

===Frequency allocation===
The allocation of radio frequencies is provided according to &quot;Article 5&quot; of the ITU Radio Regulations (edition 2012).

In order to improve harmonisation in spectrum utilisation, the majority of service-allocations stipulated in this document were incorporated in national Tables of Frequency Allocations and Utilisations which is with-in the responsibility of the appropriate national administration. The allocation might be primary, secondary, exclusive, and shared.
*primary allocation: is indicated by writing in capital letters (see example below)
*secondary allocation: is indicated by small letters
*exclusive or shared utilization: is within the responsibility of administrations 
However, military usage, in bands where there is civil usage, will be in accordance with the ITU Radio Regulations.

; Example of frequency allocation:
== See also ==

* Committee on Earth Observation Satellites
* Data collection satellite
* Earth observation
* Earth observation satellites transmission frequencies
* Earth Observing System - a NASA program comprising a series of satellite missions
* First images of Earth from space
*Phi Lab
* Imaging satellites
* List of Earth observation satellites
* Space telescope
* Satellite imagery
*GNSS radio occultation
*Microwave radiometer#Spaceborne
*Radar earth observation satellite
**Radar imaging
**Synthetic-aperture radar
***Interferometric synthetic-aperture radar
*Satellite altimetry

== References ==
== External links ==
* EO Portal directory 
* The TIROS I and II Ground Control Station where the first Earth Observing Satellite (TIROS I) sent it first photos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q854845" start="3" end="30" title="Earth observation satellite" label="Earth observation satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q854845" start="34" end="64" title="Earth observation satellite" label="Earth remote sensing satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="70" end="79" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348989" start="101" end="118" title="Earth observation" label="Earth observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="129" end="134" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q466421" start="146" end="159" title="spy satellite" label="spy satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749732" start="217" end="241" title="environmental monitoring" label="environmental monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="243" end="254" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="256" end="267" title="cartography" label="cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q854845" start="305" end="329" title="Earth observation satellite" label="Earth imaging satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q725252" start="341" end="356" title="satellite image" label="satellite image"/>
<link wikidata="Q191839" start="372" end="389" title="aerial photograph" label="aerial photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="423" end="437" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560557" start="475" end="497" title="GNSS radio occultation" label="GNSS radio occultation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="611" end="620" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="732" end="742" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q49901" start="831" end="841" title="Explorer 1" label="Explorer 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q188533" start="1001" end="1025" title="Van Allen radiation belt" label="Van Allen radiation belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q646764" start="1032" end="1039" title="TIROS-1" label="TIROS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141538" start="1102" end="1143" title="Television Infrared Observation Satellite" label="Television Infrared Observation Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085620" start="1525" end="1536" title="Planet Labs" label="Planet Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="1544" end="1549" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="1707" end="1715" title="Drag (physics)" label="air-drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302161" start="1744" end="1751" title="reboost" label="reboost"/>
<link wikidata="Q63347" start="1806" end="1818" title="European Remote-Sensing Satellite" label="ERS-1, ERS-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q49692" start="1823" end="1830" title="Envisat" label="Envisat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="1834" end="1855" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q819651" start="1871" end="1876" title="MetOp" label="MetOp"/>
<link wikidata="Q692163" start="1891" end="1899" title="EUMETSAT" label="EUMETSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479854" start="1945" end="1952" title="PROBA" label="Proba-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q742155" start="1954" end="1961" title="Proba-2" label="Proba-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q280068" start="1966" end="1970" title="Soil Moisture and Ocean Salinity satellite" label="SMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262830" start="2100" end="2110" title="DubaiSat-1" label="DubaiSat-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310494" start="2117" end="2127" title="DubaiSat-2" label="DubaiSat-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="2147" end="2162" title="Low Earth orbit" label="Low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q725252" start="2191" end="2208" title="satellite imagery" label="satellite imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q746711" start="2284" end="2295" title="polar orbit" label="polar orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q218124" start="2457" end="2469" title="ground track" label="ground track"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="2594" end="2615" title="Sun-synchronous orbit" label="Sun-synchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="2621" end="2640" title="geostationary orbit" label="geostationary orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q209363" start="2949" end="2974" title="Weather satellite" label="meteorological satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q84870" start="2991" end="3006" title="Herman Potočnik" label="Herman Potočnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="3286" end="3299" title="geostationary" label="geostationary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41239" start="3333" end="3355" title="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky" label="Konstantin Tsiolkovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3547" end="3555" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q697175" start="3590" end="3614" title="Launch vehicle" label="Satellite launch systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q256812" start="3903" end="3909" title="CORONA (satellite)" label="CORONA"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="4060" end="4069" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11663" start="4108" end="4115" title="weather" label="weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="4120" end="4127" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="4135" end="4140" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="4198" end="4203" title="cloud" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="4237" end="4241" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="4255" end="4264" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40609" start="4266" end="4272" title="auroral light" label="aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q182878" start="4275" end="4295" title="Dust storm" label="sand and dust storms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="4297" end="4301" title="snow" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="4309" end="4312" title="ice" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="4336" end="4349" title="ocean current" label="ocean current"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="4352" end="4358" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675" start="4528" end="4544" title="Mount St. Helens" label="Mount St. Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="4587" end="4597" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="4653" end="4661" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="4666" end="4670" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749732" start="4773" end="4797" title="environmental monitoring" label="environmental monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="5119" end="5124" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49692" start="5163" end="5170" title="Envisat" label="ENVISAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="5417" end="5432" title="Sun-synchronous orbit" label="Sun-synchronous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470668" start="5437" end="5455" title="Frozen orbit" label="&amp;quot;frozen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470668" start="5671" end="5689" title="Frozen orbit" label="&amp;quot;frozen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535591" start="5773" end="5796" title="Geopotential model" label="oblateness of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q649036" start="5846" end="5870" title="solar radiation pressure" label="solar radiation pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="5876" end="5884" title="air drag" label="air drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q444263" start="5972" end="5982" title="Radarsat-1" label="Radarsat-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q705882" start="5987" end="5997" title="TerraSAR-X" label="TerraSAR-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="6047" end="6084" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q846267" start="6241" end="6262" title="ITU Radio Regulations" label="ITU Radio Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="6284" end="6310" title="radiocommunication service" label="radiocommunication service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="6319" end="6332" title="earth station" label="earth station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558598" start="6350" end="6363" title="radio space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="6594" end="6608" title="Radar" label="active sensors"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="6612" end="6622" title="satellites" label="satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408468" start="7054" end="7067" title="Fixed service" label="Fixed service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4483656" start="7084" end="7107" title="Fixed-satellite service" label="Fixed-satellite service"/>
<link wikidata="Q15820338" start="7124" end="7147" title="Inter-satellite service" label="Inter-satellite service"/>
<link wikidata="Q209363" start="7202" end="7234" title="Meteorological-satellite service" label="Meteorological-satellite service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455619" start="8106" end="8126" title="frequency allocation" label="frequency allocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856537" start="8146" end="8187" title="Committee on Earth Observation Satellites" label="Committee on Earth Observation Satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="8190" end="8215" title="Data collection satellite" label="Data collection satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348989" start="8218" end="8235" title="Earth observation" label="Earth observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327166" start="8238" end="8291" title="Earth observation satellites transmission frequencies" label="Earth observation satellites transmission frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277644" start="8294" end="8316" title="Earth Observing System" label="Earth Observing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861265" start="8378" end="8410" title="First images of Earth from space" label="First images of Earth from space"/>
<link wikidata="Q65068918" start="8412" end="8419" title="Phi Lab" label="Phi Lab"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8422" end="8440" title="Satellite imagery#Imaging satellites" label="Imaging satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761803" start="8443" end="8479" title="List of Earth observation satellites" label="List of Earth observation satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="8482" end="8497" title="Space telescope" label="Space telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q725252" start="8500" end="8517" title="Satellite imagery" label="Satellite imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560557" start="8519" end="8541" title="GNSS radio occultation" label="GNSS radio occultation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8543" end="8574" title="Microwave radiometer#Spaceborne" label="Microwave radiometer#Spaceborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572176" start="8576" end="8609" title="Radar earth observation satellite" label="Radar earth observation satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279985" start="8612" end="8625" title="Radar imaging" label="Radar imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q740686" start="8628" end="8652" title="Synthetic-aperture radar" label="Synthetic-aperture radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q124439509" start="8656" end="8696" title="Interferometric synthetic-aperture radar" label="Interferometric synthetic-aperture radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928951" start="8698" end="8717" title="Satellite altimetry" label="Satellite altimetry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46599" wikidata="Q43631" url="?curid=46599" title="Leiden">
<text>Leiden ( ; ; in English and archaic Dutch also Leyden) is a city and municipality in the province of South Holland, Netherlands. The municipality of Leiden has a population of 127,046 (31 January 2023), but the city forms one densely connected agglomeration with its suburbs Oegstgeest, Leiderdorp, Voorschoten and Zoeterwoude with 215,602 inhabitants. The Netherlands Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) further includes Katwijk in the agglomeration which makes the total population of the Leiden urban agglomeration 282,207 and in the larger Leiden urban area also Teylingen, Noordwijk, and Noordwijkerhout are included with in total 365,913 inhabitants. Leiden is located on the Oude Rijn, at a distance of some from The Hague to its south and some from Amsterdam to its north. The recreational area of the Kaag Lakes (Kagerplassen) lies just to the northeast of Leiden.

A university city since 1575, Leiden has been one of Europe&#x27;s most prominent scientific centres for more than four centuries. University buildings are scattered throughout the city and the many students from all over the world give the city a bustling, vivid and international atmosphere. Many important scientific discoveries have been made here, giving rise to Leiden&#x27;s motto: &#x27;City of Discoveries&#x27;. The city houses Leiden University, the oldest university of the Netherlands, and Leiden University Medical Center. Leiden University is one of Europe&#x27;s top universities, with thirteen Nobel Prize winners. It is a member of the League of European Research Universities and positioned highly in all international academic rankings. It is twinned with Oxford, the location of the United Kingdom&#x27;s oldest university. Leiden University and Leiden University of Applied Sciences (&quot;Leidse Hogeschool&quot;) together have around 35,000 students. Modern scientific medical research and teaching started in the early 18th century in Leiden with Boerhaave.

Leiden is a city with a rich cultural heritage, not only in science, but also in the arts. One of the world&#x27;s most famous painters, Rembrandt, was born and educated in Leiden. Other Leiden painters include Lucas van Leyden, Jan van Goyen and Jan Steen.

== History ==

Leiden was formed on an artificial hill (today called the Burcht van Leiden) at the confluence of the rivers Oude and Nieuwe Rijn (Old and New Rhine). The settlement was called &quot;Leithon&quot;. The name is from Germanic *&quot;leitha&quot; (canal).

Leiden has erroneously been associated with the Roman outpost Lugdunum Batavorum. This was thought to be located at the Burcht of Leiden, and the city&#x27;s name was thought to be derived from the Latin name Lugdunum. However, the &quot;castellum&quot; was in fact closer to the town of Katwijk, whereas the Roman settlement near Leiden was called Matilo.

=== Siege of 1420 ===

In 1420, during the Hook and Cod wars, Duke John III of Bavaria along with his army marched from Gouda in the direction of Leiden in order to conquer the city since Leiden did not pay the new Count of Holland Jacqueline, Countess of Hainaut, his niece and only daughter of Count William VI of Holland.

Burgrave Filips of Wassenaar and the other local noblemen of the Hook faction assumed that the duke would besiege Leiden first and send small units out to conquer the surrounding citadels. But John of Bavaria chose to attack the citadels first.

He rolled the cannons along with his army but one which was too heavy went by ship. By firing at the walls and gates with iron balls the citadels fell one by one. Within a week John of Bavaria conquered the castles of Poelgeest, Ter Does, Hoichmade, de Zijl, ter Waerd, Warmond and de Paddenpoel.

On 24 June the army appeared before the walls of Leiden. On 17 August 1420, after a two-month siege, the city surrendered to John of Bavaria. The burgrave Filips of Wassenaar was stripped of his offices and rights and lived out his last years in captivity.

=== 16th to 18th centuries ===

Leiden flourished in the 16th and 17th century. At the close of the 15th century, the weaving establishments of Leiden (mainly broadcloth) were very important. In the same period, Leiden developed an important printing and publishing industry. Printers Lucas van Leyden and Otto van Veen lived here, and so did Christoffel Plantijn. One of Christoffel&#x27;s pupils was Lodewijk Elzevir (1547–1617), who established the largest bookshop and printing works in Leiden, a business continued by his descendants through 1712.
In 1572, the city sided with the Dutch Revolt against Spanish rule and played an important role in the Eighty Years&#x27; War. It was besieged from May to October 1574 by the Spanish but was relieved by the cutting of the dikes, thus enabling ships to carry provisions to the inhabitants. William I of Orange founded the University of Leiden in 1575 as a reward for their heroic defense. The end of the siege is still celebrated in Leiden on October 3 each year. According to tradition, the citizens of Leiden were offered the choice between a university and a certain exemption from taxes and chose the university. The siege is notable also for being the first instance in Europe of the issuance of paper money, with paper taken from prayer books being stamped using coin dies when silver ran out.

Leiden is known as the place where the Pilgrims and some of the settlers of New Amsterdam lived, operating a printing press for a time in the early 17th century before their departure to Massachusetts and New Amsterdam in the New World.

Leiden prospered in the 17th century, in part because of the impetus to the textile industry by refugees from Flanders. The city had lost about a third of its 15,000 citizens during the siege of 1574, but it quickly recovered to 45,000 in 1622 and may have come near to 70,000 . During the Dutch Golden Era, Leiden was the second largest city of Holland after Amsterdam. It played a crucial role in the establishment of modern chemistry and medicine due to the work by Herman Boerhaave (1668–1738).

Leiden slumped from the late 17th century on, mainly due to the decline of the textile industries. The baize manufacture was given up at the beginning of the 19th century, although industry remained central to Leiden economy. This decline can be seen in the fall in population, which had sunk to 30,000 between 1796 and 1811, and in 1904 was 56,044.

Leiden was the publishing place from the 17th to the early 19th century of the important journal &quot;Nouvelles Extraordinaires de Divers Endroits&quot;, known also as &quot;Gazette de Leyde&quot;.

=== 19th and 20th centuries ===

On 12 January 1807, a catastrophe struck the city when a boat loaded with of gunpowder blew up in the middle of Leiden. 151 people were killed, over 2,000 were injured and some 220 homes were destroyed. King Louis Bonaparte personally visited the city to provide assistance to the victims. Although located in the centre of the city, the area destroyed remained empty for many years. In 1886 the space was turned into a public park, the Van der Werff park.

In 1842, the railroad from Leiden to Haarlem was inaugurated and one year later the railway to The Hague (Den Haag) was completed, resulting in some social and economic improvement. Perhaps the most important piece of Dutch history contributed by Leiden was the Constitution of the Netherlands. Johan Rudolf Thorbecke (1798–1872) wrote the Dutch Constitution in April 1848 in his house at Garenmarkt 9 in Leiden.

Leiden&#x27;s reputation as the &quot;city of books&quot; continued through the 19th century with the establishment of publishing dynasties by Evert Jan Brill and Albertus Willem Sijthoff. Sijthoff, who rose to prominence in the trade of translated books, wrote a letter in 1899 to Queen Wilhelmina regarding his opposition to becoming a signatory to the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works. He felt that international copyright restrictions would stifle the Dutch publishing industry.

Leiden began to expand beyond its 17th-century moats around 1896 and the number of citizens surpassed 50,000 in 1900. After 1920, new industries were established in the city, such as the canning and metal industries. During World War II, Leiden was hit hard by Allied bombardments. The areas surrounding the railway station and Marewijk were almost completely destroyed.

The University of Leiden is famous for its many discoveries including Snell&#x27;s law (by Willebrord Snellius) and
the famous Leyden jar, a capacitor made from a glass jar, invented in Leiden by Pieter van Musschenbroek in 1746. Another development was in cryogenics: Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (1913 Nobel Prize in Physics) liquefied helium for the first time (1908) and later managed to reach a temperature of less than one degree above the absolute minimum. Albert Einstein also spent some time at Leiden University during his early to middle career.

=== Leiden today ===

The city&#x27;s biggest and most popular annual festival is celebrated on 3 October and is called simply 3 Oktober. The people of Leiden celebrate the end of the Spanish siege of 1574. It typically takes place over the course of two to three days and includes parades, a hutspot feast, historical reenactments, a funfair and other events. Since 2006, the city has also hosted the annual Leiden International Film Festival.

Leiden has important functions as a shopping and trade centre for communities around the city.

The city also houses the Eurotransplant, the international organization responsible for the mediation and allocation of organ donation procedures in Austria, Belgium, Croatia, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Slovenia. Leiden also houses the headquarters of Airbus, a global pan-European aerospace and defence corporation and a leading defence and military contractor worldwide. The group includes Airbus, the leading manufacturer of commercial aircraft worldwide.

== Rivers, canals and parks ==

The two branches of the Oude Rijn, which enter Leiden on the east, unite in the centre of the city. The city is further intersected by numerous small canals with tree-bordered quays. On the west side of the city, the Hortus Botanicus and other gardens extend along the old &quot;Singel&quot;, or outer canal. The Leidse Hout park, which contains a small deer park, lies on the northwest border with Oegstgeest. The &quot;Van der Werf Park&quot; is named after the mayor , who defended the city against the Spaniards in 1574. The city was beleaguered for months and many died from famine. The open space for the park was formed by the accidental explosion of a ship loaded with gunpowder in 1807, which destroyed hundreds of houses, including that of the Elsevier family of printers.

== Buildings of interest ==

Because of the economic decline from the end of the 17th until the middle of the 19th century, much of the 16th- and 17th-century city centre is still intact. It is the second largest 17th-century town centre in the Netherlands, the largest being Amsterdam&#x27;s city centre.

A hundred buildings in the centre are decorated with large murals of poetry, part of a wall poem project active from 1992, and still ongoing.


=== Fortifications ===

At the strategically important junction of the two arms of the Oude Rijn stands the old castle &quot;de Burcht&quot;, a circular tower built on an earthen mound. The mound probably was a refuge against high water before a small wooden fortress was built on top of it in the 11th century. The citadel is a so-called motte-and-bailey castle. Of Leiden&#x27;s old city gates only two are left, the &quot;Zijlpoort&quot; and the &quot;Morspoort&quot;, both dating from the end of the 17th century. Apart from one small watch tower on the Singel nothing is left of the town&#x27;s city walls. Another former fortification is the &quot;Gravensteen&quot;. Built as a fortress in the 13th century it has since served as house, library and prison. Presently it is one of the university&#x27;s buildings.

=== Churches ===


The chief of Leiden&#x27;s numerous churches are the Hooglandse Kerk (or the church of St Pancras, built in the 15th century and containing a monument to Pieter Adriaansz. van der Werff) and the &quot;Pieterskerk&quot; (church of St Peter (1315)) with monuments to Scaliger, Boerhaave and other famous scholars. From a historical perspective the Marekerk is interesting too. Arent van &#x27;s Gravesande designed that church in 1639. Other fine examples of his work in Leiden are in the &quot;Stedelijk Museum De Lakenhal&quot; (the municipal museum of fine arts), and the &quot;Bibliotheca Thysiana&quot;. The growing city needed another church and the Marekerk was the first Protestant church to be built in Leiden (and in Holland) after the Reformation. It is an example of Dutch Classicism. In the drawings by Van &#x27;s Gravesande the pulpit is the centrepiece of the church. The pulpit is modelled after the one in the &quot;Nieuwe Kerk&quot; at Haarlem (designed by Jacob van Campen). The building was first used in 1650, and is still in use. The Heilige Lodewijkkerk is first catholic church in Leiden that was built after the Reformation. This church was given to the Catholics after the gunpowder explosion in 1807, which killed 150 inhabitants and destroyed a large part of the city centre. The &#x27;Waalse Kerk&#x27; (Breestraat 63) was originally part of the Katharina Hospital. In 1584 it became the church of Protestant refugees from the Southern Netherlands (Brugge) and France. Later churches in the centre include the St. Joseph in expressionistic style.

=== University buildings ===

The city centre contains many buildings that are in use by the University of Leiden. The &quot;Academy Building&quot; is housed in a former 16th-century convent. Among the institutions connected with the university are the national institution for East Indian languages, ethnology and geography; the botanical gardens, founded in 1587; the observatory (1860); the museum of antiquities (&quot;Rijksmuseum van Oudheden&quot;); and the ethnographical museum, of which P.F. von Siebold&#x27;s Japanese collection was the nucleus (&quot;Rijksmuseum voor Volkenkunde&quot;). This collection is now housed in a separate museum called the &quot;SieboldHuis&quot;. The Bibliotheca Thysiana occupies an old Renaissance building of the year 1655. It is especially rich in legal works and vernacular chronicles. Noteworthy are also the many special collections at Leiden University Library among which those of the Society of Dutch Literature (1766) and the collection of casts and engravings. In recent years the university has built the Leiden Bio Science Park at the city&#x27;s outskirts to accommodate the Science departments. 

=== Other buildings ===

*Stadhuis (City Hall), a 16th-century building that was badly damaged by a fire in 1929 but has its Renaissance façade designed by Lieven de Key still standing
*Gemeenlandshuis van Rijnland (1596, restored in 1878)
*De Waag (English: weigh house), built by Pieter Post
*Gravensteen – a former 15th century jail at the &quot;Gerecht&quot; square (former court-house) 
*Stedelijk Gymnasium (aka Latijnse School) – the old gymnasium (1599)
*Heilige Geest Weeshuis (a former &quot;Holy Spirit Orphanage&quot;) – a complex of 16th century buildings.
*Molen de Valk – a corn-grinding windmill, now home to a museum (1743)
*Pesthuis, which was built during 1657–1661 at that time just outside the city for curing patients suffering the bubonic plague. However, after it was built the feared disease did not occur in the Netherlands anymore so it was never used for its original purpose. The building has been used as a military hospital, prison, national asylum and army museum. Until 2019, it served as the entrance of Naturalis. This museum, one of the largest natural history museums in the world, was recently renovated and is a building of interest in itself.
*Stadstimmerwerf – the city carpenter&#x27;s yard or construction yard (1612), built by Lieven de Key (–1627). The former residence of the city&#x27;s master carpenter is open to the public and is in use as an art gallery of a local visual artists collective.

== Culture ==
=== Museums ===

*Rijksmuseum van Oudheden (National Museum of Antiquities)
*Museum Volkenkunde (National Museum of Ethnology)
*Naturalis Biodiversity Center
*Rijksmuseum Boerhaave
*Stedelijk Museum de Lakenhal
*Japan Museum Sieboldhuis
*Museum de Valk
*Leiden American Pilgrim Museum
*Corpus (in Oegstgeest, but almost directly next to the border with Leiden)
*Hortus Botanicus Leiden
*Museum Het Leids Weverhuis
*Young Rembrandt Studio
*Erfgoed Leiden en Omstreken
*Anatomisch Museum Leiden

== Public transport ==

Bus transport in Leiden is provided by Qbuzz.

formerly Arivva (until 15 dec. 2024)

Railway stations within the municipality of Leiden are:
*

== Notable people ==

The following is a selection of important &quot;Leidenaren&quot; throughout history:
=== Public officials and scholars ===

*William II, Count of Holland (1228–1256) Count of Holland 1234-1256
*Floris V, Count of Holland (1254–1296) Count of Holland and Zeeland 1256–1296
*John of Leiden (1509–1536) leader of the Anabaptist Münster Rebellion 
*William Brewster (1568–1644) pilgrim, &quot;Mayflower&quot; passenger in 1620 
*Daniel Heinsius (1580–1655) famous scholar of the Dutch Renaissance 
*William Bradford (1590–1657) pilgrim, leader of the American Plymouth Colony in Massachusetts 
*Franciscus Junius (1591–1677) pioneer of Germanic philology 
*Isaac Elzevir (1596–1651) Dutch publisher and printer, co-founder of House of Elzevir 
*Love Brewster (1611–1650/1) pilgrim and founder of Bridgewater, Massachusetts 
*Isaac Vossius (1618–1689) scholar, manuscript collector and Canon at Windsor Castle 
*Nicolaas Heinsius the Elder (1620–1681) Dutch classical scholar and poet
*Johann Bachstrom (1688–1742) writer, scientist and Lutheran theologian
*Gottfried, Freiherr van Swieten (1733–1803) diplomat, friend and patron of several great composers
*Jan Bake (1787–1864) Dutch philologist and critic 
*Reinhart Dozy (1820–1883) Dutch scholar of Arabic of Huguenot origin 
*Cornelis Tiele (1830–1902) Dutch theologian and scholar 
*J. P. B. de Josselin de Jong (1886–1964) museum curator, founding father of modern Dutch anthropology and structural anthropology
*Hans de Koster (1914–1992) Dutch politician, diplomat and businessman
*Twins Alfred Kossmann (1922–1998) poet and prose writer and Ernst Kossmann (1922–2003) historian
*Leendert Ginjaar (1928–2003) Dutch politician and chemist
*Laurens Jan Brinkhorst (born 1937) retired Dutch politician and diplomat
*Ankie Broekers-Knol (born 1946) Dutch politician, jurist and Minister
*Carel Stolker (born 1954), rector magnificus and president of Leiden University from 2013 until 2021
*Princess Laurentien of the Netherlands (born 1966) wife of Prince Constantijn
*Kajsa Ollongren (born 1967) Dutch-Swedish politician, Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands
*Julius Terpstra (born 1989) Dutch politician

=== The arts ===

*Cornelis Engebrechtsz. (ca.1462–1527) early Dutch painter 
*Lucas van Leyden (1494–1533) Dutch painter and printmaker in engraving and woodcut
*Jan van Goyen (1596–1656) Dutch landscape painter 
*Justus van Egmont (1601–1674) painter and tapestry designer
*Rembrandt van Rijn (1606– 1669) Dutch draughtsman, painter and printmaker
*Willem van de Velde the Elder (1610/11–1693) Dutch Golden Age seascape painter 
*Frans Post (1612–1680) Dutch Golden Age painter
*Gerard Dou (1613–1675) Dutch Golden Age painter 
*Jan Steen (ca.1626–1679) Dutch Golden Age genre painter 
*Gabriel Metsu (1629–1667) painter of history paintings, still life, portraits and genre works 
*Willem van de Velde the Younger (1633-1707) Dutch marine painter 
*Frans van Mieris the Elder (1635–1681) Dutch Golden Age genre and portrait painter 
*Jan Gaykema Jacobsz. (1798–1875) Dutch painter, draughtsman and botanical illustrator
*Jan Elias Kikkert (1843–1925) Dutch lithographer and watercolorist of street scenes of Leiden
*Coenraad V. Bos (1875–1955) Dutch pianist, an accompanist to singers of lieder
*Theo van Doesburg (1883–1931) Dutch artist, founder and leader of De Stijl 
*Ernst Winar (1894–1978) Dutch actor and film director
*Nina Foch (1924–2008) Dutch American actress and drama teacher
*Michel Waisvisz (1949–2008) Dutch composer, performer, inventor of experimental electronic musical instruments and artistic director of STEIM 1981-2008
*Leoni Jansen (born 1955) TV personality and anchor-woman, singer and stage-director 
*Daniel Reuss (born 1961) Dutch conductor, primarily a choral conductor
*Isa Hoes (born 1967) Dutch actress and voice actress 
*Eva Dorrepaal (born 1970) Dutch actress
*Armin van Buuren (born 1976) Dutch DJ, record producer and remixer
*Carice van Houten (born 1976) Dutch actress and singer
*Dyro (born 1992) Dutch DJ and Electronic dance music producer

=== Science ===
*Rembert Dodoens (1517–1585) botanist, died in Leiden
*Charles de L&#x27;Écluse (1526–1609) botanist, horticulturist and director of Hortus Botanicus Leiden
*Ludolph van Ceulen (1540–1610) mathematician, computed the number π, pi
*Willebrord Snellius (1580–1626) Dutch astronomer and mathematician 
*Herman Boerhaave (1668–1738) botanist, chemist, Christian humanist and physician 
*Bernhard Siegfried Albinus (1697–1770) a German-born Dutch anatomist
*Gerard van Swieten (1700–1772) Dutch physician, personal physician of Maria Theresa
*Petrus Camper FRS (1722–1789) Dutch physician, anatomist, physiologist, midwife, zoologist, anthropologist, palaeontologist and a naturalist
*Philipp Franz von Siebold (1796–1866) German physician and botanist, studied Japanese flora and fauna
*Johannes Diderik van der Waals (1837–1923) Dutch theoretical physicist, winner of the 1910 Nobel Prize in Physics
*Hendrik Lorentz (1853–1928) Dutch physicist, joint winner of the 1902 Nobel Prize in Physics
*Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (1853–1926) Dutch physicist and winner of the 1913 Nobel Prize in Physics
*Willem Einthoven (1860–1927) Dutch physician and physiologist
*Pieter Zeeman (1865–1943) Dutch physicist, joint winner of the 1902 Nobel Prize in Physics
*Willem de Sitter (1872–1934) Dutch mathematician, physicist and astronomer
*Albert Einstein (1879–1955) lecturer/researcher at Leiden University, variously between 1916 and 1930
*Paul Ehrenfest (1880–1933) Austrian/Dutch theoretical physicist, contributed to statistical mechanics
*Geertruida de Haas-Lorentz (1885–1973) female Dutch physicist, worked on Brownian motion and electrical noise theory
*Jan Oort (1900–1992) Dutch astronomer, pioneer in radio astronomy 
*Hendrik Casimir (1909–2000) Dutch physicist
*Ewine van Dishoeck (born 1955) Dutch astronomer, chemist, molecular astrophysicist

=== Sport ===
*Willem Slijkhuis (1923–2003) Dutch middle-distance runner, won two bronze medals in the 1948 Summer Olympics
*Sandra Le Poole (born 1959) retired field hockey player, team gold medallist at the 1984 Summer Olympics
*Ronald Florijn (born 1961) former rower, twice team gold medallist, at the 1988 and 1996 Summer Olympics
*Carina Benninga (born 1962) &amp; Taco van den Honert (born 1966) former Dutch field hockey players, team gold medallist at the 1984 Summer Olympics and team bronze medallist at the 1988 Summer Olympics
*Alfons Groenendijk (born 1964) former footballer with 413 club caps and current manager
*Gerritjan Eggenkamp (born 1975) Dutch rower, team silver medallist at the 2004 Summer Olympics
*Rodney Glunder (born 1975) retired kickboxer, mixed martial artist, professional wrestler and boxer
*Tim de Cler (born 1978) Dutch former footballer with 361 club caps
*Erik van den Doel (born 1979) Dutch chess Grandmaster
*Merel Witteveen (born 1985) sailor, team silver medallist at the 2008 Summer Olympics
*Biurakn Hakhverdian (born 1985) &amp; Iefke van Belkum (born 1986) Dutch water polo players, team gold medallist at the 2008 Summer Olympics
*Gegard Mousasi (born 1985) Dutch mixed martial artist and former kickboxer
*Laurine van Riessen (born 1987) long track speed skater and track cyclist, bronze medallist at the 2010 Winter Olympics
*Kjeld Nuis (born 1989) Dutch speed skater, world record holder and gold medallist at the 2018 Winter Olympics over 1000 metre and 1500 metre

*Chantal de Ridder (born 1989) Dutch football striker, 46 caps with the Netherlands women&#x27;s national football team
*Esmee Visser (born 1996) long-distance speed skater, gold medallist in the 2018 Winter Olympics in the women&#x27;s 5000 metres

=== Others ===
*Maria Swanenburg (1839–1915) Dutch serial killer, murdered at least 27 people and suspected of killing more than 90
*Aemilianus van Heel (1907–1938) Franciscan friar who served as a missionary in China
*Marinus van der Lubbe (1909–1934) executed for the Reichstag fire in Berlin in 1933
*Buurtpoes Bledder (2011–2013) male domestic cat, media star for his exploits in the city 
*Kirtie Ramdas (born 1980), Dutch television presenter and actress

== International relations ==
=== Twin cities – sister cities ===

Leiden is twinned with:


== Miscellaneous ==
*The coat of arms of Leiden is two red keys, crossed in an X-shape on a white background. These keys are the Keys of Heaven held by St. Peter, for whom a large church in the city centre is named. Because of this coat of arms, Leiden is referred to as the &quot;Sleutelstad&quot; (&quot;the key city&quot;).
*For a time Leiden held the title &quot;The Coldest Place on Earth&quot; because of the developments in cryogenics in a laboratory there. Heike Kamerlingh Onnes (1913 Nobel Prize in Physics) liquefied helium for the first time (1908), and later managed to reach a temperature of less than one degree above Absolute zero.
*The Norwegian cheese &quot;nøkkelost&quot; (&quot;key cheese&quot;) is named after the keys in coat of arms of Leyden, as it is a variation of Leyden cheese.
*The following places and things are named after this city:
**Leyden, New York, USA
**Leyden, Massachusetts, USA
**Leyden Township, Cook County, Illinois, USA
**Leiden scale, for measuring extreme low temperatures.
**Factor V Leiden is named after the city of Leiden where it was discovered in 1994.
**The Leyden jar, a capacitor made from a glass jar, was invented here by Pieter van Musschenbroek in 1746. It was actually first invented by Ewald Georg von Kleist the year before, but the name &quot;Leyden jar&quot; stuck.
*Leiden&#x27;s &quot;Stadhuis&quot; (Town Hall) has a poem in the form of a cryptogram on its façade that records the date 1574 in Roman numerals, the year of the &quot;Black Famine&quot; or Spanish siege (W equals two Vs):
(Dutch: &quot;When the Black Famine had brought to the death nearly six thousand persons, then God the Lord repented, and gave bread again as much as we could wish&quot;.)

== Sports ==
Zorg en Zekerheid Leiden is the basketball club of Leiden. In 2011, 2013 and 2021 they won the National Title, in 2010 and 2012 the National Cup and in 2011 and 2012 the National Super Cup. The club also played in the FIBA EuroChallenge and reached the Second Round (Best 16) in 2011/2012.

== See also ==

*De Zandbak, a hacklab in Leiden
*Leiden Classical A distributed computing project
*Oudt Leyden, former Michelin starred restaurant
*Wireless Leiden
*Zijl

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===


== Further reading ==

*Cruz Laura. 2009. &quot;The Paradox of Prosperity : The Leiden Booksellers&#x27; Guild and the Distribution of Books in Early Modern Europe.&quot; 1st ed. New Castle DE: Oak Knoll Press.

== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="0" end="6" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="16" end="23" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q181970" start="28" end="35" title="Archaism" label="archaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="36" end="41" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="47" end="53" title="Leiden" label="Leyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947904" start="60" end="64" title="List of cities in the Netherlands by province" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039348" start="69" end="81" title="List of municipalities of the Netherlands" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q134390" start="89" end="97" title="Provinces of the Netherlands" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q694" start="101" end="114" title="South Holland" label="South Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="116" end="127" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q94747" start="275" end="285" title="Oegstgeest" label="Oegstgeest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000817" start="287" end="297" title="Leiderdorp" label="Leiderdorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q848324" start="299" end="310" title="Voorschoten" label="Voorschoten"/>
<link wikidata="Q218259" start="315" end="326" title="Zoeterwoude" label="Zoeterwoude"/>
<link wikidata="Q167086" start="357" end="397" title="Statistics Netherlands" label="Netherlands Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208764" start="421" end="428" title="Katwijk" label="Katwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368003" start="566" end="575" title="Teylingen" label="Teylingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q455464" start="577" end="586" title="Noordwijk" label="Noordwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q848988" start="592" end="607" title="Noordwijkerhout" label="Noordwijkerhout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345836" start="681" end="690" title="Oude Rijn (Utrecht and South Holland)" label="Oude Rijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="719" end="728" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="756" end="765" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220392" start="821" end="833" title="Kagerplassen" label="Kagerplassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187811" start="876" end="891" title="University town" label="university city"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="927" end="933" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="1312" end="1329" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406409" start="1377" end="1409" title="Leiden University Medical Center" label="Leiden University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1650" end="1656" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="1707" end="1717" title="University of Oxford" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916886" start="1741" end="1778" title="Leiden University of Applied Sciences" label="Leiden University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="2095" end="2104" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q320980" start="2169" end="2185" title="Lucas van Leyden" label="Lucas van Leyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q315996" start="2187" end="2200" title="Jan van Goyen" label="Jan van Goyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q205863" start="2205" end="2214" title="Jan Steen" label="Jan Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345558" start="2290" end="2307" title="Burcht van Leiden" label="Burcht van Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345836" start="2341" end="2345" title="Oude Rijn (Utrecht and South Holland)" label="Oude"/>
<link wikidata="Q921048" start="2548" end="2566" title="Brittenburg" label="Lugdunum Batavorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208764" start="2774" end="2781" title="Katwijk" label="Katwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863008" start="2835" end="2841" title="Matilo" label="Matilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758572" start="2887" end="2904" title="Hook and Cod wars" label="Hook and Cod wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q77252" start="2906" end="2930" title="John III, Duke of Bavaria" label="Duke John III of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q84125" start="2964" end="2969" title="Gouda, South Holland" label="Gouda"/>
<link wikidata="Q548187" start="3059" end="3075" title="Count of Holland" label="Count of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q467007" start="3076" end="3107" title="Jacqueline, Countess of Hainaut" label="Jacqueline, Countess of Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q77247" start="3140" end="3167" title="William II, Duke of Bavaria-Straubing" label="Count William VI of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q77252" start="3363" end="3378" title="John of Bavaria-Straubing" label="John of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866550" start="4131" end="4141" title="broadcloth" label="broadcloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q320980" start="4257" end="4273" title="Lucas van Leyden" label="Lucas van Leyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q785355" start="4278" end="4291" title="Otto van Veen" label="Otto van Veen"/>
<link wikidata="Q380360" start="4315" end="4335" title="Christoffel Plantijn" label="Christoffel Plantijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q358635" start="4374" end="4390" title="Lodewijk Elzevir" label="Lodewijk Elzevir"/>
<link wikidata="Q602323" start="4495" end="4510" title="House of Elzevir" label="his descendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="4558" end="4570" title="Dutch Revolt" label="Dutch Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="4628" end="4650" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q694619" start="4659" end="4667" title="Siege of Leiden" label="besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q78454" start="4814" end="4833" title="William I of Orange" label="William I of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="4846" end="4866" title="University of Leiden" label="University of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q855700" start="5364" end="5372" title="Pilgrims (Plymouth Colony)" label="Pilgrims"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="5401" end="5414" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="5512" end="5525" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="5530" end="5543" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="5551" end="5560" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="5673" end="5681" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q313093" start="6032" end="6048" title="Herman Boerhaave" label="Herman Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991982" start="6517" end="6561" title="Nouvelles Extraordinaires de Divers Endroits" label="Nouvelles Extraordinaires de Divers Endroits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514684" start="6669" end="6680" title="Leiden gunpowder disaster" label="catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729" start="6855" end="6870" title="Louis Bonaparte" label="Louis Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q9920" start="7142" end="7149" title="Haarlem" label="Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="7200" end="7209" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299064" start="7367" end="7398" title="Constitution of the Netherlands" label="Constitution of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q182509" start="7400" end="7422" title="Johan Rudolf Thorbecke" label="Johan Rudolf Thorbecke"/>
<link wikidata="Q917031" start="7662" end="7677" title="Evert Jan Brill" label="Evert Jan Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000532" start="7682" end="7706" title="Albertus Willem Sijthoff" label="Albertus Willem Sijthoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q150747" start="7801" end="7817" title="Wilhelmina of the Netherlands" label="Queen Wilhelmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q217398" start="7874" end="7940" title="Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works" label="Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q843389" start="8224" end="8231" title="canning" label="canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8261" end="8273" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q208391" start="8479" end="8495" title="Snell&amp;#x27;s law" label="Snell&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q244152" start="8500" end="8519" title="Willebrord Snellius" label="Willebrord Snellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q23645" start="8536" end="8546" title="Leyden jar" label="Leyden jar"/>
<link wikidata="Q176206" start="8605" end="8629" title="Pieter van Musschenbroek" label="Pieter van Musschenbroek"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="8666" end="8676" title="cryogenics" label="cryogenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62891" start="8678" end="8700" title="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes" label="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="8707" end="8729" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="8741" end="8747" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="8849" end="8865" title="absolute zero" label="absolute minimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="8867" end="8882" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q15041935" start="9088" end="9097" title="3 October Festival" label="3 Oktober"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701367" start="9254" end="9261" title="hutspot" label="hutspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692879" start="9370" end="9404" title="Leiden International Film Festival" label="Leiden International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q152121" start="9528" end="9542" title="Eurotransplant" label="Eurotransplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q849032" start="9623" end="9637" title="organ donation" label="organ donation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="9769" end="9775" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="9909" end="9915" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345836" start="10033" end="10042" title="Oude Rijn (Utrecht and South Holland)" label="Oude Rijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="10159" end="10164" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="10185" end="10189" title="quay" label="quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468128" start="10226" end="10242" title="Hortus Botanicus Leiden" label="Hortus Botanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42816890" start="10288" end="10294" title="Binnenvestgracht" label="Singel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697934" start="10322" end="10333" title="Leidse Hout" label="Leidse Hout"/>
<link wikidata="Q94747" start="10408" end="10418" title="Oegstgeest" label="Oegstgeest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514684" start="10643" end="10663" title="Leiden Gunpowder Disaster" label="accidental explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="10686" end="10695" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500733" start="10782" end="10790" title="Printer (publisher)" label="printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310956" start="11187" end="11204" title="Wall poems in Leiden" label="wall poem project"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="11356" end="11362" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q92062" start="11583" end="11599" title="motte-and-bailey" label="motte-and-bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q82117" start="11629" end="11638" title="city gate" label="city gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326072" start="11669" end="11678" title="Zijlpoort (Leiden)" label="Zijlpoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="11844" end="11853" title="city wall" label="city wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="11871" end="11884" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="11928" end="11936" title="fortress" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537970" start="12136" end="12151" title="Hooglandse Kerk" label="Hooglandse Kerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q336731" start="12170" end="12180" title="Pancras of Rome" label="St Pancras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537972" start="12284" end="12295" title="Pieterskerk, Leiden" label="Pieterskerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="12313" end="12321" title="St Peter" label="St Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q315163" start="12348" end="12356" title="Joseph Justus Scaliger" label="Scaliger"/>
<link wikidata="Q313093" start="12358" end="12367" title="Boerhaave" label="Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781104" start="12429" end="12437" title="Marekerk" label="Marekerk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12458" end="12486" title="Arent van &amp;#x27;s Gravesande" label="Arent van &amp;#x27;s Gravesande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098586" start="12576" end="12604" title="Stedelijk Museum De Lakenhal" label="Stedelijk Museum De Lakenhal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12662" end="12682" title="Leiden University Library#Bibliotheca Thysiana" label="Bibliotheca Thysiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781104" start="12737" end="12745" title="Marekerk" label="Marekerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="12827" end="12838" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="12860" end="12876" title="Classicism" label="Dutch Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="12924" end="12930" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275186" start="13015" end="13026" title="Nieuwe Kerk (Haarlem)" label="Nieuwe Kerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q536951" start="13057" end="13073" title="Jacob van Campen" label="Jacob van Campen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520298" start="13138" end="13158" title="Heilige Lodewijkkerk" label="Heilige Lodewijkkerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366708" start="13621" end="13631" title="St. Joseph, Leiden" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="13635" end="13650" title="expressionism" label="expressionistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="13752" end="13772" title="University of Leiden" label="University of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="13842" end="13849" title="convent" label="convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="13960" end="13969" title="ethnology" label="ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="13974" end="13983" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q186244" start="14029" end="14040" title="Leiden Observatory" label="observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860378" start="14082" end="14106" title="Rijksmuseum van Oudheden" label="Rijksmuseum van Oudheden"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="14123" end="14137" title="ethnography" label="ethnographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q77140" start="14155" end="14178" title="Philipp Franz von Siebold" label="P.F. von Siebold&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q17339437" start="14222" end="14250" title="National Museum of Ethnology (Netherlands)" label="Rijksmuseum voor Volkenkunde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662109" start="14327" end="14338" title="SieboldHuis" label="SieboldHuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="14387" end="14398" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="14467" end="14477" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q638395" start="14542" end="14567" title="Leiden University Library" label="Leiden University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237463" start="14593" end="14620" title="Society of Dutch Literature" label="Society of Dutch Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288608" start="14717" end="14740" title="Leiden Bio Science Park" label="Leiden Bio Science Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q576729" start="14968" end="14981" title="Lieven de Key" label="Lieven de Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393805" start="14998" end="15026" title="Gemeenlandshuis van Rijnland" label="Gemeenlandshuis van Rijnland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088619" start="15053" end="15060" title="Weigh House (Leiden)" label="De Waag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407236" start="15071" end="15082" title="weigh house" label="weigh house"/>
<link wikidata="Q577598" start="15094" end="15105" title="Pieter Post" label="Pieter Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q781124" start="15205" end="15224" title="Stedelijk Gymnasium Leiden" label="Stedelijk Gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="15257" end="15266" title="gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892214" start="15275" end="15297" title="Holy Spirit Orphanage" label="Heilige Geest Weeshuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776719" start="15383" end="15396" title="Museum De Valk" label="Molen de Valk"/>
<link wikidata="Q217519" start="15566" end="15580" title="bubonic plague" label="bubonic plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q641676" start="15850" end="15859" title="Naturalis" label="Naturalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="15893" end="15908" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15996" end="16011" title="Stadstimmerwerf" label="Stadstimmerwerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860378" start="16288" end="16345" title="Rijksmuseum van Oudheden" label="Rijksmuseum van Oudheden (National Museum of Antiquities)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17339437" start="16347" end="16396" title="National Museum of Ethnology (Netherlands)" label="Museum Volkenkunde (National Museum of Ethnology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q641676" start="16398" end="16427" title="Naturalis Biodiversity Center" label="Naturalis Biodiversity Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q759169" start="16429" end="16450" title="Museum Boerhaave" label="Rijksmuseum Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098586" start="16452" end="16480" title="Museum De Lakenhal" label="Stedelijk Museum de Lakenhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662109" start="16482" end="16506" title="SieboldHuis" label="Japan Museum Sieboldhuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776719" start="16508" end="16522" title="Museum De Valk" label="Museum de Valk"/>
<link wikidata="Q670212" start="16524" end="16554" title="Leiden American Pilgrim Museum" label="Leiden American Pilgrim Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q93466" start="16556" end="16562" title="Corpus (museum)" label="Corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468128" start="16632" end="16655" title="Hortus Botanicus Leiden" label="Hortus Botanicus Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18608766" start="16657" end="16683" title="Museum Het Leids Wevershuis" label="Museum Het Leids Weverhuis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16685" end="16707" title="Young Rembrandt Studio" label="Young Rembrandt Studio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16738" end="16762" title="Anatomisch Museum Leiden" label="Anatomisch Museum Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q680991" start="16827" end="16832" title="Arriva" label="Qbuzz"/>
<link wikidata="Q77255" start="17079" end="17107" title="William II, Count of Holland" label="William II, Count of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q548187" start="17120" end="17136" title="Count of Holland" label="Count of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q77245" start="17148" end="17174" title="Floris V, Count of Holland" label="Floris V, Count of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q548187" start="17187" end="17203" title="Count of Holland" label="Count of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945565" start="17208" end="17215" title="County of Zeeland" label="Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q560443" start="17227" end="17241" title="John of Leiden" label="John of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="17268" end="17278" title="Anabaptist" label="Anabaptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q691882" start="17279" end="17296" title="Münster Rebellion" label="Münster Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q864709" start="17299" end="17315" title="William Brewster (Mayflower passenger)" label="William Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q187093" start="17343" end="17352" title="Mayflower" label="Mayflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q918731" start="17379" end="17394" title="Daniel Heinsius" label="Daniel Heinsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742589" start="17429" end="17446" title="Dutch Renaissance" label="Dutch Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210370" start="17449" end="17465" title="William Bradford (Plymouth governor)" label="William Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q126195" start="17510" end="17525" title="Plymouth Colony" label="Plymouth Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2951068" start="17545" end="17562" title="Franciscus Junius (the younger)" label="Franciscus Junius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673380" start="17607" end="17620" title="Isaac Elzevir" label="Isaac Elzevir"/>
<link wikidata="Q602323" start="17676" end="17692" title="House of Elzevir" label="House of Elzevir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690404" start="17695" end="17708" title="Love Brewster" label="Love Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086280" start="17746" end="17772" title="Bridgewater, Massachusetts" label="Bridgewater, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112766" start="17775" end="17788" title="Isaac Vossius" label="Isaac Vossius"/>
<link wikidata="Q42646" start="17844" end="17858" title="Windsor Castle" label="Windsor Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q510116" start="17861" end="17888" title="Nicolaas Heinsius the Elder" label="Nicolaas Heinsius the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479945" start="17935" end="17951" title="Johann Bachstrom" label="Johann Bachstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q549419" start="18007" end="18038" title="Gottfried van Swieten" label="Gottfried, Freiherr van Swieten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564387" start="18107" end="18115" title="Jan Bake" label="Jan Bake"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="18134" end="18145" title="philologist" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q708843" start="18159" end="18172" title="Reinhart Dozy" label="Reinhart Dozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308882" start="18230" end="18244" title="Cornelis Tiele" label="Cornelis Tiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682124" start="18288" end="18316" title="J. P. B. de Josselin de Jong" label="J. P. B. de Josselin de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111399" start="18394" end="18417" title="structural anthropology" label="structural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494960" start="18419" end="18433" title="Hans de Koster" label="Hans de Koster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895179" start="18496" end="18511" title="Alfred Kossmann" label="Alfred Kossmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499321" start="18588" end="18604" title="Leendert Ginjaar" label="Leendert Ginjaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662835" start="18647" end="18669" title="Laurens Jan Brinkhorst" label="Laurens Jan Brinkhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609978" start="18721" end="18740" title="Ankie Broekers-Knol" label="Ankie Broekers-Knol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878535" start="18792" end="18805" title="Carel Stolker" label="Carel Stolker"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="18819" end="18836" title="rector magnificus" label="rector magnificus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="18854" end="18871" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden University"/>
<link wikidata="Q267367" start="18894" end="18932" title="Princess Laurentien of the Netherlands" label="Princess Laurentien of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q355254" start="18953" end="18971" title="Prince Constantijn of the Netherlands" label="Prince Constantijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2776715" start="18973" end="18988" title="Kajsa Ollongren" label="Kajsa Ollongren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430481" start="19027" end="19067" title="Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands" label="Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28861159" start="19069" end="19084" title="Julius Terpstra" label="Julius Terpstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q964357" start="19134" end="19156" title="Cornelis Engebrechtsz." label="Cornelis Engebrechtsz."/>
<link wikidata="Q320980" start="19194" end="19210" title="Lucas van Leyden" label="Lucas van Leyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q315996" start="19278" end="19291" title="Jan van Goyen" label="Jan van Goyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034140" start="19330" end="19347" title="Justus van Egmont" label="Justus van Egmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598" start="19391" end="19409" title="Rembrandt" label="Rembrandt van Rijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q722912" start="19466" end="19495" title="Willem van de Velde the Elder" label="Willem van de Velde the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q661566" start="19511" end="19527" title="Dutch Golden Age" label="Dutch Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q577489" start="19547" end="19557" title="Frans Post" label="Frans Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q661566" start="19570" end="19586" title="Dutch Golden Age" label="Dutch Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q335927" start="19596" end="19606" title="Gerard Dou" label="Gerard Dou"/>
<link wikidata="Q661566" start="19619" end="19635" title="Dutch Golden Age" label="Dutch Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q205863" start="19646" end="19655" title="Jan Steen" label="Jan Steen"/>
<link wikidata="Q661566" start="19671" end="19687" title="Dutch Golden Age" label="Dutch Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q355213" start="19704" end="19717" title="Gabriel Metsu" label="Gabriel Metsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q432266" start="19800" end="19831" title="Willem van de Velde the Younger" label="Willem van de Velde the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q959236" start="19867" end="19893" title="Frans van Mieris the Elder" label="Frans van Mieris the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q661566" start="19906" end="19922" title="Dutch Golden Age" label="Dutch Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q28056198" start="19952" end="19972" title="Jan Gaykema Jacobsz." label="Jan Gaykema Jacobsz."/>
<link wikidata="Q18649109" start="20039" end="20056" title="Jan Elias Kikkert" label="Jan Elias Kikkert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140792" start="20134" end="20149" title="Coenraad V. Bos" label="Coenraad V. Bos"/>
<link wikidata="Q216860" start="20206" end="20212" title="lieder" label="lieder"/>
<link wikidata="Q160422" start="20214" end="20231" title="Theo van Doesburg" label="Theo van Doesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q207445" start="20280" end="20288" title="De Stijl" label="De Stijl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536344" start="20291" end="20302" title="Ernst Winar" label="Ernst Winar"/>
<link wikidata="Q235632" start="20346" end="20355" title="Nina Foch" label="Nina Foch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930958" start="20410" end="20425" title="Michel Waisvisz" label="Michel Waisvisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394720" start="20546" end="20551" title="STEIM" label="STEIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994426" start="20563" end="20575" title="Leoni Jansen" label="Leoni Jansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q592648" start="20649" end="20661" title="Daniel Reuss" label="Daniel Reuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508984" start="20721" end="20729" title="Isa Hoes" label="Isa Hoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379165" start="20776" end="20789" title="Eva Dorrepaal" label="Eva Dorrepaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q62617" start="20817" end="20833" title="Armin van Buuren" label="Armin van Buuren"/>
<link wikidata="Q232384" start="20885" end="20902" title="Carice van Houten" label="Carice van Houten"/>
<link wikidata="Q16298903" start="20941" end="20945" title="Dyro" label="Dyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="20971" end="20993" title="Electronic dance music" label="Electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q437466" start="21021" end="21036" title="Rembert Dodoens" label="Rembert Dodoens"/>
<link wikidata="Q333372" start="21075" end="21099" title="Carolus Clusius" label="Charles de L&amp;#x27;Écluse"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="21122" end="21136" title="horticulturist" label="horticulturist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468128" start="21153" end="21176" title="Hortus Botanicus Leiden" label="Hortus Botanicus Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q310771" start="21178" end="21196" title="Ludolph van Ceulen" label="Ludolph van Ceulen"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="21247" end="21249" title="pi" label="pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q244152" start="21251" end="21270" title="Willebrord Snellius" label="Willebrord Snellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q313093" start="21320" end="21336" title="Herman Boerhaave" label="Herman Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q61462" start="21403" end="21429" title="Bernhard Siegfried Albinus" label="Bernhard Siegfried Albinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q711132" start="21473" end="21491" title="Gerard van Swieten" label="Gerard van Swieten"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="21543" end="21556" title="Maria Theresa" label="Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q382682" start="21558" end="21571" title="Petrus Camper" label="Petrus Camper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="21572" end="21575" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q77140" start="21700" end="21725" title="Philipp Franz von Siebold" label="Philipp Franz von Siebold"/>
<link wikidata="Q131721" start="21803" end="21833" title="Johannes Diderik van der Waals" label="Johannes Diderik van der Waals"/>
<link wikidata="Q852317" start="21889" end="21916" title="List of Nobel laureates in Physics" label="1910 Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41688" start="21918" end="21933" title="Hendrik Lorentz" label="Hendrik Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q852317" start="21983" end="22010" title="List of Nobel laureates in Physics" label="1902 Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62891" start="22012" end="22034" title="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes" label="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q852317" start="22081" end="22108" title="List of Nobel laureates in Physics" label="1913 Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189488" start="22110" end="22126" title="Willem Einthoven" label="Willem Einthoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q79000" start="22173" end="22186" title="Pieter Zeeman" label="Pieter Zeeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q852317" start="22236" end="22263" title="List of Nobel laureates in Physics" label="1902 Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q313059" start="22265" end="22281" title="Willem de Sitter" label="Willem de Sitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="22341" end="22356" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="22392" end="22409" title="Leiden University" label="Leiden University"/>
<link wikidata="Q84227" start="22444" end="22458" title="Paul Ehrenfest" label="Paul Ehrenfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="22486" end="22507" title="theoretical physicist" label="theoretical physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="22524" end="22545" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508823" start="22547" end="22573" title="Geertruida de Haas-Lorentz" label="Geertruida de Haas-Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q178036" start="22620" end="22635" title="Brownian motion" label="Brownian motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306265" start="22640" end="22663" title="Noise (electronics)" label="electrical noise theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q309861" start="22665" end="22673" title="Jan Oort" label="Jan Oort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306" start="22715" end="22730" title="radio astronomy" label="radio astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q535748" start="22733" end="22748" title="Hendrik Casimir" label="Hendrik Casimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879957" start="22778" end="22796" title="Ewine van Dishoeck" label="Ewine van Dishoeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117675" start="22836" end="22860" title="Atomic and molecular astrophysics" label="molecular astrophysicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352440" start="22877" end="22893" title="Willem Slijkhuis" label="Willem Slijkhuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8403" start="22965" end="22985" title="1948 Summer Olympics" label="1948 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628693" start="22987" end="23002" title="Sandra Le Poole" label="Sandra Le Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="23071" end="23091" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q46092" start="23093" end="23107" title="Ronald Florijn" label="Ronald Florijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="23168" end="23172" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="23177" end="23197" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q439642" start="23199" end="23214" title="Carina Benninga" label="Carina Benninga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233194" start="23233" end="23252" title="Taco van den Honert" label="Taco van den Honert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="23327" end="23347" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="23381" end="23401" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834828" start="23403" end="23421" title="Alfons Groenendijk" label="Alfons Groenendijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918908" start="23492" end="23511" title="Gerritjan Eggenkamp" label="Gerritjan Eggenkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="23566" end="23586" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356925" start="23588" end="23602" title="Rodney Glunder" label="Rodney Glunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q334405" start="23689" end="23700" title="Tim de Cler" label="Tim de Cler"/>
<link wikidata="Q63323" start="23757" end="23774" title="Erik van den Doel" label="Erik van den Doel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105269" start="23799" end="23810" title="Grandmaster (chess)" label="Grandmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544306" start="23812" end="23827" title="Merel Witteveen" label="Merel Witteveen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="23877" end="23897" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335313" start="23899" end="23918" title="Biurakn Hakhverdian" label="Biurakn Hakhverdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563875" start="23937" end="23953" title="Iefke van Belkum" label="Iefke van Belkum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="24019" end="24039" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188997" start="24041" end="24055" title="Gegard Mousasi" label="Gegard Mousasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q264170" start="24117" end="24136" title="Laurine van Riessen" label="Laurine van Riessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="24216" end="24236" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813174" start="24238" end="24248" title="Kjeld Nuis" label="Kjeld Nuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="24327" end="24347" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="2018 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q523693" start="24381" end="24398" title="Chantal de Ridder" label="Chantal de Ridder"/>
<link wikidata="Q841563" start="24452" end="24499" title="Netherlands women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Netherlands women&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q43371144" start="24501" end="24513" title="Esmee Visser" label="Esmee Visser"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680" start="24576" end="24596" title="2018 Winter Olympics" label="2018 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185638" start="24646" end="24662" title="Maria Swanenburg" label="Maria Swanenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q31348084" start="24763" end="24782" title="Aemilianus van Heel" label="Aemilianus van Heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q157888" start="24849" end="24870" title="Marinus van der Lubbe" label="Marinus van der Lubbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q153992" start="24900" end="24914" title="Reichstag fire" label="Reichstag fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q14916910" start="24934" end="24951" title="Buurtpoes Bledder" label="Buurtpoes Bledder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812843" start="25025" end="25038" title="Kirtie Ramdas" label="Kirtie Ramdas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="25169" end="25176" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546006" start="25314" end="25328" title="Keys of Heaven" label="Keys of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="25616" end="25626" title="cryogenics" label="cryogenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62891" start="25650" end="25672" title="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes" label="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="25679" end="25701" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="25713" end="25719" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="25818" end="25831" title="Absolute zero" label="Absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772090" start="25861" end="25870" title="nøkkelost" label="nøkkelost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011347" start="25977" end="25990" title="Leyden cheese" label="Leyden cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708508" start="26054" end="26070" title="Leyden, New York" label="Leyden, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416397" start="26078" end="26099" title="Leyden, Massachusetts" label="Leyden, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537998" start="26107" end="26145" title="Leyden Township, Cook County, Illinois" label="Leyden Township, Cook County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q621989" start="26153" end="26165" title="Leiden scale" label="Leiden scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q185986" start="26209" end="26224" title="Factor V Leiden" label="Factor V Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23645" start="26298" end="26308" title="Leyden jar" label="Leyden jar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="26312" end="26321" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q176206" start="26366" end="26390" title="Pieter van Musschenbroek" label="Pieter van Musschenbroek"/>
<link wikidata="Q695938" start="26434" end="26456" title="Ewald Georg von Kleist" label="Ewald Georg von Kleist"/>
<link wikidata="Q540623" start="26593" end="26603" title="cryptogram" label="cryptogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="26648" end="26662" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215119" start="26927" end="26951" title="Zorg en Zekerheid Leiden" label="Zorg en Zekerheid Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q910431" start="27145" end="27163" title="FIBA EuroChallenge" label="FIBA EuroChallenge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27235" end="27245" title="De Zandbak" label="De Zandbak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420074" start="27268" end="27284" title="Leiden Classical" label="Leiden Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569087" start="27318" end="27329" title="Oudt Leyden" label="Oudt Leyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q934658" start="27367" end="27382" title="Wireless Leiden" label="Wireless Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q202851" start="27384" end="27388" title="Zijl" label="Zijl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46601" wikidata="Q182483" url="?curid=46601" title="Cambyses II">
<text>Cambyses II () was the second King of Kings of the Achaemenid Empire from 530 to 522 BC. He was the son and successor of Cyrus the Great () and his mother was Cassandane. His relatively brief reign was marked by his conquests in North Africa, notably Egypt, which he conquered after his victory over the Egyptian pharaoh Psamtik III () at the battle of Pelusium in 525 BC. After having established himself in Egypt, he expanded the empire&#x27;s holdings in Africa, including the conquest of Cyrenaica. In the spring of 522 BC, Cambyses hurriedly left Egypt to deal with a rebellion in Persia. 

Before his accession, Cambyses had briefly served as the governor of northern Babylonia under his father from April to December 538 BC. Afterwards, he resided in the Babylonian cities of Babylon and Sippar, before being appointed by his father as co-ruler in 530 BC. His father then set off on an expedition against the Massagetae of Central Asia, where he met his end. Cambyses thus became the sole ruler of the vast Achaemenid Empire, facing no reported opposition.

While en route in Syria (Eber-Nari), he received a wound to the thigh, which was soon affected by gangrene. Cambyses died three weeks later at a location called Agbatana, which is most likely the modern city of Hama. He died childless, and was thus succeeded by his younger brother Bardiya, who ruled for a short period before being overthrown by Darius the Great (), who went on to increase the power of the Achaemenids even further.

== Etymology ==
The origins of the name of &quot;Cambyses&quot; () is disputed in scholarship; according to some scholars, the name is of Elamite origin, whilst others associate it with Kambojas, an Iranian people who inhabited northwestern India. The name of Cambyses is known in other languages as: Elamite &quot;Kanbuziya&quot;; Akkadian &quot;Kambuziya&quot;; Aramaic &quot;Kanbūzī&quot;.

== Background ==
Cambyses was the eldest son of Cyrus the Great () and Cassandane. Cambyses had a younger brother named Bardiya, and three sisters named Artystone, Atossa and Roxanne. Cambyses&#x27; paternal grandfather was his namesake Cambyses I, the king of Persis from 600 to 559 BC. The family was descended from a line of rulers of Persian tribes, who starting with Cyrus in Anshan, expanded their reach over Persis, subjugating the Median Empire, the Neo-Babylonian Empire, Lydia and Central Asia, thus establishing the Achaemenid Empire.

== Early life ==

In April 538 BC, Cambyses was appointed by his father as the governor of the northern part of Babylonia, including its city Babylon, whilst the central and southern part continued to be directly supervised by Cyrus and his bureaucrats. Before his appointment, Cambyses had taken part in a ritual at the regular New Year festival on 27 March 538 BC, where he received the royal sceptre in Esagila, a temple dedicated to the god Marduk. His governorship, however, lasted only nine months; Cyrus dismissed him from the post in December 538 BC for unknown reasons. After his dismissal, Cambyses continued to mostly reside in the Babylonian cities of Babylon and Sippar. 

According to Babylonian records, both Cambyses and Cyrus carried the title of &quot;King of Babylon, King of the Lands&quot; in 538/7 BC, which indicates that Cyrus had appointed him as co-ruler some years before his campaign against the Massagetae. Cyrus&#x27; younger son, Bardiya, was given his own realm in Central Asia, which was exempted from paying tribute. Cambyses reportedly took part in the expedition against the Massagetae, but, due to his being the heir to the throne, he was sent back to Persia, before Cyrus fell to the Massagetae. Cambyses had his father&#x27;s body carried to Pasargadae in Persis, where he was buried in a tomb that had been prepared for him earlier.

== Military campaigns ==
===Preparations against Egypt and the conquest of Cyprus===

Cambyses&#x27; accession to the Achaemenid throne was relatively smooth. Ruling over a vast but young empire, Cambyses preserved his authority over the subjugated lands, but also expanded his dominion over Egypt, the last prominent power in the Near East. According to the French Iranologist Pierre Briant, &quot;this must not be seen as a more or less irrational and uncontrollable desire to take over the entire inhabited world&quot;. On the contrary, Cambyses&#x27; action had already been planned by his father, who wanted to unify Babylonia with the lands of the Trans-Euphrates (an area that stretched from Posideium to Egypt). This would eventually require conquering the lands situated between the Euphrates and Nile rivers, and therefore necessitated conflict with Egypt, which had previously and more recently shown interest in the area. 

The incumbent pharaoh of Egypt was Amasis II, who had been ruling since 570. His ally, Polycrates, a Greek ruler of Samos, posed a considerable threat to the Achaemenids, launching several raids that jeopardised Achaemenid authority. However, Polycrates eventually forsook his Egyptian allies, and reached out to Cambyses, whose plans he was well acquainted with. His sudden change of alliances was undoubtedly due to his uneasy position, with the Spartans raising a force against him, and the rising hostility of some of the Samian aristocrats, who preferred partnership with Egypt. Another former ally of Amasis II, the Carian military leader Phanes of Halicarnassus, had also joined Cambyses after escaping assassins sent by the pharaoh. Cambyses, before starting his expedition into Egypt, had seized Cyprus from Amasis II, which was reportedly a heavy blow to the latter.

===Conquest of Egypt and its surroundings===
By 526 BC, Amasis II had died, and his son Psamtik III had succeeded him, thus weakening Egypt&#x27;s position. In the meantime, Cambyses had made substantial preparations for his army. He had essentially laid the foundations for the Persian navy, which was crucial to his ambitions to conquer Egypt. The navy was created using men and equipment from Phoenicia and  Asia Minor. During his march to Egypt, Cambyses made a treaty with the Arabs, who controlled the desert area between Gaza and the Egyptian frontier. This treaty granted Cambyses sufficient water for his forces to reach the Nile. This also paved the way for Cambyses to extend his authority over the unsubdued lands between Egypt and Persia, including Gaza, a prominent commercial region, which equalled that of Sardis in Lydia. The region served as the headquarters for the Persian expedition into Egypt. 

In 525 BC, Cambyses finally invaded Egypt. In the spring of that year, the Persian and Egyptian forces clashed at Pelusium, where the Persians emerged victorious. According to one author, Cambyses was able to defeat the Egyptians by putting cats, sheep, dogs and other animals that the Egyptians considered sacred in the front lines. This led the Egyptians to cease using their war engines for fear of killing an animal and angering the gods. The forces of Cambyses then laid siege to Memphis, where Psamtik III and his men had fortified themselves. Despite the considerable resistance by the pharaoh&#x27;s forces, Cambyses captured Memphis and established a Persian-Egyptian garrison there. The length of the siege is not specified by the 5th-century BC Greek historian Herodotus. Regardless, by summer, all of Egypt was under Persian suzerainty. Cambyses now adopted the aspirations of the last pharaohs in seeking to control the neighbouring lands towards the west (Libya and Cyrenaica) and south (Nubia).

===Further conquests===
The Libyans, and soon the Greeks of Cyrene and Barca, willingly acknowledged the authority of Cambyses, and as proof of their submission, sent offerings to Cambyses. As a demonstration of his generosity, Cambyses had Amasis II&#x27;s Greek widow, Ladice, returned to Cyrene. Cambyses originally intended to make an expedition against the Phoenician state of Carthage, but it was ultimately called off due to his Phoenician subjects&#x27; reluctance to make war against their own people. In the south, Cambyses, followed the same policy of the last pharaohs to keep the Kingdom of Kush in check, and had a garrison established at Elephantine.

According to Herodotus, Cambyses&#x27; campaigns against Ammon in the Siwa Oasis and Ethiopia ended catastrophically. He states that the reason behind this defeat was the &quot;madness&quot; of Cambyses, who &quot;at once began his march against Ethiopia, without any orders for the provision of supplies, and without for a moment considering the fact that he was to take his men to the ends of the earth&quot;. This is called the Lost Army of Cambyses.

However, according to Briant, &quot;the deliberate bias against Cambyses raises doubts about the accuracy of Herodotus&#x27;s version.&quot; Herodotus&#x27; statement is contradicted by other sources that do not suggest a catastrophe for his forces, even though the obstacles of the campaign possibly compelled Cambyses to withdraw. Archaeological proof indicates that the Achaemenids made use of the stronghold of Dorginarti (south of Buhen) during the time they controlled Egypt.

==Policies in Egypt==

In accordance with the traditional Egyptian royal custom, Cambyses took the titles of &quot;king of Upper and Lower Egypt&quot; and &quot;descendant of (the gods) Ra, Horus, Osiris,&quot; used by the previous Egyptian pharaohs. Cambyses used propaganda to show his Egyptian conquest as a legitimate unification with the native Egyptians, and that he was himself of Egyptian descent, claiming to be the son of Princess Nitetis, a daughter of the pharaoh Apries. At Sais, Cambyses had himself crowned in the temple of the goddess Neith as part of a religious ritual, during which he made sacrifices to the Egyptian gods.

According to ancient historians, Cambyses&#x27; rule of Egypt was marked by brutality, looting temples, ridiculing the local gods, and defilement of the royal tombs. Historians such as Herodotus put an emphasis on Cambyses&#x27; supposed killing of the Egyptian sacred bull Apis. However, no looting of temples has been reported by contemporary Egyptian sources. In addition, Cambyses is said to have ordered the burial of an Apis in a sarcophagus. The successor of the Apis died in 518 BC, four years after Cambyses had already died.

The epitaph of the Apis buried in 524 BC, states:

A legend on the sarcophagus also says:

This thus debunks Cambyses&#x27; supposed killing of the Apis, and according to Briant, proves that Herodotus documented bogus reports. Rather, Cambyses took part in the preservation and burial ceremony of an Apis. Other similar sources also make mention of Cambyses&#x27; careful treatment towards Egyptian culture and religion. According to the Egyptian Demotic Chronicle, Cambyses decreased the immense income that the Egyptian temples received from the Egyptian pharaohs. Only the three main temples were given permission to maintain all their entitlements. In response to this action, Egyptian priests who had lost their entitlements circulated spurious stories about Cambyses. The issue with the temples dated back to the earlier pharaohs, who had also tried to reduce the economic power of the temples. This issue would continue until the demise of ancient Egypt. Like Cyrus in Babylon, Cambyses allowed the Egyptian nobility to maintain their jurisdictions.

== Administration ==

Although a tax system existed during the reigns of Cyrus and Cambyses, it was not a systematic one, and thus the subjects of the king were either obligated to give gifts, or pay taxes. As was the case during his father&#x27;s reign, Cambyses&#x27; satraps were all of Persian stock: Gubaru in Babylonia-Trans-Euphrates: Aryandes in Egypt: Oroetes in Sardis, Mitrobates in Dascylium, Dadarsi in Bactria, and Vivana in Arachosia. Likewise, the imperial treasurer in Babylon, Mithradata, was also from a Persian family. Indeed, the senior officials and officers accompanying Cambyses in Egypt were composed solely of Persians. The most notable of these Persians were relatives of the king, such as his cousin Darius, who occupied high offices under Cyrus and Cambyses, and serving as a spear-bearer under the latter. Darius&#x27; father, Hystaspes, served as the governor of Parthia and Hyrcania, or at least held a prominent role there. Important offices centred around the king was also occupied by the Persians, as in the case of Prexaspes, who served as the &quot;message-bearer&quot; of Cambyses, and Sisamnes, who was the royal judge but later executed by Cambyses.

== Personality ==
According to Herodotus, Cambyses was labelled a &quot;despot&quot; by the Persians due to his being &quot;half-mad, cruel, and insolent&quot;. However, this would seem to be part of later Persian and Egyptian propaganda critical of Cambyses. Indeed, due to Cambyses&#x27; willingness to consolidate authority to himself, the Persian tribal nobility were increasingly antagonistic towards him.

==Marriages==
In Achaemenid Persia, marriages between family members, such as half-siblings, nieces and cousins took place but were not seen as incestuous. However, Greek sources state that brother-sister and father-daughter marriages allegedly took place inside the royal family, yet it remains problematic to determine the reliability of these accounts. According to Herodotus, Cambyses supposedly married two of his sisters, Atossa and Roxane. This would have been regarded as illegal. However, Herodotus also states that Cambyses married Otanes&#x27; daughter Phaidyme, whilst his contemporary Ctesias names Roxane as Cambyses&#x27; wife, but she is not referred to as his sister. 

The accusations against Cambyses of committing incest are mentioned as part of his &quot;blasphemous actions&quot;, which were designed to illustrate his &quot;madness and vanity&quot;. These reports all derive from the same Egyptian source that was antagonistic towards Cambyses, and some of these allegations of &quot;crimes&quot;, such as the killing of the Apis bull, have been confirmed as false, which means that the report of Cambyses&#x27; supposed incestuous acts is questionable.

==Death and succession==
In the spring of 522 BC, Cambyses hurriedly left Egypt to deal with a rebellion in Persia. Before he left the country, he made Egypt into a satrapy under the governorship of the Persian Aryandes.

However Cambyses died shortly after under disputed circumstances. By most accounts, while Cambyses was on his way through Syria (Eber-Nari), he received a wound to the thigh, which soon became gangrenous. Cambyses died three weeks later (in July) at a location called Agbatana, which is most likely the modern city of Hama. He died childless, and was succeeded by his younger brother Bardiya. 

According to Darius, who was Cambyses&#x27; lance-bearer at the time, Bardiya decided that he could not succeed as King of Kings and died by his own hand in 522 BC. Herodotus and Ctesias ascribe his death to an accident. Ctesias writes that Cambyses, despondent from the loss of family members, stabbed himself in the thigh while working with a piece of wood, and died eleven days later from the wound. Herodotus&#x27; story is that while Cambyses was mounting his horse, the tip of his scabbard broke, and his sword pierced his thigh. Some modern historians suspect that Cambyses was assassinated, either by Darius as the first step to usurping the empire for himself, or by supporters of Bardiya.

Cambyses was buried in Neyriz in southeastern Persis. As reported in the Persepolis Administrative Archives, sacrifices were offered in his name. At the time of Cambyses&#x27; death, the Achaemenid Empire was stronger than ever, reaching from Cyrenaica to the Hindu Kush, and from the Syr Darya to the Persian Gulf.

==See also==
* Cambysene
* &quot;Cambyses Romance&quot;

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
*
* Strassler, Robert B. &quot;The Landmark Herodotus: The Histories&quot;. Anchor Books, 2009.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182483" start="0" end="11" title="Cambyses II" label="Cambyses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q938153" start="30" end="43" title="King of Kings" label="King of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="51" end="68" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="121" end="136" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q442401" start="159" end="169" title="Cassandane" label="Cassandane"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="229" end="241" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="251" end="256" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="313" end="320" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q316278" start="321" end="332" title="Psamtik III" label="Psamtik III"/>
<link wikidata="Q544239" start="343" end="361" title="Battle of Pelusium (525 BC)" label="battle of Pelusium"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="492" end="501" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="674" end="683" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="783" end="790" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q619707" start="795" end="801" title="Sippar" label="Sippar"/>
<link wikidata="Q379821" start="916" end="926" title="Massagetae" label="Massagetae"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="930" end="942" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="1083" end="1088" title="Syria (region)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q957854" start="1090" end="1099" title="Eber-Nari" label="Eber-Nari"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="1163" end="1171" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q173545" start="1276" end="1280" title="Hama" label="Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q242267" start="1347" end="1354" title="Bardiya" label="Bardiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="1412" end="1428" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q35470" start="1639" end="1646" title="Elamite language" label="Elamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586782" start="1687" end="1695" title="Kambojas" label="Kambojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="1700" end="1714" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="1742" end="1747" title="Indian subcontinent" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="1833" end="1841" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="1865" end="1872" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="1943" end="1958" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q442401" start="1966" end="1976" title="Cassandane" label="Cassandane"/>
<link wikidata="Q242267" start="2015" end="2022" title="Bardiya" label="Bardiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q262739" start="2048" end="2057" title="Artystone" label="Artystone"/>
<link wikidata="Q233359" start="2059" end="2065" title="Atossa" label="Atossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q299428" start="2132" end="2142" title="Cambyses I" label="Cambyses I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746183" start="2156" end="2162" title="Persis" label="Persis"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="2233" end="2240" title="Persians" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q569107" start="2276" end="2282" title="Anshan (Persia)" label="Anshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8735" start="2334" end="2347" title="Medes" label="Median Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="2353" end="2374" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Neo-Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="2376" end="2381" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="2386" end="2398" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="2422" end="2439" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="2554" end="2563" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="2584" end="2591" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q483236" start="2771" end="2788" title="Nowruz" label="New Year festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q152065" start="2837" end="2844" title="sceptre" label="sceptre"/>
<link wikidata="Q928707" start="2848" end="2855" title="Esagila" label="Esagila"/>
<link wikidata="Q190123" start="2887" end="2893" title="Marduk" label="Marduk"/>
<link wikidata="Q619707" start="3118" end="3124" title="Sippar" label="Sippar"/>
<link wikidata="Q379821" start="3366" end="3376" title="Massagetae" label="Massagetae"/>
<link wikidata="Q230025" start="3723" end="3733" title="Pasargadae" label="Pasargadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635530" start="3770" end="3774" title="Tomb of Cyrus" label="tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="4147" end="4156" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4175" end="4181" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367176" start="4182" end="4193" title="Iranologist" label="Iranologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q721821" start="4194" end="4207" title="Pierre Briant" label="Pierre Briant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119291" start="4515" end="4524" title="Ras al-Bassit" label="Posideium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="4622" end="4626" title="Nile river" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="4766" end="4773" title="pharaoh" label="pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q312045" start="4787" end="4796" title="Amasis II" label="Amasis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q294840" start="4839" end="4849" title="Polycrates" label="Polycrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="4868" end="4873" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="5200" end="5207" title="Spartan" label="Spartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="5374" end="5379" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10626527" start="5397" end="5420" title="Phanes of Halicarnassus" label="Phanes of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="5557" end="5563" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q316278" start="5718" end="5729" title="Psamtik III" label="Psamtik III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867373" start="6026" end="6035" title="History of ancient Lebanon" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6040" end="6051" title=" Asia Minor" label=" Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="6112" end="6117" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="6158" end="6162" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q232615" start="6452" end="6458" title="Sardis" label="Sardis"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="6462" end="6467" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q544239" start="6651" end="6670" title="Battle of Pelusium (525 BC)" label="clashed at Pelusium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715" start="7033" end="7040" title="Memphis, Egypt" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="7320" end="7329" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q926624" start="7354" end="7395" title="Twenty-seventh Dynasty of Egypt" label="all of Egypt was under Persian suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370577" start="7518" end="7523" title="Ancient Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="7528" end="7537" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="7550" end="7555" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="7619" end="7625" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q807913" start="7630" end="7635" title="Barca (ancient city)" label="Barca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469424" start="7830" end="7836" title="Ladice (Cyrenaean princess)" label="Ladice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429397" start="7941" end="7949" title="Ancient Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q241790" start="8152" end="8167" title="Kingdom of Kush" label="Kingdom of Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q284009" start="8212" end="8223" title="Elephantine" label="Elephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="8296" end="8306" title="Siwa Oasis" label="Siwa Oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="8311" end="8319" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623040" start="8657" end="8678" title="Lost Army of Cambyses" label="Lost Army of Cambyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002656" start="9117" end="9122" title="Buhen" label="Buhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="9350" end="9352" title="Ra" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q84122" start="9354" end="9359" title="Horus" label="Horus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="9361" end="9367" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q349291" start="9640" end="9646" title="Apries" label="Apries"/>
<link wikidata="Q381038" start="9651" end="9655" title="Sais, Egypt" label="Sais"/>
<link wikidata="Q191815" start="9715" end="9720" title="Neith" label="Neith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427313" start="10069" end="10080" title="sacred bull" label="sacred bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q208150" start="10081" end="10085" title="Apis (deity)" label="Apis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="10243" end="10254" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="10347" end="10354" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186580" start="10790" end="10807" title="Demotic Chronicle" label="Demotic Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q170305" start="11671" end="11677" title="satrap" label="satrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q717941" start="11743" end="11751" title="Aryandes" label="Aryandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q971056" start="11762" end="11769" title="Oroetes" label="Oroetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893997" start="11781" end="11791" title="Mitrobates" label="Mitrobates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171924" start="11795" end="11804" title="Dascylium" label="Dascylium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503753" start="11806" end="11813" title="Dadarsi" label="Dadarsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="11817" end="11824" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q624638" start="11840" end="11849" title="Arachosia" label="Arachosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="12129" end="12135" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="12295" end="12302" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48726" start="12307" end="12315" title="Hyrcania" label="Hyrcania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15840960" start="12453" end="12462" title="Prexaspes" label="Prexaspes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485315" start="12526" end="12534" title="Sisamnes" label="Sisamnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q179352" start="12665" end="12671" title="Despotism" label="despot"/>
<link wikidata="Q127683" start="13149" end="13155" title="incest" label="incest"/>
<link wikidata="Q233359" start="13433" end="13439" title="Atossa" label="Atossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q713782" start="13547" end="13553" title="Otanes" label="Otanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180014" start="13569" end="13577" title="Phaedymia" label="Phaidyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q296325" start="13603" end="13610" title="Ctesias" label="Ctesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q208150" start="14053" end="14062" title="Apis bull" label="Apis bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q717941" start="14394" end="14402" title="Aryandes" label="Aryandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="14527" end="14532" title="Syria (region)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q957854" start="14534" end="14543" title="Eber-Nari" label="Eber-Nari"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="14598" end="14608" title="gangrene" label="gangrenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q173545" start="14723" end="14727" title="Hama" label="Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q242267" start="14789" end="14796" title="Bardiya" label="Bardiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q888715" start="15523" end="15529" title="Neyriz" label="Neyriz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752162" start="15573" end="15607" title="Persepolis Administrative Archives" label="Persepolis Administrative Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472" start="15760" end="15770" title="Hindu Kush" label="Hindu Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q483159" start="15785" end="15794" title="Syr Darya" label="Syr Darya"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="15802" end="15814" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16657614" start="15832" end="15841" title="Cambysene" label="Cambysene"/>
<link wikidata="Q114197389" start="15850" end="15866" title="Cambyses Romance" label="Cambyses Romance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46602" wikidata="Q121627" url="?curid=46602" title="Darius">
<text>Darius may refer to:
==Persian royalty==
;Kings of the Achaemenid Empire
* Darius I (the Great, 550 to 487 BC)
* Darius II (423 to 404 BC)
* Darius III (Codomannus, 380 to 330 BC)

;Crown princes
* Darius (son of Xerxes I), crown prince of Persia, may have ruled briefly in 465 BC
*Darius, son of Artaxerxes II, crown prince and junior king of his father, father of Arbupales

==Kings, princes, and politicians==
* Darius (praetorian prefect), Praetorian prefect of the East in 436 to 437 AD
* Darius I of Media Atropatene
* Darius II of Persis
* Darius the Mede
* Darius of Pontus
* Dara Shikoh, known as Darius the Magnificent
* Darius, one of the sons of King Mithridates VI Eupator

==Other==
* &quot;Darius&quot; (album), by Graham Collier
* Darius (given name), including a list of people with the given name
*Darius (surname)
* Darius (horse), a racehorse
* Darius Films
* &quot;Darius (video game)&quot;, a side-scrolling shoot-&#x27;em-up by Taito, originally released for the arcades in 1987

==See also==
* Darius II (disambiguation)
* Daria (disambiguation)
* Dara (disambiguation), Persian form of the name
* Dario (disambiguation), counterpart of Darius in Persian, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese and Croatian
* Dharius, Mexican rapper</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q121627" start="0" end="6" title="Darius" label="Darius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="75" end="83" title="Darius I" label="Darius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q202236" start="113" end="122" title="Darius II" label="Darius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q102865" start="141" end="151" title="Darius III" label="Darius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264223" start="198" end="222" title="Darius (son of Xerxes I)" label="Darius (son of Xerxes I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188472" start="297" end="310" title="Artaxerxes II" label="Artaxerxes II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17192312" start="366" end="375" title="Arbupales" label="Arbupales"/>
<link wikidata="Q568485" start="415" end="442" title="Darius (praetorian prefect)" label="Darius (praetorian prefect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222941" start="494" end="522" title="Darius I of Media Atropatene" label="Darius I of Media Atropatene"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198162" start="525" end="544" title="Darius II of Persis" label="Darius II of Persis"/>
<link wikidata="Q603176" start="547" end="562" title="Darius the Mede" label="Darius the Mede"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352675" start="565" end="581" title="Darius of Pontus" label="Darius of Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q604647" start="584" end="595" title="Dara Shikoh" label="Dara Shikoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q185126" start="663" end="685" title="Mithridates VI Eupator" label="Mithridates VI Eupator"/>
<link wikidata="Q28453193" start="699" end="725" title="Darius (album)" label="&amp;quot;Darius&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q265867" start="747" end="766" title="Darius (given name)" label="Darius (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115798047" start="816" end="832" title="Darius (surname)" label="Darius (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222902" start="835" end="849" title="Darius (horse)" label="Darius (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222926" start="865" end="877" title="Darius Films" label="Darius Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q374820" start="886" end="905" title="Darius (video game)" label="Darius (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753851" start="1018" end="1044" title="Darius II (disambiguation)" label="Darius II (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18141913" start="1047" end="1069" title="Daria (disambiguation)" label="Daria (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q143352" start="1072" end="1093" title="Dara (disambiguation)" label="Dara (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16279980" start="1122" end="1144" title="Dario (disambiguation)" label="Dario (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30069064" start="1224" end="1231" title="Dharius" label="Dharius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46605" wikidata="Q117253" url="?curid=46605" title="Demosthenes">
<text>Demosthenes (; ; ; 384 – 12 October 322 BC) was a Greek statesman and orator in ancient Athens. His orations constitute a significant expression of contemporary Athenian intellectual prowess and provide insight into the politics and culture of ancient Greece during the 4th century BC. Demosthenes learned rhetoric by studying the speeches of previous great orators. He delivered his first judicial speeches at the age of 20, in which he successfully argued that he should gain from his guardians what was left of his inheritance. For a time, Demosthenes made his living as a professional speechwriter (logographer) and a lawyer, writing speeches for use in private legal suits.

Demosthenes grew interested in politics during his time as a logographer, and in 354 BC he gave his first public political speeches. He went on to devote his most productive years to opposing Macedon&#x27;s expansion. He idealized his city and strove throughout his life to restore Athens&#x27; supremacy and motivate his compatriots against Philip II of Macedon. He sought to preserve his city&#x27;s freedom and to establish an alliance against Macedon, in an unsuccessful attempt to impede Philip&#x27;s plans to expand his influence southward, conquering the Greek states.

After Philip&#x27;s death, Demosthenes played a leading part in his city&#x27;s uprising against the new king of Macedonia, Alexander the Great. However, his efforts failed, and the revolt was met with a harsh Macedonian reaction. To prevent a similar revolt against his own rule, Alexander&#x27;s successor in this region, Antipater, sent his men to track Demosthenes down. Demosthenes killed himself to avoid being arrested by Archias of Thurii, Antipater&#x27;s confidant.

The &quot;Alexandrian Canon&quot;, compiled by Aristophanes of Byzantium and Aristarchus of Samothrace, called Demosthenes one of the ten greatest Attic orators and logographers. Longinus likened Demosthenes to a blazing thunderbolt and argued that he had &quot;perfected to the utmost the tone of lofty speech, living passions, copiousness, readiness, speed.&quot; Quintilian extolled him as (&quot;the standard of oratory&quot;). Cicero said of him that (&quot;one exceeds among all&quot;), and also praised him as &quot;the perfect orator&quot; who lacked nothing.

==Early years and personal life==
===Family and personal life===

Demosthenes was born in 384 BC, during the last year of the 98th Olympiad or the first year of the 99th Olympiad. His father—also named Demosthenes—who belonged to the local tribe, Pandionis, and lived in the deme of Paeania in the Athenian countryside, was a wealthy sword-maker. Aeschines, Demosthenes&#x27; greatest political rival, maintained that his mother Kleoboule was a Scythian by blood—an allegation disputed by some modern scholars. He was also the uncle of the Athenian Orator Demochares. Demosthenes was orphaned at the age of seven. Although his father provided for him well, his legal guardians, Aphobus, Demophon and Therippides, mishandled his inheritance.

Demosthenes started to learn rhetoric because he wished to take his guardians to court and because he was of &quot;delicate physique&quot; and could not receive gymnastic education, which was customary. In &quot;Parallel Lives&quot;, Plutarch states that Demosthenes built an underground study where he practised speaking and shaving one half of his head so that he could not go out in public. Plutarch also states that he had &quot;an inarticulate and stammering pronunciation&quot; that he overcame by speaking with pebbles in his mouth and by repeating verses when running or out of breath. He also practised speaking in front of a large mirror.

As soon as Demosthenes came of age in 366 BC, he demanded his guardians render an account of their management. According to Demosthenes, the account revealed the misappropriation of his property. Although his father left an estate of nearly fourteen talents (equivalent to about 220 years of a labourer&#x27;s income at standard wages, or 11 million dollars in terms of median U.S. annual incomes). Demosthenes asserted his guardians had left nothing &quot;except the house, and fourteen slaves and thirty silver &quot; (30 = ½ talent). At the age of 20 Demosthenes sued his trustees to recover his patrimony and delivered five orations: three &quot;Against Aphobus&quot; during 363 and 362 BC and two &quot;Against Onetor&quot; during 362 and 361 BC. The courts fixed Demosthenes&#x27; damages at ten talents. When all the trials came to an end, he only succeeded in retrieving a portion of his inheritance.

According to Pseudo-Plutarch, Demosthenes was married once. The only information about his wife, whose name is unknown, is that she was the daughter of Heliodorus, a prominent citizen. Demosthenes also had a daughter, &quot;the only one who ever called him father&quot;, according to Aeschines in a trenchant remark. His daughter died young and unmarried a few days before Philip II&#x27;s death.

In his speeches, Aeschines uses pederastic relations of Demosthenes as a means to attack him. In the case of Aristion, a youth from Plataea who lived for a long time in Demosthenes&#x27; house, Aeschines mocks the &quot;scandalous&quot; and &quot;improper&quot; relation. In another speech, Aeschines brings up the pederastic relation of his opponent with a boy called Cnosion. The slander that Demosthenes&#x27; wife also slept with the boy suggests that the relationship was contemporary with his marriage. Aeschines claims that Demosthenes made money out of young rich men, such as Aristarchus, the son of Moschus, whom he allegedly deceived with the pretence that he could make him a great orator. Apparently, while still under Demosthenes&#x27; tutelage, Aristarchus killed and mutilated a certain Nicodemus of Aphidna. Aeschines accused Demosthenes of complicity in the murder, pointing out that Nicodemus had once pressed a lawsuit accusing Demosthenes of desertion. He also accused Demosthenes of having been such a bad to Aristarchus so as not even to deserve the name. His crime, according to Aeschines, was to have betrayed his by pillaging his estate, allegedly pretending to be in love with the youth so as to get his hands on the boy&#x27;s inheritance. Nevertheless, the story of Demosthenes&#x27; relations with Aristarchus is still regarded as more than doubtful, and no other pupil of Demosthenes is known by name.

===Education===
Between his coming of age in 366 BC and the trials that took place in 364 BC, Demosthenes and his guardians negotiated acrimoniously but were unable to reach an agreement, for neither side was willing to make concessions. At the same time, Demosthenes prepared himself for the trials and improved his oratory skill. According to a story repeated by Plutarch, when Demosthenes was an adolescent, his curiosity was noticed by the orator Callistratus, who was then at the height of his reputation, having just won a case of considerable importance. According to Friedrich Nietzsche, a German philologist and philosopher, and Constantine Paparrigopoulos, a major modern Greek historian, Demosthenes was a student of Isocrates; according to Cicero, Quintillian and the Roman biographer Hermippus, he was a student of Plato. Lucian, a Roman-Syrian rhetorician and satirist, lists the philosophers Aristotle, Theophrastus and Xenocrates among his teachers. These claims are nowadays disputed. According to Plutarch, Demosthenes employed Isaeus as his master in rhetoric, even though Isocrates was then teaching this subject, either because he could not pay Isocrates the prescribed fee or because Demosthenes believed Isaeus&#x27; style better suited a vigorous and astute orator such as himself. Curtius, a German archaeologist and historian, likened the relation between Isaeus and Demosthenes to &quot;an intellectual armed alliance&quot;.

It has also been said that Demosthenes paid Isaeus 10,000 drachmae (somewhat over 1½ talents) on the condition that Isaeus withdraw from a school of rhetoric he had opened and instead devote himself wholly to Demosthenes, his new pupil. Another version credits Isaeus with having taught Demosthenes without charge. According to Sir Richard C. Jebb, a British classical scholar, &quot;the intercourse between Isaeus and Demosthenes as teacher and learner can scarcely have been either very intimate or of very long duration&quot;. Konstantinos Tsatsos, a Greek professor and academician, believes that Isaeus helped Demosthenes edit his initial judicial orations against his guardians. Demosthenes is also said to have admired the historian Thucydides. In the &quot;Illiterate Book-Fancier,&quot; Lucian mentions eight beautiful copies of Thucydides made by Demosthenes, all in Demosthenes&#x27; own handwriting. These references hint at his respect for a historian he must have assiduously studied.

===Speech training===

According to Plutarch, when Demosthenes first addressed himself to the people, he was derided for his strange and uncouth style, &quot;which was cumbered with long sentences and tortured with formal arguments to a most harsh and disagreeable excess&quot;. Some citizens, however, discerned his talent. When he first left the ekklesia (the Athenian Assembly) disheartened, an old man named Eunomus encouraged him, saying his diction was very much like that of Pericles. Another time, after the ekklesia had refused to hear him and he was going home dejected, an actor named Satyrus followed him and entered into a friendly conversation with him.

As a boy Demosthenes had a speech impairment: Plutarch refers to a weakness in his voice of &quot;a perplexed and indistinct utterance and a shortness of breath, which, by breaking and disjointing his sentences much obscured the sense and meaning of what he spoke.&quot; There are problems in Plutarch&#x27;s account, however, and it is probable that Demosthenes actually suffered from rhotacism, mispronouncing ρ (r) as λ (l). Aeschines taunted him and referred to him in his speeches by the nickname &quot;Batalus&quot;, apparently invented by Demosthenes&#x27; pedagogues or by the little boys with whom he was playing—which corresponded to how someone with that variety of rhotacism would pronounce &quot;&quot;Battaros&quot;,&quot; the name of a legendary Libyan king who spoke quickly and in a disordered fashion. Demosthenes undertook a disciplined programme to overcome his weaknesses and improve his delivery, including diction, voice and gestures. According to one story, when he was asked to name the three most important elements in oratory, he replied &quot;Delivery, delivery and delivery!&quot; It is unknown whether such vignettes are factual accounts of events in Demosthenes&#x27; life or merely anecdotes used to illustrate his perseverance and determination.

==Career==
===Legal career===
To make his living, Demosthenes became a professional litigant, both as a &quot;logographer&quot; (, ), writing speeches for use in private legal suits, and as an advocate (, ) speaking on another&#x27;s behalf. He seems to have been able to manage any kind of case, adapting his skills to almost any client, including wealthy and powerful men. It is not unlikely that he became a teacher of rhetoric and that he brought pupils into court with him. However, though he probably continued writing speeches throughout his career, he stopped working as an advocate once he entered the political arena.
Judicial oratory had become a significant literary genre by the second half of the fifth century, as represented in the speeches of Demosthenes&#x27; predecessors, Antiphon and Andocides. Logographers were a unique aspect of the Athenian justice system: evidence for a case was compiled by a magistrate in a preliminary hearing and litigants could present it as they pleased within set speeches; however, witnesses and documents were popularly mistrusted (since they could be secured by force or bribery), there was little cross-examination during the trial, there were no instructions to the jury from a judge, no conferencing between jurists before voting, the juries were huge (typically between 201 and 501 members), cases depended largely on questions of probable motive, and notions of natural justice were felt to take precedence over written law—conditions that favoured artfully constructed speeches.

Since Athenian politicians were often indicted by their opponents, there was not always a clear distinction between &quot;private&quot; and &quot;public&quot; cases, and thus a career as a logographer opened the way for Demosthenes to embark on his political career. An Athenian logographer could remain anonymous, which enabled him to serve personal interests, even if it prejudiced the client. It also left him open to allegations of malpractice. Thus for example Aeschines accused Demosthenes of unethically disclosing his clients&#x27; arguments to their opponents; in particular, that he wrote a speech for Phormion (350 BC), a wealthy banker, and then communicated it to Apollodorus, who was bringing a capital charge against Phormion. Plutarch much later supported this accusation, stating that Demosthenes &quot;was thought to have acted dishonourably&quot; and he also accused Demosthenes of writing speeches for both sides. It has often been argued that the deception, if there was one, involved a political &quot;quid pro quo&quot;, whereby Apollodorus secretly pledged support for unpopular reforms that Demosthenes was pursuing in the greater, public interest (i.e. the diversion of Theoric Funds to military purposes).

===Early political activity===

Demosthenes was admitted to his () as a citizen with full rights probably in 366 BC, and he soon demonstrated an interest in politics. In 363 and 359 BC, he assumed the office of the trierarch, being responsible for the outfitting and maintenance of a trireme. He was among the first ever volunteer trierarchs in 357 BC, sharing the expenses of a ship called &quot;Dawn&quot;, for which the public inscription still survives. In 348 BC, he became a choregos, paying the expenses of a theatrical production.

Between 355 and 351 BC, Demosthenes continued practising law privately while he was becoming increasingly interested in public affairs. During this period, he wrote &quot;Against Androtion&quot; and &quot;Against Leptines&quot;, two fierce attacks on individuals who attempted to repeal certain tax exemptions. In &quot;Against Timocrates&quot; and &quot;Against Aristocrates&quot;, he advocated eliminating corruption. All these speeches, which offer early glimpses of his general principles on foreign policy, such as the importance of the navy, of alliances and of national honour, are prosecutions (&quot;,&quot; ) against individuals accused of illegally proposing legislative texts.

In Demosthenes&#x27; time, different political goals developed around personalities. Instead of electioneering, Athenian politicians used litigation and defamation to remove rivals from government processes. Often they indicted each other for breaches of the statute laws (&quot;&quot;), but accusations of bribery and corruption were ubiquitous in all cases, being part of the political dialogue. The orators often resorted to &quot;character assassination&quot; tactics (, ; , ), both in the courts and in the Assembly. The rancorous and often hilariously exaggerated accusations, satirised by Old Comedy, were sustained by innuendo, inferences about motives, and a complete absence of proof; as J. H. Vince states &quot;there was no room for chivalry in Athenian political life&quot;. Such rivalry enabled the &quot;demos&quot; (&quot;citizen-body&quot;) to reign supreme as judge, jury and executioner. Demosthenes was to become fully engaged in this kind of litigation and he was also to be instrumental in developing the power of the Areopagus to indict individuals for treason, invoked in the &quot;ekklesia&quot; by a process called ().

In 354 BC, Demosthenes delivered his first political oration, &quot;On the Navy&quot;, in which he espoused moderation and proposed the reform of the &quot;symmoriai&quot; (boards) as a source of funding for the Athenian fleet. In 352 BC, he delivered &quot;For the Megalopolitans&quot; and, in 351 BC, &quot;On the Liberty of the Rhodians.&quot; In both speeches he opposed Eubulus, the most powerful Athenian statesman of the period 355 to 342 BC. The latter was no pacifist but came to eschew a policy of aggressive interventionism in the internal affairs of the other Greek cities. Contrary to Eubulus&#x27; policy, Demosthenes called for an alliance with Megalopolis against Sparta or Thebes, and for supporting the democratic faction of the Rhodians in their internal strife. His arguments revealed his desire to articulate Athens&#x27; needs and interests through a more activist foreign policy, wherever opportunity might provide.

Although his early orations were unsuccessful and reveal a lack of real conviction and of coherent strategic and political prioritisation, Demosthenes established himself as an important political personality and broke with Eubulus&#x27; faction, of which a prominent member was Aeschines. He thus laid the foundations for his future political successes and for becoming the leader of his own &quot;party&quot; (the issue of whether the modern concept of political parties can be applied in the Athenian democracy is hotly disputed among modern scholars).

===Confrontation with Philip II===
====First Philippic and the Olynthiacs (351–349 BC)====
Most of Demosthenes&#x27; major orations were directed against the growing power of King Philip II of Macedon. Since 357 BC, when Philip seized Amphipolis and Pydna, Athens had been formally at war with the Macedonians. In 352 BC, Demosthenes characterised Philip as the very worst enemy of his city; his speech presaged the fierce attacks that Demosthenes would launch against the Macedonian king over the ensuing years. A year later he criticised those dismissing Philip as a person of no account and warned that he was as dangerous as the king of Persia.

In 352 BC, Athenian troops successfully opposed Philip at Thermopylae, but the Macedonian victory over the Phocians at the Battle of Crocus Field shook Demosthenes. In 351 BC, Demosthenes felt strong enough to express his view concerning the most important foreign policy issue facing Athens at that time: the stance his city should take towards Philip. According to Jacqueline de Romilly, a French philologist and member of the , the threat of Philip would give Demosthenes&#x27; stances a focus and a . Demosthenes saw the King of Macedon as a menace to the autonomy of all Greek cities and yet he presented him as a monster of Athens&#x27;s own creation; in the &quot;First Philippic&quot; he reprimanded his fellow citizens as follows: &quot;Even if something happens to him, you will soon raise up a second Philip [...]&quot;.

The theme of the &quot;First Philippic&quot; (351–350 BC) was preparedness and the reform of the Theoric fund, a mainstay of Eubulus&#x27; policy. In his rousing call for resistance, Demosthenes asked his countrymen to take the necessary action and asserted that &quot;for a free people there can be no greater compulsion than shame for their position&quot;. He thus provided for the first time a plan and specific recommendations for the strategy to be adopted against Philip in the north. Among other things, the plan called for the creation of a rapid-response force, to be created cheaply with each () to be paid only ten drachmas per month (two obols per day), which was less than the average pay for unskilled labourers in Athens—implying that the hoplite was expected to make up the deficiency in pay by looting.
From this moment until 341 BC, all of Demosthenes&#x27; speeches referred to the same issue, the struggle against Philip. In 349 BC, Philip attacked Olynthus, an ally of Athens. In the three &quot;Olynthiacs&quot;, Demosthenes criticised his compatriots for being idle and urged Athens to help Olynthus. He also insulted Philip by calling him a &quot;barbarian&quot;. Despite Demosthenes&#x27; strong advocacy, the Athenians would not manage to prevent the falling of the city to the Macedonians. Almost simultaneously, probably on Eubulus&#x27; recommendation, they engaged in a war in Euboea against Philip, which ended in a stalemate.

====Case of Meidias (348 BC)====

In 348 BC a peculiar event occurred: Meidias, a wealthy Athenian, publicly slapped Demosthenes, who was at the time a choregos at the Greater Dionysia, a large religious festival in honour of the god Dionysus. Meidias was a friend of Eubulus and supporter of the unsuccessful excursion in Euboea. He also was an old enemy of Demosthenes; in 361 BC he had broken violently into his house, with his brother Thrasylochus, to take possession of it.
Demosthenes decided to prosecute his wealthy opponent and wrote the judicial oration &quot;Against Meidias&quot;. This speech gives valuable information about Athenian law at the time and especially about the Greek concept of hybris (aggravated assault), which was regarded as a crime not only against the city but against society as a whole. He stated that a democratic state perishes if the rule of law is undermined by wealthy and unscrupulous men, and that the citizens acquire power and authority in all state affairs due &quot;to the strength of the laws&quot;. There is no consensus among scholars either on whether Demosthenes finally delivered &quot;Against Meidias&quot; or on the veracity of Aeschines&#x27; accusation that Demosthenes was bribed to drop the charges.

====Peace of Philocrates (347–345 BC)====

In 348 BC, Philip conquered Olynthus and razed it to the ground; then conquered the entire Chalcidice and all the states of the Chalcidic federation that Olynthus had once led. After these Macedonian victories, Athens sued for peace with Macedon. Demosthenes was among those who favoured compromise. In 347 BC, an Athenian delegation, comprising Demosthenes, Aeschines and Philocrates, was officially sent to Pella to negotiate a peace treaty. In his first encounter with Philip, Demosthenes is said to have collapsed from fright.

The ekklesia officially accepted Philip&#x27;s harsh terms, including the renouncement of their claim to Amphipolis. However, when an Athenian delegation arrived at Pella to put Philip under oath, which was required to conclude the treaty, he was campaigning abroad. He expected that he would hold safely any Athenian possessions that he might seize before the ratification. Being very anxious about the delay, Demosthenes insisted that the embassy should travel to the place where they would find Philip and swear him in without delay. Despite his suggestions, the Athenian envoys, including himself and Aeschines, remained in Pella, until Philip successfully concluded his campaign in Thrace.

Philip swore to the treaty, but he delayed the departure of the Athenian envoys, who had yet to receive the oaths from Macedon&#x27;s allies in Thessaly and elsewhere. Finally, peace was sworn at Pherae, where Philip accompanied the Athenian delegation, after he had completed his military preparations to move south. Demosthenes accused the other envoys of venality and of facilitating Philip&#x27;s plans with their stance. Just after the conclusion of the Peace of Philocrates, Philip passed Thermopylae, and subdued Phocis; Athens made no move to support the Phocians. Supported by Thebes and Thessaly, Macedon took control of Phocis&#x27; votes in the Amphictyonic League, a Greek religious organisation formed to support the greater temples of Apollo and Demeter. Despite some reluctance on the part of the Athenian leaders, Athens finally accepted Philip&#x27;s entry into the Council of the League. Demosthenes was among those who adopted a pragmatic approach, and recommended this stance in his oration &quot;On the Peace&quot;. For Edmund M. Burke, this speech heralds a maturation in Demosthenes&#x27; career: after Philip&#x27;s successful campaign in 346 BC, the Athenian statesman realised that, if he was to lead his city against the Macedonians, he had &quot;to adjust his voice, to become less partisan in tone&quot;.

====Second and Third Philippics (344–341 BC)====
In 344 BC Demosthenes travelled to the Peloponnese, to detach as many cities as possible from Macedon&#x27;s influence, but his efforts were generally unsuccessful. Most of the Peloponnesians saw Philip as the guarantor of their freedom and sent a joint embassy to Athens to express their grievances against Demosthenes&#x27; activities. In response, Demosthenes delivered the &quot;Second Philippic&quot;, a vehement attack against Philip. In 343 BC Demosthenes delivered &quot;On the False Embassy&quot; against Aeschines, who was facing a charge of high treason. Nonetheless, Aeschines was acquitted by the narrow margin of thirty votes by a jury which may have numbered as many as 1,501.

In 343 BC, Macedonian forces were conducting campaigns in Epirus and, in 342 BC, Philip campaigned in Thrace. He also negotiated with the Athenians an amendment to the Peace of Philocrates. When the Macedonian army approached Chersonese (now known as the Gallipoli Peninsula), an Athenian general named Diopeithes ravaged the maritime district of Thrace, thereby inciting Philip&#x27;s rage. Because of this turbulence, the Athenian Assembly convened. Demosthenes delivered &quot;On the Chersonese&quot; and convinced the Athenians not to recall Diopeithes. Also in 342 BC, he delivered the &quot;Third Philippic&quot;, which is considered to be the best of his political orations. Using all the power of his eloquence, he demanded resolute action against Philip and called for a burst of energy from the Athenian people. He told them that it would be &quot;better to die a thousand times than pay court to Philip&quot;. Demosthenes now dominated Athenian politics and was able to considerably weaken the pro-Macedonian faction of Aeschines.

====Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC)====
In 341 BC Demosthenes was sent to Byzantium, where he sought to renew its alliance with Athens. Thanks to Demosthenes&#x27; diplomatic manoeuvres, Abydos also entered into an alliance with Athens. These developments worried Philip and increased his anger at Demosthenes. The Assembly, however, laid aside Philip&#x27;s grievances against Demosthenes&#x27; conduct and denounced the peace treaty; so doing, in effect, amounted to an official declaration of war. In 339 BC Philip made his last and most effective bid to conquer southern Greece, assisted by Aeschines&#x27; stance in the Amphictyonic Council. During a meeting of the council, Philip accused the Amfissian Locrians of intruding on consecrated ground. The presiding officer of the council, a Thessalian named Cottyphus, proposed the convocation of an Amphictyonic Congress to inflict a harsh punishment upon the Locrians. Aeschines agreed with this proposition and maintained that the Athenians should participate in the Congress. Demosthenes however reversed Aeschines&#x27; initiatives and Athens finally abstained. After the failure of a first military excursion against the Locrians, the summer session of the Amphictyonic Council gave command of the league&#x27;s forces to Philip and asked him to lead a second excursion. Philip decided to act at once; in the winter of 339–338 BC, he passed through Thermopylae, entered Amfissa and defeated the Locrians. After this significant victory, Philip swiftly entered Phocis in 338 BC. He then turned south-east down the Cephissus valley, seized Elateia, and restored the fortifications of the city.

At the same time, Athens orchestrated the creation of an alliance with Euboea, Megara, Achaea, Corinth, Acarnania and other states in the Peloponnese. However the most desirable ally for Athens was Thebes. To secure their allegiance, Demosthenes was sent by Athens, to the Boeotian city; Philip also sent a deputation, but Demosthenes succeeded in securing Thebes&#x27; allegiance. Demosthenes&#x27; oration before the Theban people is not extant and, therefore, the arguments he used to convince the Thebans remain unknown. In any case, the alliance came at a price: Thebes&#x27; control of Boeotia was recognised, Thebes was to command solely on land and jointly at sea, and Athens was to pay two thirds of the campaign&#x27;s cost.

While the Athenians and the Thebans were preparing themselves for war, Philip made a final attempt to appease his enemies, proposing in vain a new peace treaty. After a few trivial encounters between the two sides, which resulted in minor Athenian victories, Philip drew the phalanx of the Athenian and Theban confederates into a plain near Chaeronea, where he defeated them. Demosthenes fought as a mere hoplite. Such was Philip&#x27;s hatred for Demosthenes that, according to Diodorus Siculus, the King after his victory sneered at the misfortunes of the Athenian statesman. However, the Athenian orator and statesman Demades is said to have remarked: &quot;O King, when Fortune has cast you in the role of Agamemnon, are you not ashamed to act the part of Thersites [an obscene soldier of the Greek army during the Trojan War]?&quot; Stung by these words, Philip immediately altered his demeanour.

===Last political initiatives and death===
====Confrontation with Alexander====

After Chaeronea, Philip inflicted a harsh punishment upon Thebes, but made peace with Athens on very lenient terms. Demosthenes encouraged the fortification of Athens and was chosen by the ekklesia to deliver the Funeral Oration. In 337 BC, Philip created the League of Corinth, a confederation of Greek states under his leadership, and returned to Pella. In 336 BC, Philip was assassinated at the wedding of his daughter, Cleopatra of Macedon, to King Alexander of Epirus. The Macedonian citizens swiftly proclaimed Alexander III of Macedon, then twenty years old, as the new King of Macedon. Greek cities like Athens and Thebes saw in this change of leadership an opportunity to regain their full independence. Demosthenes celebrated Philip&#x27;s assassination and played a leading part in his city&#x27;s uprising. According to Aeschines, &quot;it was but the seventh day after the death of his daughter, and though the ceremonies of mourning were not yet completed, he put a garland on his head and white raiment on his body, and there he stood making thank-offerings, violating all decency.&quot; Demosthenes also sent envoys to Attalus, whom he considered to be an internal opponent of Alexander. Nonetheless, Alexander moved swiftly to Thebes, which submitted shortly after his appearance at its gates. When the Athenians learned that Alexander had moved quickly to Boeotia, they panicked and begged the new King of Macedon for mercy. Alexander admonished them but imposed no punishment.

In 335 BC Alexander felt free to engage the Thracians and the Illyrians, but, while he was campaigning in the north, Demosthenes spread a rumour—even producing a bloodstained messenger—that Alexander and all of his expeditionary force had been slaughtered by the Triballians. The Thebans and the Athenians rebelled once again, financed by Darius III of Persia, and Demosthenes is said to have received about 300 talents on behalf of Athens and to have faced accusations of embezzlement. Alexander reacted immediately and razed Thebes to the ground. He did not attack Athens, but demanded the exile of all anti-Macedonian politicians, Demosthenes first of all. According to Plutarch, a special Athenian embassy led by Phocion, an opponent of the anti-Macedonian faction, was able to persuade Alexander to relent.

According to ancient writers, Demosthenes called Alexander &quot;Margites&quot; () and a boy. Greeks used the word Margites to describe foolish and useless people, on account of the Margites.

====Delivery of &quot;On the Crown&quot;====
Despite the unsuccessful ventures against Philip and Alexander, most Athenians still respected Demosthenes, because they shared his sentiments and wished to restore their independence. In 336 BC, the orator Ctesiphon proposed that Athens honour Demosthenes for his services to the city by presenting him, according to custom, with a golden crown. This proposal became a political issue and, in 330 BC, Aeschines prosecuted Ctesiphon on charges of legal irregularities. In his most brilliant speech, &quot;On the Crown,&quot; Demosthenes effectively defended Ctesiphon and vehemently attacked those who would have preferred peace with Macedon. He was unrepentant about his past actions and policies and insisted that, when in power, the constant aim of his policies was the honour and the ascendancy of his country; and on every occasion and in all business he preserved his loyalty to Athens. He finally defeated Aeschines, although his enemy&#x27;s objections, though politically-motivated, to the crowning were arguably valid from a legal point of view.

====Case of Harpalus and death====
In 324 BC Harpalus, to whom Alexander had entrusted huge treasures, absconded and sought refuge in Athens. The Assembly had initially refused to accept him, following Demosthenes&#x27; and Phocion&#x27;s advice, but finally Harpalus entered Athens. He was imprisoned after a proposal of Demosthenes and Phocion, despite the dissent of Hypereides, an anti-Macedonian statesman and former ally of Demosthenes. Additionally, the ekklesia decided to take control of Harpalus&#x27; money, which was entrusted to a committee presided over by Demosthenes. When the committee counted the treasure, they found they only had half the money Harpalus had declared he possessed. When Harpalus escaped, the Areopagus conducted an inquiry and charged Demosthenes and others with mishandling twenty talents.

Among the accused, Demosthenes was the first to be brought to trial before an unusually numerous jury of 1,500. He was found guilty and fined 50 talents. Unable to pay this huge amount, Demosthenes escaped and only returned to Athens nine months later, after the death of Alexander. Upon his return, he &quot;received from his countrymen an enthusiastic welcome, such as had never been accorded to any returning exile since the days of Alkibiades.&quot; Such a reception, the circumstances of the case, Athenian need to placate Alexander, the urgency to account for the missing funds, Demosthenes&#x27; patriotism and wish to set Greece free from Macedonian rule, all lend support to George Grote&#x27;s view that Demosthenes was innocent, that the charges against him were politically-motivated, and that he &quot;was neither paid nor bought by Harpalus.&quot;

Mogens Hansen, however, notes that many Athenian leaders, Demosthenes included, made fortunes out of their political activism, especially by taking bribes from fellow citizens and such foreign states as Macedonia and Persia. Demosthenes received vast sums for the many decrees and laws he proposed. Given this pattern of corruption in Greek politics, it appears likely, writes Hansen, that Demosthenes accepted a huge bribe from Harpalus, and that he was justly found guilty in an Athenian People&#x27;s Court. 

After Alexander&#x27;s death in 323 BC, Demosthenes again urged the Athenians to seek independence from Macedon in what became known as the Lamian War. However, Antipater, Alexander&#x27;s successor, quelled all opposition and demanded that the Athenians turn over Demosthenes and Hypereides, among others. Following his order, the ekklesia had no choice but to reluctantly adopt a decree condemning the most prominent anti-Macedonian agitators to death. Demosthenes escaped to a sanctuary on the island of Kalaureia (modern-day Poros), where he was later discovered by Archias, a confidant of Antipater. He died by suicide before his capture by taking poison out of a reed, pretending he wanted to write a letter to his family. When Demosthenes felt that the poison was working on his body, he said to Archias: &quot;Now, as soon as you please you may commence the part of Creon in the tragedy, and cast out this body of mine unburied. But, O gracious Neptune, I, for my part, while I am yet alive, arise up and depart out of this sacred place; though Antipater and the Macedonians have not left so much as the temple unpolluted.&quot; After saying these words, he passed by the altar, fell down and died. Years after Demosthenes&#x27; suicide, the Athenians erected a statue to honour him and decreed that the state should provide meals to his descendants in the Prytaneum.

==Assessments==
===Political career===
Plutarch lauds Demosthenes for not being of a fickle disposition. Rebutting historian Theopompus, the biographer insists that for &quot;the same party and post in politics which he held from the beginning, to these he kept constant to the end; and was so far from leaving them while he lived, that he chose rather to forsake his life than his purpose&quot;. On the other hand, Polybius, a Greek historian of the Mediterranean world, was highly critical of Demosthenes&#x27; policies. Polybius accused him of having launched unjustified verbal attacks on great men of other cities, branding them unjustly as traitors to the Greeks. The historian maintains that Demosthenes measured everything by the interests of his own city, imagining that all the Greeks ought to have their eyes fixed upon Athens. According to Polybius, the only thing the Athenians eventually got by their opposition to Philip was the defeat at Chaeronea. &quot;And had it not been for the King&#x27;s magnanimity and regard for his own reputation, their misfortunes would have gone even further, thanks to the policy of Demosthenes&quot;.

Paparrigopoulos extols Demosthenes&#x27; patriotism, but criticises him as being short-sighted. According to this critique, Demosthenes should have understood that the ancient Greek states could only survive unified under the leadership of Macedon. Therefore, Demosthenes is accused of misjudging events, opponents and opportunities and of being unable to foresee Philip&#x27;s inevitable triumph. He is criticised for having overrated Athens&#x27;s capacity to revive and challenge Macedon. His city had lost most of its Aegean allies, whereas Philip had consolidated his hold over Macedonia and was master of enormous mineral wealth. Chris Carey, a professor of Greek in UCL, concludes that Demosthenes was a better orator and political operator than strategist. Nevertheless, the same scholar underscores that &quot;pragmatists&quot; like Aeschines or Phocion had no inspiring vision to rival that of Demosthenes. The orator asked the Athenians to choose that which is just and honourable, before their own safety and preservation. The people preferred Demosthenes&#x27; activism and even the bitter defeat at Chaeronea was regarded as a price worth paying in the attempt to retain freedom and influence. According to Professor of Greek Arthur Wallace Pickarde, success may be a poor criterion for judging the actions of people like Demosthenes, who were motivated by the ideals of democracy political liberty. Athens was asked by Philip to sacrifice its freedom and its democracy, while Demosthenes longed for the city&#x27;s brilliance. He endeavoured to revive its imperilled values and, thus, he became an &quot;educator of the people&quot; (in the words of Werner Jaeger).

The fact that Demosthenes fought at the battle of Chaeronea as a hoplite indicates that he lacked any military skills. According to historian Thomas Babington Macaulay, in his time the division between political and military offices was beginning to be strongly marked. Almost no politician, with the exception of Phocion, was at the same time an apt orator and a competent general. Demosthenes dealt in policies and ideas, and war was not his business. This contrast between Demosthenes&#x27; intellectual prowess and his deficiencies in terms of vigour, stamina, military skill and strategic vision is illustrated by the inscription his countrymen engraved on the base of his statue:Had you for Greece been strong, as wise you were, the Macedonian would not have conquered her.George Grote notes that already thirty years before his death, Demosthenes &quot;took a sagacious and provident measure of the danger which threatened Grecian liberty from the energy and encroachments of Philip.&quot; Throughout his career &quot;we trace the same combination of earnest patriotism with wise and long-sighted policy.&quot; Had his advice to the Athenians and other fellow Greeks been followed, the power of Macedonia could have been successfully checked. Moreover, says Grote, &quot;it was not Athens only that he sought to defend against Philip, but the whole Hellenic world. In this he towers above the greatest of his predecessors.&quot; The sentiments to which Demosthenes appeals throughout his numerous orations, are those of the noblest and largest patriotism; trying to inflame the ancient Grecian sentiment of an autonomous Hellenic world, as the indispensable condition of a dignified and desirable existence.

===Oratorical skill===
In Demosthenes&#x27; initial judicial orations, the influence of both Lysias and Isaeus is obvious, but his marked, original style is already revealed. Most of his extant speeches for private cases—written early in his career—show glimpses of talent: a powerful intellectual drive, masterly selection (and omission) of facts, and a confident assertion of the justice of his case, all ensuring the dominance of his viewpoint over his rival. However, at this early stage of his career, his writing was not yet remarkable for its subtlety, verbal precision and variety of effects.

According to Dionysius of Halicarnassus, a Greek historian and teacher of rhetoric, Demosthenes represented the final stage in the development of Attic prose. Both Dionysius and Cicero assert that Demosthenes brought together the best features of the basic types of style; he used the middle or normal type style ordinarily and applied the archaic type and the type of plain elegance where they were fitting. In each one of the three types he was better than its special masters. He is, therefore, regarded as a consummate orator, adept in the techniques of oratory, which are brought together in his work.

According to the classical scholar Harry Thurston Peck, Demosthenes &quot;affects no learning; he aims at no elegance; he seeks no glaring ornaments; he rarely touches the heart with a soft or melting appeal, and when he does, it is only with an effect in which a third-rate speaker would have surpassed him. He had no wit, no humour, no vivacity, in our acceptance of these terms. The secret of his power is simple, for it lies essentially in the fact that his political principles were interwoven with his very spirit.&quot; In this judgement, Peck agrees with Jaeger, who said that the imminent political decision imbued Demosthenes&#x27; speech with a fascinating artistic power. From his part, George A. Kennedy believes that his political speeches in the ekklesia were to become &quot;the artistic exposition of reasoned views&quot;.

Demosthenes was apt at combining abruptness with the extended period, brevity with breadth. Hence, his style harmonises with his fervent commitment. His language is simple and natural, never far-fetched or artificial. According to Jebb, Demosthenes was a true artist who could make his art obey him. For his part, Aeschines stigmatised his intensity, attributing to his rival strings of absurd and incoherent images. Dionysius stated that Demosthenes&#x27; only shortcoming is the lack of humour, although Quintilian regards this deficiency as a virtue. In a now lost letter, Cicero, though an admirer of the Athenian orator, claimed that occasionally Demosthenes &quot;nods&quot;, and elsewhere Cicero also argued that, although he is pre-eminent, Demosthenes sometimes fails to satisfy his ears. The main criticism of Demosthenes&#x27; art, however, seems to have rested chiefly on his known reluctance to speak ; he often declined to comment on subjects he had not studied beforehand. However, he gave the most elaborate preparation to all his speeches and, therefore, his arguments were the products of careful study. He was also famous for his caustic wit.

Besides his style, Cicero also admired other aspects of Demosthenes&#x27; works, such as the good prose rhythm, and the way he structured and arranged the material in his orations. According to the Roman statesman, Demosthenes regarded &quot;delivery&quot; (gestures, voice, etc.) as more important than style. Although he lacked Aeschines&#x27; charming voice and Demades&#x27; skill at improvisation, he made efficient use of his body to accentuate his words. Thus he managed to project his ideas and arguments much more forcefully. However, the use of physical gestures was not an integral or developed part of rhetorical training in his day. Moreover, his delivery was not accepted by everybody in antiquity: Demetrius Phalereus and the comedians ridiculed Demosthenes&#x27; &quot;theatricality&quot;, whilst Aeschines regarded Leodamas of Acharnae as superior to him.

Demosthenes relied heavily on the different aspects of ethos, especially phronesis. When presenting himself to the Assembly, he had to depict himself as a credible and wise statesman and adviser to be persuasive. One tactic that Demosthenes used during his philippics was foresight. He pleaded with his audience to predict the potential of being defeated, and to prepare. He appealed to pathos through patriotism and introducing the atrocities that would befall Athens if it was taken over by Philip. He was a master at &quot;self-fashioning&quot; by referring to his previous accomplishments, and renewing his credibility. He would also slyly undermine his audience by claiming that they had been wrong not to listen before, but they could redeem themselves if they listened and acted with him presently.

Demosthenes tailored his style to be very audience-specific. He took pride in not relying on attractive words but rather simple, effective prose. He was mindful of his arrangement, he used clauses to create patterns that would make seemingly complex sentences easy for the hearer to follow. His tendency to focus on delivery promoted him to use repetition, this would ingrain the importance into the audience&#x27;s minds; he also relied on speed and delay to create suspense and interest among the audience when presenting the most important aspects of his speech. One of his most effective skills was his ability to strike a balance: his works were complex so that the audience would not be offended by any elementary language, but the most important parts were clear and easily understood.

==Rhetorical legacy==

Demosthenes is widely considered one of the greatest orators of all time, and his fame has continued down the ages. Authors and scholars who flourished at Rome, such as Longinus and Caecilius, regarded his oratory as sublime. Juvenal acclaimed him as &quot;largus et exundans ingenii fons&quot; (a large and overflowing fountain of genius), and he inspired Cicero&#x27;s speeches against Mark Antony, also called the Philippics. According to Professor of Classics Cecil Wooten, Cicero ended his career by trying to imitate Demosthenes&#x27; political role. Plutarch drew attention in his &quot;Life of Demosthenes&quot; to the strong similarities between the personalities and careers of Demosthenes and Marcus Tullius Cicero:

The divine power seems originally to have designed Demosthenes and Cicero upon the same plan, giving them many similarities in their natural characters, as their passion for distinction and their love of liberty in civil life, and their want of courage in dangers and war, and at the same time also to have added many accidental resemblances. I think there can hardly be found two other orators, who, from small and obscure beginnings, became so great and mighty; who both contested with kings and tyrants; both lost their daughters, were driven out of their country, and returned with honour; who, flying from thence again, were both seized upon by their enemies, and at last ended their lives with the liberty of their countrymen.

During the Middle Ages and Renaissance, Demosthenes had a reputation for eloquence. He was read more than any other ancient orator; only Cicero offered any real competition. French author and lawyer Guillaume du Vair praised his speeches for their artful arrangement and elegant style; John Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, and Jacques Amyot, a French Renaissance writer and translator, regarded Demosthenes as a great or even the &quot;supreme&quot; orator. For Thomas Wilson, who first published translation of his speeches into English, Demosthenes was not only an eloquent orator, but, mainly, an authoritative statesman, &quot;a source of wisdom&quot;.

In modern history, orators such as Henry Clay would mimic Demosthenes&#x27; technique. His ideas and principles survived, influencing prominent politicians and movements of our times. Hence, he constituted a source of inspiration for the authors of &quot;The Federalist Papers&quot; (a series of 85 essays arguing for the ratification of the United States Constitution) and for the major orators of the French Revolution. French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau was among those who idealised Demosthenes and wrote a book about him. For his part, Friedrich Nietzsche often composed his sentences according to the paradigms of Demosthenes, whose style he admired.

==Works and transmission==

The &quot;publication&quot; and distribution of prose texts was common practice in Athens by the latter half of the fourth century BC and Demosthenes was among the Athenian politicians who set the trend, publishing many or even all of his orations. After his death, texts of his speeches survived in Athens (possibly forming part of the library of Cicero&#x27;s friend, Atticus, though their fate is otherwise unknown), and in the Library of Alexandria.

The Alexandrian texts were incorporated into the body of classical Greek literature that was preserved, catalogued and studied by the scholars of the Hellenistic period. From then until the fourth century AD, copies of Demosthenes&#x27; orations multiplied and they were in a relatively good position to survive the tense period from the sixth until the ninth century AD. In the end, sixty-one orations attributed to Demosthenes survived till the present day (some however are pseudonymous). Friedrich Blass, a German classical scholar, believes that nine more speeches were recorded by the orator, but they are not extant. Modern editions of these speeches are based on four manuscripts of the tenth and eleventh centuries AD.

Some of the speeches that comprise the &quot;Demosthenic corpus&quot; are known to have been written by other authors, though scholars differ over which speeches these are. Irrespective of their status, the speeches attributed to Demosthenes are often grouped in three genres first defined by Aristotle:
* &quot;Symbouleutic&quot; or &quot;political&quot;, considering the expediency of future actions—sixteen such speeches are included in the Demosthenic corpus;
* &quot;Dicanic&quot; or &quot;judicial&quot;, assessing the justice of past actions—only about ten of these are cases in which Demosthenes was personally involved, the rest were written for other speakers;
* &quot;Epideictic&quot; or &quot;sophistic display&quot;, attributing praise or blame, often delivered at public ceremonies—only two speeches have been included in the Demosthenic corpus, one a funeral speech that has been dismissed as a &quot;rather poor&quot; example of his work, and the other probably spurious.

In addition to the speeches, there are fifty-six prologues (openings of speeches). They were collected for the Library of Alexandria by Callimachus, who believed them genuine. Modern scholars are divided: some reject them, while others, such as Blass, believe they are authentic. Finally, six letters also survive under Demosthenes&#x27; name and their authorship too is hotly debated.

==Later honours==
The Demosthenian Literary Society, founded in 1803 at the University of Georgia, was named in honor of Demosthenes. In 1936, an American botanist Albert Charles Smith named a genus of shrubs in the family Ericaceae, which were native to south America, as &quot;Demosthenesia&quot; in honour of Demosthenes.

==See also==
* Pseudo-Demosthenes

==Notes==
a. According to Edward Cohen, professor of Classics at the University of Pennsylvania, Cleoboule was the daughter of a Scythian woman and of an Athenian father, Gylon, although other scholars insist on the genealogical purity of Demosthenes. There is an agreement among scholars that Cleoboule was a Crimean and not an Athenian citizen. Gylon had suffered banishment at the end of the Peloponnesian War for allegedly betraying Nymphaeum in Crimaea. According to Aeschines, Gylon received as a gift from the Bosporan rulers a place called &quot;the Gardens&quot; in the colony of Kepoi in present-day Russia (located within two miles (3 km) of Phanagoria). Nevertheless, the accuracy of these allegations is disputed, since more than seventy years had elapsed between Gylon&#x27;s possible treachery and Aeschines&#x27; speech, and, therefore, the orator could be confident that his audience would have no direct knowledge of events at Nymphaeum.

b. According to Tsatsos, the trials against the guardians lasted until Demosthenes was twenty four. Nietzsche reduces the time of the judicial disputes to five years.

c. According to the tenth century encyclopedia Suda, Demosthenes studied with Eubulides and Plato. Cicero and Quintilian argue that Demosthenes was Plato&#x27;s disciple. Tsatsos and the philologist Henri Weil believe that there is no indication that Demosthenes was a pupil of Plato or Isocrates. As far as Isaeus is concerned, according to Jebb &quot;the school of Isaeus is nowhere else mentioned, nor is the name of any other pupil recorded&quot;. Peck believes that Demosthenes continued to study under Isaeus for the space of four years after he had reached his majority.

d. &quot;Batalus&quot; or &quot;Batalos&quot; meant &quot;stammerer&quot; in ancient Greek, but it was also the name of a flute-player (in ridicule of whom Antiphanes wrote a play) and of a songwriter. The word &quot;batalus&quot; was also used by the Athenians to describe the anus. In fact the word actually defining his speech defect was &quot;Battalos&quot;, signifying someone with rhotacism, but it was crudely misrepresented as &quot;Batalos&quot; by the enemies of Demosthenes and by Plutarch&#x27;s time the original word had already lost currency. Another nickname of Demosthenes was &quot;Argas.&quot; According to Plutarch, this name was given him either for his savage and spiteful behaviour or for his disagreeable way of speaking. &quot;Argas&quot; was a poetical word for a snake, but also the name of a poet.

e. Both Tsatsos and Weil maintain that Demosthenes never abandoned the profession of the logographer, but, after delivering his first political orations, he wanted to be regarded as a statesman. According to James J. Murphy, Professor emeritus of Rhetoric and Communication at the University of California, Davis, his lifelong career as a logographer continued even during his most intense involvement in the political struggle against Philip.

f. &quot;Theorika&quot; were allowances paid by the state to poor Athenians to enable them to watch dramatic festivals. According to Libanius, Eubulus passed a law making it difficult to divert public funds, including &quot;theorika,&quot; for minor military operations. E. M. Burke argues that, if this was indeed a law of Eubulus, it would have served &quot;as a means to check a too-aggressive and expensive interventionism [...] allowing for the controlled expenditures on other items, including construction for defense&quot;. Thus Burke believes that in the Eubulan period, the Theoric Fund was used not only as allowances for public entertainment but also for a variety of projects, including public works. As Burke also points out, in his later and more &quot;mature&quot; political career, Demosthenes no longer criticised &quot;theorika&quot;; in fact, in his &quot;Fourth Philippic&quot; (341–340 BC), he defended theoric spending.

g. In the &quot;Third Olynthiac&quot; and in the &quot;Third Philippic&quot;, Demosthenes characterised Philip as a &quot;barbarian&quot;, one of the various abusive terms applied by the orator to the king of Macedon. According to Konstantinos Tsatsos and Douglas M. MacDowell, Demosthenes regarded as Greeks only those who had reached the cultural standards of south Greece and he did not take into consideration ethnological criteria. His contempt for Philip is forcefully expressed in the &quot;Third Philippic&quot; 31 in these terms: &quot;...he is not only no Greek, nor related to the Greeks, but not even a barbarian from any place that can be named with honour, but a pestilent knave from Macedonia, whence it was never yet possible to buy a decent slave.&quot; The wording is even more telling in Greek, ending with an accumulation of plosive pi sounds: Nevertheless, Philip, in his letter to the council and people of Athens, mentioned by Demosthenes, places himself &quot;with the rest of the Greeks&quot;.

h. Aeschines maintained that Demosthenes was bribed to drop his charges against Meidias in return for a payment of thirty mnai. Plutarch argued that Demosthenes accepted the bribe out of fear of Meidias&#x27;s power. Philipp August Böckh also accepted Aeschines&#x27;s account for an out-of-court settlement, and concluded that the speech was never delivered. Böckh&#x27;s position was soon endorsed by Arnold Schaefer and Blass. Weil agreed that Demosthenes never delivered &quot;Against Meidias&quot;, but believed that he dropped the charges for political reasons. In 1956, Hartmut Erbse partly challenged Böckh&#x27;s conclusions, when he argued that &quot;Against Meidias&quot; was a finished speech that could have been delivered in court, but Erbse then sided with George Grote, by accepting that, after Demosthenes secured a judgment in his favour, he reached some kind of settlement with Meidias. Kenneth Dover also endorsed Aeschines&#x27;s account, and argued that, although the speech was never delivered in court, Demosthenes put into circulation an attack on Meidias. Dover&#x27;s arguments were refuted by Edward M. Harris, who concluded that, although we cannot be sure about the outcome of the trial, the speech was delivered in court, and that Aeschines&#x27; story was a lie.

i. According to Plutarch, Demosthenes deserted his colours and &quot;did nothing honorable, nor was his performance answerable to his speeches&quot;.

j. Aeschines reproached Demosthenes for being silent as to the seventy talents of the king&#x27;s gold which he allegedly seized and embezzled. Aeschines and Dinarchus also maintained that when the Arcadians offered their services for ten talents, Demosthenes refused to furnish the money to the Thebans, who were conducting the negotiations, and so the Arcadians sold out to the Macedonians.

k. The exact chronology of Harpalus&#x27;s entrance into Athens and of all the related events remains a debated topic among modern scholars, who have proposed different, and sometimes conflicting, chronological schemes.

l. According to Pausanias, Demosthenes himself and others had declared that the orator had taken no part of the money that Harpalus brought from Asia. He also narrates the following story: Shortly after Harpalus ran away from Athens, he was put to death by the servants who were attending him, though some assert that he was assassinated. The steward of his money fled to Rhodes, and was arrested by a Macedonian officer, Philoxenus. Philoxenus proceeded to examine the slave, &quot;until he learned everything about such as had allowed themselves to accept a bribe from Harpalus.&quot; He then sent a dispatch to Athens, in which he gave a list of the persons who had taken a bribe from Harpalus. &quot;Demosthenes, however, he never mentioned at all, although Alexander held him in bitter hatred, and he himself had a private quarrel with him.&quot; On the other hand, Plutarch believes that Harpalus sent Demosthenes a cup with twenty talents and that &quot;Demosthenes could not resist the temptation, but admitting the present, ... he surrendered himself up to the interest of Harpalus.&quot; Tsatsos defends Demosthenes&#x27;s innocence, but Irkos Apostolidis underlines the problematic character of the primary sources on this issue—Hypereides and Dinarchus were at the time Demosthenes&#x27;s political opponents and accusers—and states that, despite the rich bibliography on Harpalus&#x27;s case, modern scholarship has not yet managed to reach a safe conclusion on whether Demosthenes was bribed or not.

m. Blass disputes the authorship of the following speeches: &quot;Fourth Philippic&quot;, &quot;Funeral Oration&quot;, &quot;Erotic Essay,&quot; &quot;Against Stephanus 2&quot; and &quot;Against Evergus and Mnesibulus&quot;, while Schaefer recognises as genuine only twenty-nine orations. Of Demosthenes&#x27;s corpus political speeches, J. H. Vince singles out five as spurious: &quot;On Halonnesus&quot;, &quot;Fourth Philippic&quot;, &quot;Answer to Philip&#x27;s Letter&quot;, &quot;On Organization&quot; and &quot;On the Treaty with Alexander&quot;.

n. In this discussion the work of Jonathan A. Goldstein, Professor of History and Classics at the University of Iowa, is regarded as paramount. Goldstein regards Demosthenes&#x27;s letters as authentic apologetic letters that were addressed to the Athenian Assembly.
==References==
==Sources==
===Primary sources (Greeks and Romans)===

* Aeschines, &quot;Against Ctesiphon.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Aeschines, &quot;Against Timarchus.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Aeschines, &quot;The Speech on the Embassy.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Athenaeus, &quot;Deipnosophistae&quot;. Translated into English by Charles Duke Yonge.
* Cicero, &quot;Brutus&quot;. See the original text in the Latin Library 
* Cicero, &quot;.&quot; See original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Cicero, &quot;Orator&quot;. See the original text in the Latin Library .
* Demades, &quot;On the Twelve Years&quot;. See original text in Perseus program .
* Demosthenes, &quot;Against Aphobus 1.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Demosthenes, &quot;Against Aphobus 3.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Demosthenes, &quot;Against Aristocrates.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Demosthenes, &quot;Against Meidias.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Demosthenes, &quot;Against Zenothemis.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Demosthenes, &quot;.&quot;
* Demosthenes, &quot;.&quot;
* Demosthenes, &quot;&quot;
* Demosthenes, &quot;Fourth Philippic&quot;. See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Demosthenes (or Hegesippus), &quot;On Halonnesus&quot;. See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Demosthenes, &quot;.&quot;
* Demosthenes, &quot;.&quot;
* Demosthenes, &quot;.&quot;
* Demosthenes, &quot;.&quot;
* Demosthenes, &quot;.&quot;
* Demosthenes, &quot;.&quot;
* Demosthenes, &quot;.&quot;
* Dinarchus, &quot;Against Demosthenes.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Library.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Dionysius of Halicarnassus, &quot;On the Admirable Style of Demosthenes.&quot;
* Hypereides,&quot;Against Demosthenes.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library 
* Juvenal, &quot;Saturae.&quot; See original text in the Latin Library . Translated into English by M. Madan
* Longinus, &quot;On the Sublime.&quot; Translated by W. Rhys Roberts
* Lucian, &quot;Demosthenes, An Encomium.&quot; Translated in Sacred Texts 
* Lucian, &quot;The Illiterate Book-Fancier.&quot; Translated in Sacred Texts 
* Pausanias, &quot;Description of Greece.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Plutarch, &quot;&quot;. See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Plutarch, &quot;&quot;. See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Plutarch, &quot;&quot;. See the original text in Perseus Digital Library .
* Polybius, &quot;Histories.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library 
* Pseudo-Plutarch, &quot;Aeschines.&quot; See Charles Barcroft&#x27;s translation .
* Pseudo-Plutarch, &quot;Demosthenes.&quot; See Charles Barcroft&#x27;s translation .
* Quintilian, &quot;Institutiones.&quot; See the original text in Perseus Digital Library and the Latin Library .
===Secondary sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Here and in her fiction, Renault portrays Demosthenes as corrupt, cowardly and cruel.
==External links==


* Art of Speech 
* Britannica online 
* Lendering, Jona 
* Works by and about Demosthenes at Perseus Digital Library 
* 

;His era
* Beck, Sanderson: Philip, Demosthenes, and Alexander 
* Blackwell, Christopher W.: The Assembly during Demosthenes&#x27; era 
* Britannica online: Macedonian supremacy in Greece 
* Smith, William: A Smaller History of Ancient Greece-Philip of Macedon

;Miscellaneous
* SORGLL: Demosthenes, On the Crown 199–208; read by Stephen Daitz
* Libanius, Hypotheses to the Orations of Demosthenes </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q117253" start="0" end="11" title="Demosthenes" label="Demosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="50" end="55" title="Classical Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064853" start="80" end="94" title="ancient Athens" label="ancient Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342738" start="100" end="107" title="oration" label="oration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="244" end="258" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="306" end="314" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q286651" start="603" end="614" title="Logographer (legal)" label="logographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q404782" start="622" end="628" title="Ancient Greek law" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="666" end="676" title="legal suit" label="legal suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="872" end="879" title="Macedon" label="Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="1022" end="1042" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="1371" end="1380" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="1382" end="1401" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q204760" start="1582" end="1591" title="Antipater" label="Antipater"/>
<link wikidata="Q10396005" start="1687" end="1704" title="Archias of Thurii" label="Archias of Thurii"/>
<link wikidata="Q313018" start="1782" end="1807" title="Aristophanes of Byzantium" label="Aristophanes of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q312114" start="1812" end="1837" title="Aristarchus of Samothrace" label="Aristarchus of Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q758169" start="1882" end="1895" title="Attic orators" label="Attic orators"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245111" start="1914" end="1922" title="Longinus (literature)" label="Longinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193769" start="2101" end="2111" title="Quintilian" label="Quintilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="2167" end="2173" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q221956" start="2435" end="2443" title="Olympiad" label="Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q672490" start="2579" end="2583" title="deme" label="deme"/>
<link wikidata="Q18015501" start="2587" end="2594" title="Paeania" label="Paeania"/>
<link wikidata="Q317089" start="2651" end="2660" title="Aeschines" label="Aeschines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555317" start="2733" end="2742" title="Kleobule" label="Kleoboule"/>
<link wikidata="Q845909" start="2749" end="2756" title="Scythia" label="Scythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="3258" end="3272" title="Parallel Lives" label="Parallel Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="3280" end="3288" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282114" start="3482" end="3523" title="Speech impediment" label="inarticulate and stammering pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14877141" start="3946" end="3953" title="Attic talent" label="talents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657275" start="4619" end="4634" title="Pseudo-Plutarch" label="Pseudo-Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294184" start="5036" end="5046" title="Pederasty in ancient Greece" label="pederastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q742538" start="5136" end="5143" title="Plataea" label="Plataea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="6803" end="6811" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q531775" start="6889" end="6901" title="Callistratus of Aphidnae" label="Callistratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="7013" end="7032" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="7043" end="7054" title="philology" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449920" start="7076" end="7103" title="Constantine Paparrigopoulos" label="Constantine Paparrigopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q221182" start="7166" end="7175" title="Isocrates" label="Isocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="7190" end="7196" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q193769" start="7198" end="7209" title="Quintillian" label="Quintillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="7266" end="7271" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="7273" end="7279" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="7312" end="7320" title="satire" label="satirist"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="7345" end="7354" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="7356" end="7368" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214121" start="7373" end="7383" title="Xenocrates" label="Xenocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q365097" start="7484" end="7490" title="Isaeus" label="Isaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q61407" start="7744" end="7751" title="Ernst Curtius" label="Curtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="7762" end="7775" title="archaeologist" label="archaeologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078648" start="7949" end="7956" title="Ancient drachma" label="drachma"/>
<link wikidata="Q356011" start="8219" end="8238" title="Sir Richard C. Jebb" label="Sir Richard C. Jebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="8250" end="8259" title="Classics" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q365209" start="8421" end="8441" title="Konstantinos Tsatsos" label="Konstantinos Tsatsos"/>
<link wikidata="Q414528" start="8465" end="8476" title="academician" label="academician"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="8631" end="8641" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q730392" start="9239" end="9247" title="Ecclesia (ancient Athens)" label="ekklesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80398" start="9373" end="9381" title="Pericles" label="Pericles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282114" start="9587" end="9604" title="speech impairment" label="speech impairment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133283" start="9946" end="9955" title="Rhotacism (speech impediment)" label="rhotacism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10275" end="10283" title="Battaros#History" label="Battaros"/>
<link wikidata="Q286651" start="10950" end="10961" title="Logographer (legal)" label="logographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q335560" start="11632" end="11640" title="Antiphon (person)" label="Antiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q391654" start="11645" end="11654" title="Andocides" label="Andocides"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="13088" end="13102" title="capital punishment" label="capital charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="13403" end="13415" title="quid pro quo" label="quid pro quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q605172" start="13575" end="13588" title="Theorica" label="Theoric Funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770133" start="13828" end="13837" title="trierarch" label="trierarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q208420" start="13897" end="13904" title="trireme" label="trireme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076418" start="14094" end="14102" title="choregos (ancient Greece)" label="choregos"/>
<link wikidata="Q189072" start="14129" end="14150" title="Ancient Greek theatre" label="theatrical production"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691027" start="14324" end="14341" title="Against Androtion" label="Against Androtion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691037" start="14358" end="14374" title="Against Leptines" label="Against Leptines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691054" start="14473" end="14491" title="Against Timocrates" label="Against Timocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132537" start="15439" end="15449" title="Old Comedy" label="Old Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202487" start="15883" end="15892" title="Areopagus" label="Areopagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507572" start="16145" end="16153" title="symmoria" label="symmoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292981" start="16364" end="16371" title="Eubulus (statesman)" label="Eubulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q823721" start="16649" end="16660" title="Megalopolis, Greece" label="Megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="16669" end="16675" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="16679" end="16685" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q223767" start="17424" end="17442" title="Athenian democracy" label="Athenian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217414" start="17721" end="17731" title="Amphipolis" label="Amphipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q639126" start="17736" end="17741" title="Pydna" label="Pydna"/>
<link wikidata="Q576065" start="17784" end="17795" title="ancient Macedonians" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="18127" end="18133" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194450" start="18194" end="18205" title="Thermopylae" label="Thermopylae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637650" start="18243" end="18251" title="Phocians" label="Phocians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887681" start="18259" end="18281" title="Battle of Crocus Field" label="Battle of Crocus Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q261687" start="18503" end="18524" title="Jacqueline de Romilly" label="Jacqueline de Romilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453516" start="18992" end="19007" title="First Philippic" label="First Philippic"/>
<link wikidata="Q605172" start="19066" end="19078" title="Theoric fund" label="Theoric fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078648" start="19595" end="19603" title="Ancient drachma" label="drachmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q384102" start="19619" end="19624" title="obol (coin)" label="obols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141669" start="19938" end="19946" title="Olynthus" label="Olynthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089276" start="19986" end="19996" title="Olynthiacs" label="Olynthiacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="20376" end="20382" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917673" start="20499" end="20506" title="Meidias" label="Meidias"/>
<link wikidata="Q574807" start="20596" end="20612" title="Dionysia" label="Greater Dionysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="20662" end="20670" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q735766" start="21133" end="21139" title="Hubris" label="hybris"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="21300" end="21311" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q204728" start="21821" end="21831" title="Chalkidiki" label="Chalcidice"/>
<link wikidata="Q213679" start="22139" end="22144" title="Pella" label="Pella"/>
<link wikidata="Q217414" start="22367" end="22377" title="Amphipolis" label="Amphipolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="22949" end="22955" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q166919" start="23102" end="23110" title="Thessaly" label="Thessaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330631" start="23154" end="23160" title="Pherae" label="Pherae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890323" start="23478" end="23484" title="Phocis" label="Phocis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182875" start="23615" end="23634" title="Amphictyonic League" label="Amphictyonic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="23708" end="23714" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40730" start="23719" end="23726" title="Demeter" label="Demeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091460" start="23976" end="23988" title="On the Peace" label="On the Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="24382" end="24393" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443471" start="24726" end="24742" title="Second Philippic" label="Second Philippic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091351" start="24822" end="24842" title="On the False Embassy" label="On the False Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="25094" end="25100" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="25262" end="25272" title="Thracian Chersonese" label="Chersonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="25291" end="25310" title="Gallipoli Peninsula" label="Gallipoli Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781404" start="25339" end="25349" title="Diopeithes" label="Diopeithes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091317" start="25516" end="25533" title="On the Chersonese" label="On the Chersonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646617" start="25633" end="25648" title="Third Philippic" label="Third Philippic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="26150" end="26159" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q336446" start="26263" end="26269" title="Abydos, Hellespont" label="Abydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q182875" start="26701" end="26721" title="Amphictyonic League" label="Amphictyonic Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q470481" start="26775" end="26784" title="Amfissa" label="Amfissian"/>
<link wikidata="Q764236" start="26785" end="26793" title="Locrians" label="Locrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q928686" start="27648" end="27657" title="Cephissus (Athenian plain)" label="Cephissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235347" start="27673" end="27680" title="Elateia" label="Elateia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="27799" end="27805" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="27807" end="27813" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495811" start="27815" end="27821" title="Achaea" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="27823" end="27830" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q416070" start="27832" end="27841" title="Acarnania" label="Acarnania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="28001" end="28008" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180335" start="28739" end="28746" title="Phalanx formation" label="phalanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q549874" start="28805" end="28814" title="Chaeronea" label="Chaeronea"/>
<link wikidata="Q175249" start="28869" end="28876" title="hoplite" label="hoplite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="28943" end="28959" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q211430" start="29085" end="29092" title="Demades" label="Demades"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="29174" end="29183" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045730" start="29224" end="29233" title="Thersites" label="Thersites"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="29283" end="29293" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256369" start="29661" end="29676" title="Demosthenes&amp;#x27; Funeral Oration" label="Funeral Oration"/>
<link wikidata="Q332337" start="29708" end="29725" title="League of Corinth" label="League of Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q230258" start="29871" end="29891" title="Cleopatra of Macedon" label="Cleopatra of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q335658" start="29901" end="29920" title="Alexander I of Epirus" label="Alexander of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="29965" end="29989" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander III of Macedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q356050" start="30583" end="30590" title="Attalus (general)" label="Attalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="30989" end="30998" title="Thracians" label="Thracians"/>
<link wikidata="Q146715" start="31007" end="31016" title="Illyrians" label="Illyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257541" start="31208" end="31216" title="Triballi" label="Triballi"/>
<link wikidata="Q102865" start="31284" end="31304" title="Darius III of Persia" label="Darius III of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="31618" end="31626" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q175942" start="31662" end="31669" title="Phocion" label="Phocion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711488" start="31940" end="31948" title="Margites" label="Margites"/>
<link wikidata="Q175942" start="33277" end="33284" title="Phocion" label="Phocion"/>
<link wikidata="Q314447" start="33423" end="33433" title="Hypereides" label="Hypereides"/>
<link wikidata="Q187982" start="34317" end="34327" title="Alkibiades" label="Alkibiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q562629" start="34744" end="34757" title="Mogens Herman Hansen" label="Mogens Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28365" start="35397" end="35407" title="Lamian War" label="Lamian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443132" start="35764" end="35773" title="Kalaureia" label="Kalaureia"/>
<link wikidata="Q724394" start="35786" end="35791" title="Poros" label="Poros"/>
<link wikidata="Q732066" start="36131" end="36136" title="Creon of Thebes" label="Creon"/>
<link wikidata="Q745156" start="36622" end="36631" title="Prytaneum" label="Prytaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318" start="36759" end="36769" title="Theopompus" label="Theopompus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="37050" end="37058" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="37085" end="37104" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean world"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="38367" end="38376" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="38457" end="38460" title="University College London" label="UCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q61882" start="39449" end="39462" title="Werner Jaeger" label="Werner Jaeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q315989" start="39608" end="39633" title="Thomas Babington Macaulay, 1st Baron Macaulay" label="Thomas Babington Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q335954" start="39840" end="39847" title="strategos" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q310164" start="41275" end="41281" title="Lysias" label="Lysias"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="41797" end="41823" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313286" start="45109" end="45128" title="Demetrius Phalereus" label="Demetrius Phalereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q576319" start="45240" end="45248" title="Acharnae" label="Acharnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316040" start="45343" end="45352" title="phronesis" label="phronesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="47049" end="47053" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q515249" start="47076" end="47085" title="Caecilius of Calacte" label="Caecilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707099" start="47120" end="47127" title="Satires of Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="47282" end="47293" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q604091" start="47311" end="47321" title="Philippicae" label="Philippics"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="47349" end="47357" title="Classics" label="Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="48367" end="48378" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="48383" end="48394" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241409" start="48555" end="48572" title="Guillaume du Vair" label="Guillaume du Vair"/>
<link wikidata="Q350427" start="48642" end="48652" title="John Jewel" label="John Jewel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636762" start="48654" end="48673" title="Bishop of Salisbury" label="Bishop of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q462371" start="48679" end="48692" title="Jacques Amyot" label="Jacques Amyot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336478" start="48814" end="48827" title="Thomas Wilson (rhetorician)" label="Thomas Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="49013" end="49027" title="modern history" label="modern history"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="49045" end="49055" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131737" start="49062" end="49067" title="imitation" label="mimic"/>
<link wikidata="Q858036" start="49265" end="49286" title="The Federalist Papers" label="The Federalist Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="49352" end="49378" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="49413" end="49430" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="49454" end="49472" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Georges Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="50133" end="50154" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="50307" end="50318" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q77619" start="50649" end="50664" title="Friedrich Blass" label="Friedrich Blass"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="50833" end="50843" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q920285" start="51924" end="51932" title="prologue" label="prologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="52011" end="52022" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256371" start="52284" end="52313" title="Demosthenian Literary Society" label="Demosthenian Literary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q761534" start="52338" end="52359" title="University of Georgia" label="University of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922675" start="52426" end="52446" title="Albert Charles Smith" label="Albert Charles Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q975872" start="52485" end="52494" title="Ericaceae" label="Ericaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q978138" start="52603" end="52621" title="Pseudo-Demosthenes" label="Pseudo-Demosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="52692" end="52718" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="52933" end="52939" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33745" start="53018" end="53035" title="Peloponnesian War" label="Peloponnesian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q287522" start="53060" end="53069" title="Nymphaion (Crimea)" label="Nymphaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q321371" start="53140" end="53148" title="Bosporan Kingdom" label="Bosporan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555347" start="53212" end="53217" title="Kepoi" label="Kepoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344411" start="53276" end="53286" title="Phanagoria" label="Phanagoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="53795" end="53799" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q461007" start="53826" end="53835" title="Eubulides of Miletus" label="Eubulides"/>
<link wikidata="Q95327" start="53947" end="53957" title="Henri Weil" label="Henri Weil"/>
<link wikidata="Q497" start="54605" end="54609" title="anus" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="55435" end="55466" title="University of California, Davis" label="University of California, Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252383" start="56799" end="56819" title="Douglas M. MacDowell" label="Douglas M. MacDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q850029" start="57685" end="57689" title="mina (unit)" label="mnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q63183" start="57780" end="57800" title="Philipp August Böckh" label="Philipp August Böckh"/>
<link wikidata="Q97791" start="58140" end="58153" title="Hartmut Erbse" label="Hartmut Erbse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364848" start="58335" end="58347" title="George Grote" label="George Grote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738862" start="58469" end="58482" title="Kenneth Dover" label="Kenneth Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q473421" start="59168" end="59177" title="Dinarchus" label="Dinarchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="59641" end="59650" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q74782" start="60047" end="60057" title="Philoxenus (general)" label="Philoxenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="61794" end="61812" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q317089" start="62035" end="62044" title="Aeschines" label="Aeschines"/>
<link wikidata="Q294923" start="62328" end="62337" title="Athenaeus" label="Athenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244416" start="62345" end="62360" title="Deipnosophistae" label="Deipnosophistae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="62417" end="62423" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q473421" start="63701" end="63710" title="Dinarchus" label="Dinarchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="63798" end="63814" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26204" start="63890" end="63916" title="Dionysius of Halicarnassus" label="Dionysius of Halicarnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q314447" start="63971" end="63981" title="Hypereides" label="Hypereides"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="64067" end="64074" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q436634" start="64176" end="64184" title="Cassius Longinus (philosopher)" label="Longinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="64246" end="64252" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="64401" end="64410" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="64500" end="64508" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="64577" end="64585" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="64654" end="64662" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="64731" end="64739" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657275" start="64816" end="64831" title="Pseudo-Plutarch" label="Pseudo-Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q193769" start="64986" end="64996" title="Quintilian" label="Quintilian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46607" wikidata="Q75826" url="?curid=46607" title="Catiline">
<text>Lucius Sergius Catilina ( – January 62 BC), known in English as Catiline (), was a Roman politician and soldier best known for instigating the Catilinarian conspiracy—a failed attempt to seize control of the Roman state in 63 BC.

Born to an ancient patrician family, he joined Sulla during Sulla&#x27;s civil war and profited from Sulla&#x27;s purges of his political enemies, becoming a wealthy man. In the early 60s BC, he served as praetor and then as governor of Africa (67–66 BC). Upon his return to Rome, he attempted to stand for the consulship but was rebuffed; he then was beset with legal challenges over alleged corruption in Africa and his actions during Sulla&#x27;s proscriptions (83–82 BC). Acquitted on all charges with the support of influential friends in Roman politics, he stood for the consulship in 64 and in 63 BC.

Defeated in the consular , he concocted a plot to take the consulship by force, bringing together poor rural plebs, Sullan veterans, and other senators whose political careers had stalled. Crassus revealed the coup attempt – which involved armed uprisings in Etruria – to Cicero, one of the consuls, in October 63 BC, but it took until November before evidence of Catiline&#x27;s participation emerged. Discovered, he left the city to join his rebellion. In early January 62 BC, at the head of a rebel army near Pistoria (modern-day Pistoia in Tuscany), Catiline fought the Battle of Pistoria against republican forces. He was killed and his army annihilated.

Catiline&#x27;s name became a byword for doomed and treasonous rebellion in the years after his death. Sallust, in his monograph on the conspiracy, &quot;Bellum Catilinae&quot;, painted Catiline as a symbol of the Roman Republic&#x27;s moral decline, as much of a victim as a perpetrator, as his characterization of &quot;a ravaged mind&quot; (&quot;vastus animus&quot;) indicates.

==Early life==

===Family background===
Catiline was a member of an ancient patrician family, the gens Sergia, who claimed descent from Sergestus, a Trojan companion of Aeneas. While Sallust says he was one of the &quot;nobiles&quot;, which implies a consular heritage, the specifics are unclear: no member of the gens Sergia had held the consulship since the second consulship of Gnaeus Sergius Fidenas Coxo in 429 BC; a few other Sergii had served in the consular tribunate, but the last was in 380 BC.

The exact year of Catiline&#x27;s birth is unknown. From the offices he held it can be deduced that he was born no later than 108 BC, or 106 BC if patricians enjoyed a right to hold magistracies two years earlier than plebeians. Catiline&#x27;s parents were Lucius Sergius Silus and Belliena. His father was poor by the standards of the aristocracy. His maternal uncle had served as praetor in 105 BC; earlier, Catiline&#x27;s great-grandfather – Marcus Sergius Silus – had served with distinction as praetor in 197 BC during the Second Punic War.

=== Early career ===
During the Social War, Catiline served under Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo, along with Strabo&#x27;s son – the more famous Pompey – and Cicero. His specific title was not recorded. This is recorded on the &quot;Asculum Inscription&quot;, a bronze tablet which was once nailed to the wall of an unknown public building in Rome, which records the names of Pompeius Strabo&#x27;s council (&quot;consilium&quot;) when he granted citizenship to several auxiliaries in his army; a Lucius Sergius is mentioned there, almost certainly Catiline.

He married a woman named Gratidia, one of Gaius Marius&#x27;s nieces. During Sulla&#x27;s civil war, Catiline joined with the Sullans in 82 BC and served as a lieutenant. According to many of the ancient sources, he made himself wealthy during the Sullan proscriptions by killing his brother and two of his brothers-in-law (one brother of his wife and one husband of his sister). Cicero accused him of helping Quintus Lutatius Catulus avenge himself upon Catiline&#x27;s wife&#x27;s brother, Marcus Marius Gratidianus, the prosecutor who had caused the death of Catulus&#x27; father. Cicero&#x27;s account – given in a campaign speech attacking Catiline, who was a rival candidate for the consulship of 63 BC, – has Catiline beheading Gratidianus and then carrying the head through the city from the Janiculum to Sulla at the Temple of Apollo; later accounts embellish the tale, describing Catiline as engaging in gratuitous cruelties against Gratidianus, as described in later sources such as Livy, Valerius Maximus, Lucan, and Florus. Some modern historians doubt Catiline was involved in Gratidianus&#x27; death except perhaps in an auxiliary role, placing blame instead on Catulus and attributing the story of Catiline&#x27;s involvement to Ciceronean political slander. Regardless, Catiline did engage in profiteering from the Sullan proscriptions, likely purchasing estates for fractions of their true value, and by the end of Sulla&#x27;s dictatorship, he had become a rich man.

In 73 BC, he may have been prosecuted for adultery – &quot;apud pontifices&quot; (before a panel of pontiffs as judges) – with a Vestal Virgin named Fabia, a half-sister of Cicero&#x27;s wife Terentia. While evidence for Fabia&#x27;s prosecution is clear, only Orosius mentions Catiline&#x27;s prosecution. Conviction would have led to execution for sacrilege. Catiline&#x27;s friend Catulus – probably the president of the court and definitely one of the pontiffs – and other former consuls rallied to help Fabia, and possibly Catiline if he too was prosecuted, securing their acquittals. Catiline and Cicero &quot;must have been relieved&quot;; Catiline, for his part, regarded himself in Catulus&#x27; debt.

== Attempts at the consulship ==
Catiline served as praetor some time before 68 BC; T. R. S. Broughton in &quot;Magistrates of the Roman Republic&quot; dates the praetorship exactly to 68 BC. He then served as propraetorian governor of Africa for two years (67–66 BC).

Some time in the mid-60s BC, Catiline married the wealthy and beautiful Aurelia Orestilla, daughter of the consul of 71 BC, Gnaeus Aufidius Orestes; this was his second marriage. Sallust relates that he did so not out of money, but only due to her good looks, something which Romans believed to be discreditable. Cicero later claimed in his &quot;Catilinarians&quot; that Catiline murdered his first wife and Orestilla&#x27;s son to make way for the match; he also claimed in &quot;In toga candida&quot; that Orestilla was Catiline&#x27;s own illegitimate daughter. Cicero&#x27;s allegations &quot;cannot be taken at face value and reveal more about typical themes and slanders found in Roman invective than they do about Catiline&#x27;s domestic history&quot;.

=== Elections of 66 BC and trial ===
Upon his return to Rome in 66 BC, embassies from Africa protested his maladministration. Catiline also attempted to stand for the consulship, but his candidacy was rejected by the presiding magistrate. Sallust and Cicero attribute the rejection to an imminent extortion trial, but this decision may have been made in terms of the contested elections for the consulship of 65 BC: before Catiline&#x27;s return to Rome, the first consular elections were held but both men elected were deposed after they were both convicted of bribery; the second elections, after Catiline&#x27;s return, were held with the same candidates – the two convicts excepted – returning two different consuls. Catiline&#x27;s candidacy could have been rejected not due to expectations of an extortion trial, but rather for the mere fact that he was not a candidate in the first election.

Following the elections, early in 65 BC, the ancient sources give contradictory descriptions of what is called a &quot;First Catilinarian conspiracy&quot; in which Catiline (except in Suetonius&#x27; narrative) conspired with the deposed consular candidates from the first election to recover the consulship by force. In some tellings, Catiline himself was to assume the consulship. Regardless, the supposed date of this alleged conspiracy, 5 February, came and went without incident. Modern scholars overwhelmingly believe that this &quot;First Catilinarian conspiracy&quot; is fictitious.

Later that year, in the second half of 65 BC (some time after 17 July), Catiline was brought to trial for corruption during his governorship. The prosecution was led by Publius Clodius Pulcher, but Catiline was defended by many influential former consuls, including one of the consuls of 65 BC (who had won in the second election; that consul also disavowed Catiline&#x27;s rumoured involvement in the alleged putsch). Clodius, prosecuting, may have helped Catiline out by selecting a favourable jury that would be impressed by the &quot;consulares&quot; coming to Catiline&#x27;s aid. But scholarly opinion on whether Clodius purposefully manipulated the proceedings for acquittal is divided. In the end, the jury – composed of senators, equites, and the &quot;tribuni aerarii&quot; – divided: the senators voted for conviction, the latter two panels for acquittal. Cicero, not yet having broken with Catiline, considered defending Catiline at this trial, but eventually decided not to; Catiline&#x27;s advocate is unknown.

=== Consular elections of 64 BC ===
Catiline&#x27;s candidacy at the consular elections in 64 BC was accepted. Also standing for the consulship that year were Cicero and Gaius Antonius Hybrida; the three were the only candidates with a realistic chance of winning. Catiline, bankrolled by Caesar and Crassus, distributed large bribes; after a bill against electoral bribery was defeated, Cicero gave &quot;In toga candida&quot;, a speech full of invective attacking Catiline and Antonius. Antonius and Catiline were allies during the election and attempted to beat Cicero. Their strategy, however, was unsuccessful. Cicero was carried unanimously and Antonius narrowly defeated Catiline. 

This was also the year that Gaius Julius Caesar was president of the standing court on assassinations. His willingness – along with Cato the Younger in the treasury demanding repayment of loans from the civil wars – to pursue the beneficiaries of the Sullan civil war may have swayed voters away from supporting Catiline. This may also have been reinforced by timely conviction of Catiline&#x27;s maternal uncle on charges of murder during the proscriptions. After the consular elections, Catiline was brought up on charges of murdering people during the proscriptions, perhaps of Gratidianus. Prosecuted by Lucius Lucceius or possibly Caesar, Catiline was again acquitted when a number of former consuls spoke in his defence. There is no evidence that Caesar affected Catiline&#x27;s acquittal.

== Catilinarian conspiracy ==
Antonius, Catiline&#x27;s ally in the elections of 64 BC, joined with Cicero in a deal where he would take the wealthy and exploitable province of Macedonia (which Cicero had been given) in exchange for cooperation; he therefore broke with Catiline early in the year. In early 63 BC, there were no indications that Catiline was involved in a conspiracy. He was still, however, nursing hopes of an eventual consulship that would be both his birth-right and necessary for his career.

=== Consular elections ===
The events of the year 63 BC were not amenable for civil harmony, no matter how much Cicero as consul had been preaching it to the people. Early in the year, a proposal came before the plebs to redistribute lands; it was a proposal that would have alleviated great hardship in a time of economic hardship. Cicero spoke out against it, warning of tyrannical land commissioners and painting the project as selling out the people to the beneficiaries of the Sullan proscriptions. The failure of the land proposal contributed to the conspiracy&#x27;s support among the people in the coming months.

A trial that year for one Gaius Rabirius for the murder of Lucius Appuleius Saturninus in 100 BC, almost forty years earlier, was possibly a signal from Caesar to the senate against use of the &quot;senatus consultum ultimum&quot; (a declaration of emergency which gave the consuls political cover to break laws in suppressing civil unrest). Rabirius was convicted by Caesar (&quot;not an impartial judge&quot;) by means of an archaic procedure before appealing and then being acquitted by a similarly archaic loophole. A later proposal to overturn Sulla&#x27;s civil disabilities for the sons of the victims of the proscriptions also was defeated with Cicero&#x27;s help; Cicero argued that repeal would cause political upheaval. This failure &quot;drove some of the men concerned into supporting Catiline&quot; in his conspiracy.

That summer, Catiline stood again for the consulship in 63 BC; his candidacy was accepted by Cicero. Against him were three other major candidates: Decimus Junius Silanus, Lucius Licinius Murena, and Servius Sulpicius Rufus. Cicero supported Sulpicius&#x27; bid as a friend and fellow lawyer, which directly harmed Catiline&#x27;s chances, since both men were patricians and therefore were legally barred from both holding the consulship. Bribery was again rampant, after the senate moved again to pass legislation to stamp it out, Cicero and Antonius as consuls were successful in moving the &quot;lex Tullia&quot; increasing penalties and enumerating forbidden electoral practices. 

Just before the elections, Cicero alleges Catiline engaged in demagoguery and attempted to build up his bona fides with the poor and dispossessed men of Rome and Italy, including himself among their number, advocating the wholesale abolition of all existing debts ().

At the electoral &quot;comitia&quot;, Cicero presided, surrounded by a bodyguard and wearing an ostentatious cuirass, to signal his belief that Catiline posed a threat to his person and public safety. Sallust reports that Catiline promised his supporters that he would kill the rich, but this supposed promise is likely ahistorical. No contemporary source indicates that Catiline supported land reform. The &quot;comitia&quot; returned as consuls-designate Decimus Junius Silanus and Lucius Licinius Murena. After his second defeat, Catiline seems to have run out of money and must have been abandoned by his former supporters such as Crassus and Caesar.

=== Conspiracy ===
On 18 or 19 October, Crassus and two other senators visited Cicero&#x27;s house on the Oppian Hill (near the ruins of the Colosseum) and delivered to the consuls anonymous letters, warning that Catiline was planning a massacre of leading politicians, and advising them to leave the city. Cicero convened the senate and had them read aloud. A few days later, on 21 or 22 October, an ex-praetor reported news that an ex-Sullan centurion – Gaius Manlius – who had supported Catiline&#x27;s bid for the consulship had raised an army in Etruria. The senate acted immediately, usually dated to the 21st, to pass a &quot;senatus consultum ultimum&quot; directing the consuls to take whatever actions they believed necessary for state security. When news of the decree arrived to Manlius he declared an open rebellion.

Some modern scholars reject a connection between Manlius and Catiline at this early point, arguing that Manlius&#x27; rebellion may have been separate from Catiline&#x27;s alleged conspiracy and that the conspiracy only came into actual fruition when Catiline joined Manlius&#x27; rebellion when leaving Rome for exile and seeing nothing to lose. There are, however, no indications of this in the ancient sources.

Catiline&#x27;s indebtedness – if he was in fact indebted, there is little evidence one way or the other – was not the sole cause of his conspiring: &quot;wounded pride and fierce ambition&quot; played a great role in his decision-making. Many of the senatorial members of the conspiracy were men who had been ejected from the senate for immorality, corruption, or seen their careers stall out (especially in attempts to reach the consulship). The men who joined Manlius&#x27; rebellion were largely two groups: poor farmers who had been dispossessed by Sulla&#x27;s confiscations after the civil war and ruined Sullan veterans seeking more riches. Cicero, in his invectives, naturally focused on the ruined Sullan veterans, who were unpopular; but at the end, Catiline likely kept only the support of the dispossessed Etruscans who had &quot;nowhere else to go&quot;. Altogether, these men had mixed backgrounds and no &quot;single-minded purpose [can] readily be ascribed&quot; to them.

=== Flight from the city ===
While the consuls fortified central Italy, reports also filtered in of slave revolts in the south. Two generals who were waiting for their triumphs to be approved were then dispatched with men to garrison the northern approaches to Rome and southern Italy. Catiline for his part remained in Rome since the letters sent to Crassus were anonymous and thus insufficient to prove Catiline&#x27;s involvement. 

On 6 November, Catiline held a secret meeting in Rome at the house of Marcus Porcius Laeca where he planned to go to Manlius&#x27; army, for other members of the conspiracy to take charge of the nascent revolts elsewhere in Italy, for conspirators in Rome to set fires in the city, and for two specific conspirators to assassinate Cicero the next morning. Cicero exaggerates Catiline&#x27;s supposed intention to raze the city as a means to turn the urban population against him – a story further embellished in Plutarch – it is more likely that Catiline&#x27;s fires were intended only to create exploitable confusion for his army.

The next day, on 7 November, the assassins found Cicero&#x27;s house shut against them and Cicero convened the senate later that day at the Temple of Jupiter Stator reporting the threat to his life and then delivering the &quot;First Catilinarian&quot; denouncing Catiline. Catiline, who was already planning to leave the city, offered to go into exile if the senate would so decree. After Cicero refused to bring up such a motion, Catiline protested his innocence and insulted Cicero&#x27;s ancestry, calling him a &quot;squatter&quot;. He thereafter left the city, claiming that he was going into voluntary exile at Massilia &quot;to spare his country a civil war&quot;. On his departure, he sent a letter to his old friend and ally Quintus Lutatius Catulus Capitolinus, which Sallust copied into &quot;Bellum Catilinae&quot;. In the letter, Catiline defends himself as an injured party who took up the cause of the less fortunate in accordance with his patrician forebears&#x27; custom; he vehemently denies that he goes into exile due to his debts and commits his wife Orestilla to Catulus&#x27; care.

He left the city on the road to Massilia, but in Etruria, he went to a weapons cache before diverting for Faesulae where he met up with Manlius&#x27; forces. Upon his arrival, he proclaimed himself consul and adopted consular regalia. When news of this reached Rome, the senate declared Catiline and Manlius &quot;hostes&quot; (public enemies) and dispatched Antonius at the head of an army to subdue him.

=== Death ===


In late November, Antonius&#x27; forces approached from the south. He decamped from Faesulae and moved near the mountains but remained close enough to the town to be in striking distance. When Antonius&#x27; forces arrived in the vicinity of the town, he avoided battle.

Catiline&#x27;s coconspirators in Rome had been caught out by Cicero with the aid of some Gallic envoys. After a fierce senate debate, they were executed without trial on 5 December. When news of their death arrived to Catiline&#x27;s camp, much of his army melted away, leaving him with perhaps a bit more than three thousand men. Hoping to escape into Gaul, his escape from Italy was blocked when Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer – proconsul in Cisalpine Gaul – garrisoned the Apennine passes near Bononia.

Antonius kept his men relatively docile near Faesulae, but after he received reinforcements from then-quaestor Publius Sestius in the last days of December, he moved out. Catiline, for his part, seeing his escape blocked, turned south to face Antonius, perhaps believing that Antonius would not fight as hard. They met at Pistoria, modern day Pistoia. Descending from the heights, he offered battle to Antonius&#x27; army, possibly on 3 January 62 BC.

On the day of the battle, Antonius gave operational command to Marcus Petreius (Sallust claims he was stricken with gout), an experienced lieutenant, who broke through the Catilinarian centre with the praetorian cohort, forcing Catiline&#x27;s men to flight. Catiline and his diehard supporters fought bravely and were annihilated: &quot;they were desperate men who did not wish to survive their defeat&quot;.

Sallust&#x27;s account reads:
==Legacy==
In Roman literature, Catiline&#x27;s figure became often used as a byword for &quot;villainy&quot;. Politicians quickly distanced themselves from his failed revolt; others tried to discredit rivals by linking them to Catiline&#x27;s conspiracy after the fact. Cicero, who claimed for himself the credit of saving the state from Catiline&#x27;s revolt, later praised Catiline&#x27;s personal qualities in a defence speech for someone accused of being a co-conspirator: Cicero paints Catiline as a good motivator, effective general, sociable, and strong as reasons for why so many men were willing to associate with him (for Cicero&#x27;s client, however, only as a non-conspiring friend). The history of Sallust, written around the time of the Second Triumvirate, painted Catiline as a thoroughgoing disrepute who had from an early time wanted to destroy his own country and symbolised the moral decline that Sallust identified as the cause of the republic&#x27;s collapse:

Livy used the Catilinarian conspiracy as a template to fill in shaky portions of early Roman history. For example, the conspiracy of one Marcus Manlius, who rose up against the elite with the support of poor plebs, both gives a speech patterned on Cicero&#x27;s &quot;First Catilinarian&quot; and takes actions patterned on the real Catiline&#x27;s. Virgil, in the &quot;Aeneid&quot; (written during the reign of Augustus), depicts Catiline as being tortured in the underworld by the Furies.

Into the imperial period, Catiline&#x27;s name was used as a derogatory nickname of unpopular ruling emperors. However, his reputation as an advocate for the dispossessed rural plebs seemed to carry to some degree in rural parts of northern Italy at least until the mediaeval period. In Tuscany, a mediaeval tradition had Catiline survive the battle and live out his life as a local hero; another version gives him a son, Uberto, who eventually spawns the Uberti dynasty in Florence.

While history has often viewed Catiline through the lenses of his enemies – especially in the vein of Cicero&#x27;s four &quot;Catilinarians&quot; – some modern historians have reassessed Catiline. The first major attempt was Edward Spencer Beesly in 1878, who argued against the then-prevailing view that Catiline was &quot;a demon breathing murder, rapine, and conflagration, with bloodshot eyes and pallid face, luring on weak and depraved young men to the damnation prepared for himself&quot;. Beesly&#x27;s defences have been followed more recently by others, such as and . Waters&#x27; admittedly &quot;largely hypothetical&quot; narrative depicts the Catilinarian conspiracy largely as a Ciceronean fiction framing Catiline and the &quot;co-conspirators&quot; for Cicero&#x27;s own political advancement. Seager&#x27;s defence does not go so far, but instead argues the conspiracy was purposefully incited by Cicero and the senate to purge Italy of men who might join with Pompey if he were to follow in Sulla&#x27;s footsteps on his then-imminent return from the Third Mithridatic War.

Other classicists have argued that Catiline was a precursor of Caesar or that he rebelled to oppose senatorial corruption and incompetence. But, largely, such defences are highly speculative, as the literary evidence that survives is overwhelmingly Ciceronean and biased against Catiline.

==Cultural depictions==

* At least two major dramatists have written tragedies about Catiline: Ben Jonson, the English Jacobean playwright, wrote &quot;Catiline His Conspiracy&quot; in 1611, depicting Catiline as &quot;a sadistic anti-hero&quot;; &quot;Catiline&quot; was the first play by the Norwegian &quot;father of modern drama&quot; Henrik Ibsen, written in the aftermath of the 1848 revolutions and depicting Catiline as hero struggling against his world&#x27;s corruption.
* Antonio Salieri wrote an opera tragicomica in two acts on the subject of the Catilinarian conspiracy entitled &quot;Catilina&quot; to a libretto by Giambattista Casti in 1792. The work was left unperformed until 1994 due to its political implications during the French Revolution. Here, serious drama and politics were blended with high and low comedy: the plot centered on a love affair between Catiline and a daughter of Cicero as well as the historic political situation.
* Steven Saylor&#x27;s 1993 novel &quot;Catilina&#x27;s Riddle&quot; revolves around the intrigue between Catiline and Cicero in 63 BC. Catiline also plays a major character in Steven Saylor&#x27;s short story &quot;The House of the Vestals&quot;.
* Catiline&#x27;s conspiracy and Cicero&#x27;s consular actions figure prominently in the novel &quot;Caesar&#x27;s Women&quot; by Colleen McCullough as a part of her &quot;Masters of Rome&quot; series.
* SPQR II: &quot;The Catiline Conspiracy&quot;, by John Maddox Roberts, discusses Catiline&#x27;s conspiracy.
* Robert Harris&#x27; 2006 book &quot;Imperium&quot;, based on Cicero&#x27;s letters, covers the developing career of Cicero with many references to his increasing interactions with Catiline. The sequel, &quot;Lustrum&quot; (issued in the United States as &quot;Conspirata&quot;), deals with the five years surrounding the Catilinarian conspiracy.
* &quot;The Roman Traitor or the Days of Cicero, Cato and Catiline: A True Tale of the Republic&quot; by Henry William Herbert originally published in 1853 in two volumes.
* &quot;A Pillar of Iron&quot; by Taylor Caldwell, published in 1965, tells of the life of Cicero, especially in relation to Catiline and his conspiracy.
* &quot;A Slave Of Catiline&quot; is a book by Paul Anderson that tells of a slave who helps and then hinders Catiline&#x27;s conspiracy.
* A novel on the conspiracy, &quot;The Fall of the Republic&quot;, written by Scott Savitz, was published in September 2020.
* Bertolt Brecht&#x27;s unfinished novel &quot;The Business Affairs of Mr Julius Caesar&quot; provides a fictionalised account of the Catilinarian conspiracy in which Caesar and Crassus are alleged to be involved for financial gain.
* Adam Driver portrays Cesar Catilina, a character from Francis Ford Coppola&#x27;s 2024 sci-fi epic film &quot;Megalopolis&quot;, which is a fictionalised interpretation of the Catiline Conspiracy set in an imagined modern futuristic America. Driver stars opposite Giancarlo Esposito, who portrays a character named Mayor Franklyn Cicero. In the film, Driver&#x27;s character is pitted against Esposito&#x27;s character in a rivalry and battle for political control of New Rome. The film also centers around Cesar Catilina&#x27;s love affair with Mayor Cicero&#x27;s daughter, Julia Cicero played by Nathalie Emmanuel.

==See also==
* Catilinarian conspiracy

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Modern sources ===
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


=== Ancient sources ===
* 


== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q75826" start="0" end="23" title="Catiline" label="Lucius Sergius Catilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q75826" start="64" end="72" title="Catiline" label="Catiline"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="83" end="88" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051202" start="143" end="166" title="Catilinarian conspiracy" label="Catilinarian conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483783" start="278" end="283" title="Sulla" label="Sulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q521868" start="291" end="313" title="Sulla&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="Sulla&amp;#x27;s civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="436" end="443" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294739" start="456" end="464" title="List of Roman governors of Africa" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="468" end="474" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="542" end="552" title="consulship" label="consulship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924071" start="668" end="693" title="Sulla&amp;#x27;s proscription" label="Sulla&amp;#x27;s proscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915100" start="775" end="789" title="Roman politics" label="Roman politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="949" end="954" title="Plebeians" label="plebs"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="983" end="991" title="Roman Senate" label="senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q175121" start="1029" end="1036" title="Marcus Licinius Crassus" label="Crassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="1099" end="1106" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="1112" end="1118" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q13376" start="1373" end="1380" title="Pistoia" label="Pistoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862056" start="1414" end="1432" title="Battle of Pistoria" label="Battle of Pistoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170" start="1604" end="1611" title="Sallust" label="Sallust"/>
<link wikidata="Q776615" start="1655" end="1671" title="Bellum Catilinae" label="Bellum Catilinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="1715" end="1729" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="1960" end="1969" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509456" start="1982" end="1993" title="Sergia gens" label="gens Sergia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526637" start="2020" end="2029" title="Sergestus" label="Sergestus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001045" start="2104" end="2111" title="nobiles" label="nobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q673808" start="2341" end="2359" title="consular tribunes" label="consular tribunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="2727" end="2738" title="Aristocracy (class)" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="2773" end="2780" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656282" start="2837" end="2857" title="Marcus Sergius Silus" label="Marcus Sergius Silus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="2920" end="2936" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q677316" start="2971" end="2981" title="Social War (91–87 BC)" label="Social War"/>
<link wikidata="Q336538" start="3005" end="3027" title="Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo" label="Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="3076" end="3082" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="3089" end="3095" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q177975" start="3533" end="3545" title="Gaius Marius" label="Gaius Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q521868" start="3568" end="3590" title="Sulla&amp;#x27;s civil war" label="Sulla&amp;#x27;s civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q463027" start="3901" end="3925" title="Quintus Lutatius Catulus Capitolinus" label="Quintus Lutatius Catulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q378407" start="3983" end="4008" title="Marcus Marius Gratidianus" label="Marcus Marius Gratidianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q352035" start="4053" end="4073" title="Quintus Lutatius Catulus" label="Catulus&amp;#x27; father"/>
<link wikidata="Q303001" start="4291" end="4300" title="Janiculum" label="Janiculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="4485" end="4489" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q379991" start="4491" end="4507" title="Valerius Maximus" label="Valerius Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188646" start="4509" end="4514" title="Lucan" label="Lucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q316483" start="4520" end="4526" title="Works attributed to Florus" label="Florus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="5107" end="5120" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q311456" start="5239" end="5246" title="Orosius" label="Orosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q980809" start="5774" end="5792" title="T. R. S. Broughton" label="T. R. S. Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q544988" start="6032" end="6049" title="Aurelia Orestilla" label="Aurelia Orestilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881568" start="6084" end="6107" title="Gnaeus Aufidius Orestes" label="Gnaeus Aufidius Orestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8563343" start="7742" end="7771" title="First Catilinarian conspiracy" label="First Catilinarian conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="7807" end="7816" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q313664" start="8384" end="8407" title="Publius Clodius Pulcher" label="Publius Clodius Pulcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="9400" end="9406" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q435213" start="9411" end="9433" title="Gaius Antonius Hybrida" label="Gaius Antonius Hybrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="9959" end="9978" title="Julius Caesar" label="Gaius Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q193506" start="10063" end="10079" title="Cato the Younger" label="Cato the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="10893" end="10901" title="Roman province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="10905" end="10914" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="11353" end="11359" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351021" start="11889" end="11903" title="Gaius Rabirius (senator)" label="Gaius Rabirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q355544" start="11922" end="11949" title="Lucius Appuleius Saturninus" label="Lucius Appuleius Saturninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q522482" start="12062" end="12087" title="senatus consultum ultimum" label="senatus consultum ultimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q518928" start="12844" end="12866" title="Decimus Junius Silanus (consul)" label="Decimus Junius Silanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q708570" start="12868" end="12890" title="Lucius Licinius Murena (consul 62 BC)" label="Lucius Licinius Murena"/>
<link wikidata="Q435163" start="12896" end="12919" title="Servius Sulpicius Rufus" label="Servius Sulpicius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="13486" end="13496" title="bona fides" label="bona fides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114821" start="13674" end="13681" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; assemblies of the Roman Republic" label="comitia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182731" start="13760" end="13767" title="cuirass" label="cuirass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036262" start="14413" end="14424" title="Oppian Hill" label="Oppian Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="14448" end="14457" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q522482" start="14940" end="14965" title="senatus consultum ultimum" label="senatus consultum ultimum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579576" start="17753" end="17777" title="Temple of Jupiter Stator (3rd century BC)" label="Temple of Jupiter Stator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566850" start="18231" end="18239" title="Massalia" label="Massilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q463027" start="18348" end="18384" title="Quintus Lutatius Catulus Capitolinus" label="Quintus Lutatius Catulus Capitolinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82670" start="18826" end="18834" title="Faesulae" label="Faesulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q112061841" start="19028" end="19046" title="Hostis" label="&amp;quot;hostes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q82670" start="19227" end="19235" title="Faesulae" label="Faesulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q505341" start="19814" end="19846" title="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer" label="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer"/>
<link wikidata="Q199728" start="19862" end="19876" title="Cisalpine Gaul" label="Cisalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="19915" end="19922" title="Bologna" label="Bononia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241419" start="20036" end="20051" title="Publius Sestius" label="Publius Sestius"/>
<link wikidata="Q13376" start="20268" end="20275" title="Pistoia" label="Pistoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212079" start="21573" end="21591" title="Second Triumvirate" label="Second Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="22154" end="22160" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="22288" end="22294" title="Erinyes" label="Furies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="22771" end="22779" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764124" start="23853" end="23874" title="Third Mithridatic War" label="Third Mithridatic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="24263" end="24273" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053538" start="24320" end="24343" title="Catiline His Conspiracy" label="Catiline His Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774375" start="24421" end="24429" title="Catiline (play)" label="Catiline"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="24507" end="24519" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="24553" end="24569" title="1848 revolutions" label="1848 revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q51088" start="24651" end="24666" title="Antonio Salieri" label="Antonio Salieri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24767" end="24775" title="Catilina (opera)" label="Catilina"/>
<link wikidata="Q251926" start="24799" end="24817" title="Giambattista Casti" label="Giambattista Casti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="24913" end="24930" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q918553" start="25128" end="25141" title="Steven Saylor" label="Steven Saylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940472" start="25166" end="25188" title="Catilina&amp;#x27;s Riddle" label="Catilina&amp;#x27;s Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828682" start="25476" end="25495" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Women" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q228801" start="25505" end="25523" title="Colleen McCullough" label="Colleen McCullough"/>
<link wikidata="Q685165" start="25547" end="25562" title="Masters of Rome" label="Masters of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392639" start="25579" end="25623" title="SPQR series" label="SPQR II: &amp;quot;The Catiline Conspiracy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q320664" start="25628" end="25647" title="John Maddox Roberts" label="John Maddox Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q313981" start="25689" end="25702" title="Robert Harris (novelist)" label="Robert Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660324" start="25725" end="25733" title="Imperium (Harris novel)" label="Imperium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="25750" end="25756" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q378975" start="25897" end="25904" title="Lustrum (novel)" label="Lustrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730228" start="26140" end="26161" title="Henry William Herbert" label="Henry William Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q445429" start="26241" end="26256" title="Taylor Caldwell" label="Taylor Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152029" start="26408" end="26421" title="Paul Lewis Anderson" label="Paul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="26626" end="26647" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q175121" start="26802" end="26809" title="Marcus Licinius Crassus" label="Crassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678990" start="26859" end="26870" title="Adam Driver" label="Adam Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q115175910" start="26969" end="26980" title="Megalopolis (film)" label="Megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051202" start="27035" end="27054" title="Catiline Conspiracy" label="Catiline Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q726142" start="27123" end="27141" title="Giancarlo Esposito" label="Giancarlo Esposito"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968794" start="27458" end="27475" title="Nathalie Emmanuel" label="Nathalie Emmanuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051202" start="27493" end="27516" title="Catilinarian conspiracy" label="Catilinarian conspiracy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46608" wikidata="Q109236" url="?curid=46608" title="Caesar (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Julius Caesar]] (100–44 BC) was a Roman general and dictator.

Caesar or Cæsar may also refer to:
==Places==
* Caesar, Zimbabwe
* Caesar Creek State Park, in southwestern Ohio

==People==
* Caesar (given name)
* Caesar (surname)
* Caesar (title), a title used by Roman and Byzantine emperors, and also at times by Ottoman emperors, derived from the dictator&#x27;s name
** Augustus (63 BC – 14 AD), adoptive son of the dictator and first Roman emperor
* Other members of the Julii Caesares, the family from which the dictator came
** Gaius Julius Caesar (proconsul) (140–85 BC), father of the dictator
** Claudius, fourth Roman emperor, first bearer of the name &quot;Claudius Caesar&quot;
** Nero, fifth Roman emperor, second bearer of the name &quot;Claudius Caesar&quot;
* Caesar of Dyrrhachium, 1st-century bishop
* Caesar (slave) (), Subject of an early photograph 
* Bernhard Caesar Einstein (1930–2008), Swiss-American physicist and grandson of Albert Einstein
* Caesar the Geezer (born 1958), British radio personality

==Art and entertainment==

===Fictional characters===
* Caesar (&quot;Planet of the Apes&quot;)
* Caesar (&quot;Xena&quot;), in &quot;Xena: Warrior Princess&quot;
* Caesar, the leader of Caesar&#x27;s Legion in &quot;Fallout&quot;
* King Caesar, a monster in the &quot;Godzilla&quot; series
* Malik Caesar, in the video game &quot;Tales of Graces&quot;
* Caesar Flickerman, in &quot;The Hunger Games&quot;
* Caesar Salazar, in Cartoon Network&#x27;s &quot;Generator Rex&quot;
* Caesar Anthonio Zeppeli, in the manga &quot;Jojo&#x27;s Bizarre Adventure: Battle Tendency&quot;

===Literature===
* &quot;Caesar&quot; (McCullough novel), a 1998 novel by Colleen McCullough
* &quot;Caesar&quot; (Massie novel), a 1993 novel by Allan Massie
* &quot;Caesar, Life of a Colossus&quot;, a 2006 biography of Julius Caesar by Adrian Goldsworthy

===Music===
* Caesar (band), a Dutch indie rock band
* Caesars (band), a Swedish garage rock band
* &quot;Caesar&quot; (song), a 2010 song by I Blame Coco
* &quot;Caesar&quot;, a 1993 song by Iggy Pop from &quot;American Caesar&quot;

===Other uses in art and entertainment===
* &quot;Caesar&quot; (Mercury Theatre), 1937 stage production of Orson Welles&#x27;s Mercury Theatre
* &quot;Caesar&quot; (board game), a 1977 board wargame that simulates the Battle of Alesia
* &quot;Caesar&quot; (video game), a 1992 city-building computer game
* &quot;Caesar!&quot;, a British series of radio plays by Mike Walker
* &quot;The Caesars&quot; (TV series), a 1968 British television series
*Dr.Caesar Salazar, supporting character of 2010 Cartoon Network show&quot;Generator Rex&quot;, in which he is the title character&#x27;s long-lost elder brother

==Brands and enterprises==
* Caesar Film, an Italian film company of the silent era
* Caesars Entertainment (2020), a hotel and casino operator, among whose properties include:
** Caesars Atlantic City, New Jersey, US
** Caesars Palace, Las Vegas, Nevada, US
** Caesars Southern Indiana, Elizabeth, Indiana, US
** Caesars Tahoe, now MontBleu, Stateline, Nevada, US
** Caesars Windsor, Ontario, Canada

==Food and drinks==
* Caesar (cocktail), a Canadian cocktail
* Caesar salad
*Caesar&#x27;s, Tijuana restaurant and birthplace of the eponymous salad
* Little Caesars, a pizza chain

==Military==
* CAESAR self-propelled howitzer, a French artillery gun
* HMS &quot;Caesar&quot;, several ships of the Royal Navy
* Operation Caesar, a German World War II mission

==Science and technology==
* CAESAR (spacecraft), a proposed NASA sample-return mission to comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko
* Caesar cipher, an encryption technique
* Caesarean section (often simply called &quot;a caesar&quot;), surgically assisted birth procedure
* Center of Advanced European Studies and Research
* Clean And Environmentally Safe Advanced Reactor, a nuclear reactor design
* Committee for the Scientific Examination of Religion
* Ctgf/hcs24 CAESAR, a cis-acting RNA element
* Euroradar CAPTOR, a radar system

==Other uses==
* Caesar (dog), a fox terrier owned by King Edward VII
* &quot;Caesar&quot; (ship), three merchant ships and a privateer
* Caesar cut, a hairstyle
* Nottingham Caesars, an American football team

==See also==

*List of things named after Julius Caesar
*
*
* Given name
** Cesar (disambiguation)
** Cesare (disambiguation)
** Qaisar
* Title
** Kaiser (disambiguation)
** Kayser (disambiguation)
** Keiser (disambiguation)
** Czar (disambiguation)
** Tsar (disambiguation)
** Kay (title)
* Caesarea (disambiguation)
* Julius Caesar (disambiguation)
** Giulio Cesare (disambiguation)
** Julio Cesar (disambiguation)
* Little Caesar (disambiguation)
* Seasar, open source application framework</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q109236" start="0" end="17" title="Caesar (disambiguation)" label="[[Julius Caesar]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q109236" start="65" end="71" title="Caesar (disambiguation)" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q109236" start="75" end="80" title="Caesar (disambiguation)" label="Cæsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016959" start="113" end="129" title="Caesar, Zimbabwe" label="Caesar, Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016979" start="132" end="155" title="Caesar Creek State Park" label="Caesar Creek State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q123651" start="192" end="211" title="Caesar (given name)" label="Caesar (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14873084" start="214" end="230" title="Caesar (surname)" label="Caesar (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="233" end="247" title="Caesar (title)" label="Caesar (title)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="375" end="383" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268376" start="477" end="491" title="Julii Caesares" label="Julii Caesares"/>
<link wikidata="Q314710" start="536" end="567" title="Gaius Julius Caesar (proconsul)" label="Gaius Julius Caesar (proconsul)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="607" end="615" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="695" end="699" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017018" start="778" end="799" title="Caesar of Dyrrhachium" label="Caesar of Dyrrhachium"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858905" start="822" end="836" title="Caesar (slave)" label="Caesar (slave)"/>
<link wikidata="Q824855" start="875" end="899" title="Bernhard Caesar Einstein" label="Bernhard Caesar Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017020" start="972" end="989" title="Caesar the Geezer" label="Caesar the Geezer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010400" start="1086" end="1125" title="Caesar (Planet of the Apes)" label="Caesar (&amp;quot;Planet of the Apes&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354729" start="1128" end="1153" title="Caesar (Xena)" label="Caesar (&amp;quot;Xena&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125507102" start="1247" end="1254" title="Fallout (franchise)" label="Fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q251335" start="1263" end="1274" title="King Caesar" label="King Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202172" start="1361" end="1376" title="Tales of Graces" label="Tales of Graces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412141" start="1385" end="1402" title="Caesar Flickerman" label="Caesar Flickerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q910185" start="1486" end="1499" title="Generator Rex" label="Generator Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q696918" start="1552" end="1581" title="Jojo&amp;#x27;s Bizarre Adventure" label="Jojo&amp;#x27;s Bizarre Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q763781" start="1583" end="1598" title="Battle Tendency" label="Battle Tendency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3665311" start="1625" end="1662" title="Caesar (McCullough novel)" label="&amp;quot;Caesar&amp;quot; (McCullough novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875544" start="1701" end="1734" title="Caesar (Massie novel)" label="&amp;quot;Caesar&amp;quot; (Massie novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963317" start="1773" end="1799" title="Caesar, Life of a Colossus" label="Caesar, Life of a Colossus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751335" start="1878" end="1891" title="Caesar (band)" label="Caesar (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q740696" start="1919" end="1933" title="Caesars (band)" label="Caesars (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q547255" start="1964" end="1989" title="Caesar (song)" label="&amp;quot;Caesar&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950802" start="2076" end="2091" title="American Caesar (album)" label="American Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182893" start="2143" end="2179" title="Caesar (Mercury Theatre)" label="&amp;quot;Caesar&amp;quot; (Mercury Theatre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016964" start="2244" end="2275" title="Caesar (board game)" label="&amp;quot;Caesar&amp;quot; (board game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025416" start="2336" end="2367" title="Caesar (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Caesar&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016945" start="2412" end="2419" title="Caesar!" label="Caesar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720918" start="2476" end="2511" title="The Caesars (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Caesars&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q910185" start="2621" end="2634" title="Generator Rex" label="Generator Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649554" start="2738" end="2749" title="Caesar Film" label="Caesar Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636524" start="2795" end="2823" title="Caesars Entertainment (2020)" label="Caesars Entertainment (2020)"/>
<link wikidata="Q971020" start="2889" end="2910" title="Caesars Atlantic City" label="Caesars Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q569978" start="2930" end="2944" title="Caesars Palace" label="Caesars Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688431" start="2971" end="2995" title="Caesars Southern Indiana" label="Caesars Southern Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903028" start="3042" end="3050" title="MontBleu" label="MontBleu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025472" start="3077" end="3092" title="Caesars Windsor" label="Caesars Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29288" start="3133" end="3150" title="Caesar (cocktail)" label="Caesar (cocktail)"/>
<link wikidata="Q275508" start="3174" end="3186" title="Caesar salad" label="Caesar salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q65079269" start="3188" end="3201" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393809" start="3262" end="3276" title="Little Caesars" label="Little Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q262670" start="3308" end="3338" title="CAESAR self-propelled howitzer" label="CAESAR self-propelled howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124993" start="3365" end="3387" title="HMS Caesar" label="HMS &amp;quot;Caesar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975601" start="3423" end="3439" title="Operation Caesar" label="Operation Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46360276" start="3501" end="3520" title="CAESAR (spacecraft)" label="CAESAR (spacecraft)"/>
<link wikidata="Q180943" start="3597" end="3610" title="Caesar cipher" label="Caesar cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q228036" start="3638" end="3655" title="Caesarean section" label="Caesarean section"/>
<link wikidata="Q111675906" start="3738" end="3786" title="Center of Advanced European Studies and Research" label="Center of Advanced European Studies and Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130464" start="3789" end="3836" title="Clean And Environmentally Safe Advanced Reactor" label="Clean And Environmentally Safe Advanced Reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152988" start="3865" end="3917" title="Committee for the Scientific Examination of Religion" label="Committee for the Scientific Examination of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953126" start="3920" end="3937" title="Ctgf/hcs24 CAESAR" label="Ctgf/hcs24 CAESAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130362" start="3966" end="3982" title="Euroradar CAPTOR" label="Euroradar CAPTOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016963" start="4017" end="4029" title="Caesar (dog)" label="Caesar (dog)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48818031" start="4072" end="4097" title="Caesar (ship)" label="&amp;quot;Caesar&amp;quot; (ship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3665313" start="4138" end="4148" title="Caesar cut" label="Caesar cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015629" start="4164" end="4182" title="Nottingham Caesars" label="Nottingham Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q131698549" start="4226" end="4266" title="List of things named after Julius Caesar" label="List of things named after Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056691" start="4287" end="4309" title="Cesar (disambiguation)" label="Cesar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21481563" start="4313" end="4336" title="Cesare (disambiguation)" label="Cesare (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265867" start="4340" end="4346" title="Qaisar" label="Qaisar"/>
<link wikidata="Q122792" start="4358" end="4381" title="Kaiser (disambiguation)" label="Kaiser (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737453" start="4385" end="4408" title="Kayser (disambiguation)" label="Kayser (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q342842" start="4412" end="4435" title="Keiser (disambiguation)" label="Keiser (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q446216" start="4439" end="4460" title="Czar (disambiguation)" label="Czar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q446216" start="4464" end="4485" title="Tsar (disambiguation)" label="Tsar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q102328410" start="4489" end="4500" title="Kay (title)" label="Kay (title)"/>
<link wikidata="Q223962" start="4503" end="4528" title="Caesarea (disambiguation)" label="Caesarea (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q242174" start="4531" end="4561" title="Julius Caesar (disambiguation)" label="Julius Caesar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528014" start="4565" end="4595" title="Giulio Cesare (disambiguation)" label="Giulio Cesare (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191193" start="4599" end="4627" title="Julio Cesar (disambiguation)" label="Julio Cesar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493918" start="4630" end="4660" title="Little Caesar (disambiguation)" label="Little Caesar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441809" start="4663" end="4669" title="Seasar" label="Seasar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46618" wikidata="Q509980" url="?curid=46618" title="Shovelware">
<text>Shovelware is a type of video game or software bundle known more for the quantity of what is included than for its quality or usefulness.

The metaphor implies that the creators showed little care for the quality of the original software, as if the new compilation or version had been created by indiscriminately adding titles &quot;by the shovel&quot; in the same way someone would shovel bulk material into a pile. The term &quot;shovelware&quot; is coined by semantic analogy to phrases like shareware and freeware, which describe methods of software distribution. It first appeared in the early 1990s when large amounts of shareware demo programs were copied onto CD-ROMs and advertised in magazines or sold at computer flea markets.

==Shovelware CD-ROMs==
&quot;Computer Gaming World&quot; wrote in 1990 that for &quot;those who do not wish to wait&quot; for software that used the new CD-ROM format, The Software Toolworks and Access Software planned to release &quot;game packs of several classic titles&quot;. By 1993 the magazine referred to software repackaged on CD-ROM as &quot;shovelware&quot;, describing one collection from Access as having a &quot;rather dusty menu&quot; and another from The Software Toolworks (&quot;the reigning king of software repackaging efforts&quot;) as including games that were &quot;mostly mediocre even in their prime&quot;; the one exception, &quot;Chessmaster 2000&quot;, used &quot;stunning CGA graphics&quot;. In 1994 the magazine described shovelware as &quot;old and/or weak programs shoveled onto a CD to turn a quick buck&quot;.

The capacity of a CD-ROM was 450–700 times that of the floppy disk, and 6–16 times larger than the hard disks with which personal computers were commonly outfitted in 1990. This outsized capacity meant that very few users would install the discs&#x27; entire contents, encouraging producers to fill them by including as much existing content as possible, often without regard to the quality of the material. Advertising the number of titles on the disc often took precedence over the quality of the content. Software reviewers, displeased with huge collections of inconsistent quality, dubbed this practice &quot;shovelware&quot; in the early 1990s. Additionally, some CD-ROM computer games had software that did not fill the disc to capacity, which enabled game companies to bundle demo versions of other products on the same disc.

The prevalence of shovelware has decreased due to the practice of downloading individual programs from a crowdsourced or curated app store becoming the predominant mode of software distribution. It continues in some cases with bundled or pre-installed software, where many extra programs of dubious quality and functionality are included with a piece of hardware.

==Shovelware video games==

Low-budget, poor-quality video games, released in the hopes of being purchased by unsuspecting customers, are often referred to as &quot;shovelware&quot;. This can lead to discoverability issues when a platform has no type of quality control. 

Some developers and publishers have become well-known as creators of shovelware. Blast! Entertainment, a defunct video game developer and publisher, was known for releasing licensed shovelware games based on movies, television shows and books such as &quot;An American Tail&quot;, &quot;Beverly Hills Cop&quot;, &quot;Jumanji&quot;, and &quot;Lassie,&quot; the majority of which received negative reception. Another defunct European publisher, Phoenix Games, was known for its line of value-priced titles for the PlayStation 2, Wii, DS, and PC. A number of their in-house games are adaptations of low-budget animated mockbusters, which largely function as interactive &quot;activity centre&quot; games with minimal actual gameplay. Games made by other studios, including Mere Mortals, but published by Phoenix, have a similarly poor reputation.

The Nintendo Wii became known for large amounts of shovelware, including ports of PlayStation 2 games which had previously only been released in Europe. Data Design Interactive became known for creating shovelware for the Wii. Their games &quot;Ninjabread Man&quot;, &quot;Anubis II&quot;, &quot;Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll Adventures&quot;, and &quot;Myth Makers: Trixie in Toyland&quot; all used the exact same gameplay and level layouts, but changed the art and character design to make them appear to be unique properties. The eShop on Nintendo&#x27;s later console, the Nintendo Switch, has also become notorious for featuring an abundance of low-quality games and software. 

Asset flips are a subset of shovelware that largely or entirely use pre-made assets in order to release games en masse. Called fake games by Valve Corporation, 173 were removed from Steam in one 2017 purge that included several sock puppets of Silicon Echo Studios.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* Archive of CD-ROM compilations at Textfiles.com
* Alistair B. Fraser on Academic Shovelware
* Wired: On Wii Shovelware
* PC World: Make your new PC hassle free</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q509980" start="0" end="10" title="Shovelware" label="Shovelware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020767" start="38" end="53" title="Bundled software" label="software bundle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185534" start="495" end="504" title="shareware" label="shareware"/>
<link wikidata="Q178285" start="509" end="517" title="freeware" label="freeware"/>
<link wikidata="Q185534" start="627" end="636" title="shareware" label="shareware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755420" start="637" end="641" title="Game demo" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q707182" start="768" end="789" title="Computer Gaming World" label="Computer Gaming World"/>
<link wikidata="Q29576806" start="907" end="929" title="The Software Toolworks" label="The Software Toolworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425540" start="934" end="949" title="Access Software" label="Access Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q17709318" start="1396" end="1412" title="Chessmaster 2000" label="Chessmaster 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q725893" start="1440" end="1452" title="CGA graphics" label="CGA graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="1639" end="1650" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="2523" end="2535" title="crowdsourced" label="crowdsourced"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814081" start="2547" end="2556" title="app store" label="app store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229611" start="2590" end="2611" title="software distribution" label="software distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020767" start="2645" end="2652" title="bundled software" label="bundled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259352" start="2656" end="2678" title="pre-installed software" label="pre-installed software"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009281" start="2983" end="2998" title="discoverability" label="discoverability"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3137" end="3157" title="Mastertronic_Group#Blast!_Entertainment" label="Blast! Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="3229" end="3237" title="Intellectual_property" label="licensed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3313" end="3329" title="An_American_Tail_(franchise)#Video_games" label="An American Tail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3343" end="3360" title="Beverly_Hills_Cop_(franchise)#Video_games" label="Beverly Hills Cop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3374" end="3381" title="Jumanji#Games" label="Jumanji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3399" end="3405" title="Lassie_(2005_film)#Video_game" label="Lassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="3569" end="3582" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="3584" end="3587" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="3589" end="3591" title="Nintendo DS" label="DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941707" start="3673" end="3684" title="Mockbuster" label="mockbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q19463265" start="3827" end="3839" title="Mere Mortals" label="Mere Mortals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="3915" end="3918" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="3984" end="3997" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038967" start="4147" end="4161" title="Ninjabread Man" label="Ninjabread Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085042" start="4175" end="4184" title="Anubis II" label="Anubis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070866" start="4429" end="4434" title="Nintendo eShop" label="eShop"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="4473" end="4488" title="Nintendo Switch" label="Nintendo Switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880818" start="4580" end="4590" title="Asset flip" label="Asset flip"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="4721" end="4738" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q337535" start="4762" end="4767" title="Steam (service)" label="Steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708449" start="4940" end="4953" title="Textfiles.com" label="Textfiles.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46620" wikidata="Q40190" url="?curid=46620" title="Clark County">
<text>Clark County may refer to:

*Clark County, Arkansas
*Clark County, Idaho
*Clark County, Illinois
*Clark County, Indiana
*Clark County, Kansas
*Clark County, Kentucky
*Clark County, Missouri
*Clark County, Nevada, containing Las Vegas
*Clark County, Ohio
*Clark County, South Dakota
*Clark County, Washington
*Clark County, Wisconsin

==See also==
*Clarke County (disambiguation)
*Lewis and Clark County, Montana</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40190" start="0" end="12" title="Clark County" label="Clark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q61200" start="29" end="51" title="Clark County, Arkansas" label="Clark County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156448" start="53" end="72" title="Clark County, Idaho" label="Clark County, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q110532" start="74" end="96" title="Clark County, Illinois" label="Clark County, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q504441" start="98" end="119" title="Clark County, Indiana" label="Clark County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q376755" start="121" end="141" title="Clark County, Kansas" label="Clark County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q486048" start="143" end="165" title="Clark County, Kentucky" label="Clark County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q182845" start="167" end="189" title="Clark County, Missouri" label="Clark County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q108403" start="191" end="211" title="Clark County, Nevada" label="Clark County, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q485558" start="235" end="253" title="Clark County, Ohio" label="Clark County, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q489083" start="255" end="281" title="Clark County, South Dakota" label="Clark County, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q156287" start="283" end="307" title="Clark County, Washington" label="Clark County, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q494958" start="309" end="332" title="Clark County, Wisconsin" label="Clark County, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q248808" start="348" end="378" title="Clarke County (disambiguation)" label="Clarke County (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q496656" start="380" end="411" title="Lewis and Clark County, Montana" label="Lewis and Clark County, Montana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46621" wikidata="Q217199" url="?curid=46621" title="Soundtrack">
<text>A soundtrack is a recorded audio signal accompanying and synchronised to the images of a book, drama, motion picture, radio program, television program, or video game; colloquially, a commercially released soundtrack album of music as featured in the soundtrack of a film, video, or television presentation; or the physical area of a film that contains the synchronised recorded sound.

In movie industry terminology usage, a sound track is an audio recording created or used in film production or post-production. Initially, the dialogue, sound effects, and music in a film each has its own separate track, and these are mixed together to make what is called the &quot;composite track,&quot; which is heard in the film. A &quot;dubbing track&quot; is often later created when films are dubbed into another language. This is also known as an M&amp;E (music and effects) track. M&amp;E tracks contain all sound elements minus dialogue, which is then supplied by the foreign distributor in the native language of its territory.

Current dictionary entries for soundtrack document soundtrack as a noun, and as a verb. An early attempt at popularizing the term &quot;sound track&quot; was printed in the magazine &quot;Photoplay&quot; in 1929. A 1992 technical dictionary entry in the &quot;Academic Press Dictionary of Science and Technology&quot; does not distinguish between the form sound track and soundtrack.

The contraction &quot;soundtrack&quot; came into public consciousness with the advent of so-called &quot;soundtrack albums&quot; in the late 1940s. First conceived by movie companies as a promotional gimmick for new films, these commercially available recordings were labeled and advertised as &quot;music from the original motion picture &quot;soundtrack&quot;&quot;, or &quot;music from and inspired by the motion picture.&quot; These phrases were soon shortened to just &quot;original motion picture &quot;soundtrack&quot;.&quot; More accurately, such recordings are made from a film&#x27;s &quot;music track,&quot; because they usually consist of isolated music from a film, not the composite (sound) track with dialogue and sound effects.

The term original soundtrack (OST), often used for titles of albums of soundtrack music, is sometimes also used to differentiate the original music heard and recorded versus a rerecording or cover version.

==Types of recordings==
Types of soundtrack recordings include:
# Musical film soundtracks are for the film versions of musical theatre; they concentrate primarily on the songs. (Examples: &quot;Grease&quot;, &quot;Evita&quot;)
# Film scores showcase the primarily instrumental musical themes and background music from movies. (Examples: &quot;Blade Runner&quot;, &quot;Star Wars series&quot;)
# For movies that contain both orchestral film scores and pop songs, both types of music. (Examples: &quot;Shrek&quot; series, &quot;Back to the Future&quot; series)
# Albums of popular songs heard in whole or part in the background of non-musical movies. (Examples: &quot;Top Gun&quot;, &quot;The Bodyguard&quot;)
# Video game soundtracks are often released after a game&#x27;s release, usually consisting of the theme and background music from the game&#x27;s levels, menus, title screens, promo material (such as entire songs of which only segments were used in the game), cut-screens and occasionally sound-effects used in the game. (Examples: &quot;Final Fantasy VII&quot;, &quot;Red Dead Redemption 2&quot;)
# Albums which contain both music and dialogue from the film. (Examples: &quot;Reservoir Dogs&quot;, &quot;A Star Is Born&quot;)

The soundtrack to the 1937 Walt Disney animated film &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot; was the first commercially issued film soundtrack. It was released by RCA Victor Records on multiple 78 RPM discs in January 1938 as &quot;Songs from Walt Disney&#x27;s Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (with the Same Characters and Sound Effects as in the Film of That Title)&quot; and has since seen numerous expansions and reissues.

The first live-action musical film to have a commercially issued soundtrack album was MGM&#x27;s 1946 film biography of &quot;Show Boat&quot; composer Jerome Kern, &quot;Till the Clouds Roll By&quot;. The album was originally issued as a set of four 10-inch 78-rpm records. Only eight selections from the film were included in this first edition of the album. In order to fit the songs onto the record sides the musical material needed editing and manipulation. This was before tape existed, so the record producer needed to copy segments from the playback discs used on set, then copy and re-copy them from one disc to another adding transitions and cross-fades until the final master was created. Needless to say, it was several generations removed from the original and the sound quality suffered for it. The playback recordings were purposely recorded very &quot;dry&quot; (without reverberation); otherwise it would come across as too hollow sounding in large movie theatres. This made these albums sound flat and boxy.

===Terminology===
MGM Records called these &quot;original cast albums&quot; in the style of Decca Broadway show cast albums mostly because the material on the discs would not lock to picture, thereby creating the largest distinction between &#x27;Original &quot;Motion Picture&quot; Soundtrack&#x27; which, in its strictest sense would contain music that would lock to picture if the home user would play one alongside the other and &#x27;Original &quot;Cast&quot; Soundtrack&#x27; which in its strictest sense would refer to studio recordings of film music by the original film cast, but which had been edited or rearranged for time and content and would not lock to picture.

In reality, however, soundtrack producers remain ambiguous about this distinction, and titles in which the music on the album &quot;does&quot; lock to picture may be labeled as OCS and music from an album that does &quot;not&quot; lock to picture may be referred to as OMPS.

The phrase &quot;recorded directly from the soundtrack&quot; was used for a while in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s to differentiate material that would lock to picture from that which would not (excluding alternate masters and alternate vocals or solos). However, partly because many &#x27;film takes&#x27; actually consisted of several different attempts at the song edited together, over time that term became nebulous as well. For example, in cases where the master take used in the film could not be found in its isolated form (without the M&amp;E), the aforementioned alternate masters and alternate vocal and solo performances might be used instead.

As a result of all this ambiguity, over the years the term &quot;soundtrack&quot; began to be commonly applied to any recording from a film, whether taken from the actual film soundtrack or re-recorded in the studio at an earlier or later time. The term is also sometimes used for Broadway cast recordings.

Contributing to the vagueness of the term are projects such as &quot;The Sound of Music Live!&quot;, which was filmed live on the set for an NBC holiday season special first broadcast in 2013. The &quot;album&quot;, released three days before the broadcast, contained studio pre-recordings by the original cast of all the songs used in the special, but because only the orchestral portion of the material from the album is the same as that used in the special (i.e., the vocals were sung live over a prerecorded track), this creates a similar technicality. Although the &quot;instrumental music bed&quot; from the CD will lock to picture, the vocal performances will not (although it is possible to create a complete soundtrack recording by lifting the vocal performances from the DVD, erasing the alternate vocal masters from the CD and combining the two).

Among MGM&#x27;s most notable soundtrack albums were those of the films &quot;Good News&quot;, &quot;Easter Parade&quot;, &quot;Annie Get Your Gun&quot;, &quot;Singin&#x27; in the Rain&quot;, &quot;Show Boat&quot;, &quot;The Band Wagon&quot;, &quot;Seven Brides for Seven Brothers&quot;, and &quot;Gigi&quot;.

===Film score albums===
Film score albums did not really become popular until the LP era, although a few were issued in 78-rpm albums. Alex North&#x27;s score for the 1951 film version of &quot;A Streetcar Named Desire&quot; was released on a 10-inch LP by Capitol Records and sold so well that the label rereleased it on one side of a 12-inch LP with some of Max Steiner&#x27;s film music on the reverse.

Steiner&#x27;s score for &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot; has been recorded many times, but when the film was reissued in 1967, MGM Records finally released an album of the famous score recorded directly from the soundtrack. Like the 1967 rerelease of the film, this version of the score was artificially &quot;enhanced for stereo&quot;. In recent years, Rhino Records has released a 2-CD set of the complete &quot;Gone With the Wind&quot; score, restored to its original mono sound.

One of the biggest-selling film scores of all time was John Williams&#x27; music from the movie &quot;Star Wars&quot;. Many film score albums go out of print after the films finish their theatrical runs and some have become extremely rare collectors&#x27; items.

===Composite film tracks included on record===
In a few rare instances an entire film dialogue track was issued on records. The 1968 Franco Zeffirelli film of &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot; was issued as a 4-LP set, as a single LP with musical and dialogue excerpts, and as an album containing only the film&#x27;s musical score. The ground-breaking film &quot;Who&#x27;s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?&quot; was issued by Warner Bros Records as a 2-LP set containing virtually all the dialogue from the film. RCA Victor also issued a double-album set what was virtually all the dialogue from the film soundtrack of &quot;A Man for All Seasons&quot;, Decca Records issued a double-album for &quot;Man of La Mancha&quot; and Disney Music Group (formerly Buena Vista Records) issued a similar double-album for its soundtrack for &quot;The Hobbit&quot;.

== Film and television soundtracks ==


When a blockbuster film is released, or during and after a television series airs, an album in the form of a soundtrack is typically released alongside that.

A soundtrack typically contains instrumentation or alternatively a film score. But it can also feature songs that were sung or performed by characters in a scene (or a cover version of a song in the media, rerecorded by a popular artist), songs that were used as intentional or unintentional background music in important scenes, songs that were heard in the closing credits, or songs for no apparent reason related to the media other than for promotion, that were included in a soundtrack.

Soundtracks are usually released on major record labels (just as if they were released by a musical artist), and the songs and the soundtrack itself can also be on music charts, and win musical awards.

By convention, a &quot;soundtrack&quot; record can contain all kinds of music including music &quot;inspired by&quot; but not actually appearing in the movie; the &quot;score&quot; contains only music by the original film&#x27;s composers.

Contemporaneously, a soundtrack can go against normality, (most typically used in popular culture franchises) and contains recently released and/or exclusive never before released original pop music selections, (some of which become high charting records on their own, which due to being released on another franchises title, peaked because of that) and is simply used for promotional purposes for well known artists, or new or unknown artists. These soundtracks contain music not at all heard in the film/television series, and any artistic or lyrical connection is purely coincidental.

However depending on the genre of the media the soundtrack of popular songs would have a set pattern; a lighthearted romance might feature easy listening love songs, whilst a more dark thriller would compose of hard rock or urban music.

In 1908, Camille Saint-Saëns composed the first music specifically for use in a motion picture (L&#x27;assasinat du duc de Guise), and releasing recordings of songs used in films became prevalent in the 1930s. Henry Mancini, who won an Emmy Award and two Grammys for his soundtrack to &quot;Peter Gunn&quot;, was the first composer to have a widespread hit with a song from a soundtrack.

Before the 1970s, soundtracks (with a few exceptions), accompanied towards musicals, and was an album that featured vocal and instrumental, (and instrumental versions of vocal songs) musical selections performed by cast members. Or cover versions of songs sung by another artist.

After the 1970s, soundtracks started to include more diversity, and music consumers would anticipate a motion picture or television soundtrack. Majority of top charting songs were those featured or released on a film or television soundtrack album.

In recent years the term &quot;soundtrack&quot; sort of subsided. It now mostly commonly refers to instrumental background music used in that media. Popular songs featured in a film or television series are instead highlighted and referenced in the credits, not as part of a &quot;soundtrack&quot;.

== Psychology of music and film soundtracks ==
In the late 1980s, cognitive psychology and psychology of music started an investigation on the impact that the soundtrack exerts on the interpretation of audiovisual stimuli. Canadian psychologist Annabel J. Cohen is one of the first scholars who systematically studied the relationship between music and moving image within the interpretation process of brief animated videos. Her studies converged in the &quot;Congruence-Association Model of music and multimedia&quot;. More recent empirical studies proved that the film music goes far beyond the role of an emotionalizing accessory in film contexts; contrarily, it can radically alter the empathy experienced by the viewers toward the characters on screen, attributed emotions (e.g., whether a character is happy or sad), evaluation of the scenic environments, plot anticipations, and moral judgement of the characters. Furthermore, eyetracking and pupillometry studies found that film music is able to influence gaze direction and pupil dilation depending on its emotional valence and semantic information conveyed. Recently, new experiments showed that film music can alter time perception while watching movies; in particular, soundtracks deemed as activating and arousing lead to time overestimation as opposed to more relaxing or sad music. Lastly, soundtracks have been proved to shape the memory of the scene that the viewers form, to the point of biasing their recall coherently with the music&#x27;s semantic contents.

==Video game soundtracks==

Soundtrack may also refer to music used in video games. While sound effects were nearly universally used for action happening in the game, music to accompany the gameplay was a later development. Rob Hubbard and Martin Galway were early composers of music specifically for video games for the 1980s Commodore 64 computer. Koji Kondo was an early and important composer for Nintendo games. As the technology improved, polyphonic and often orchestral soundtracks replaced simple monophonic melodies starting in the late 1980s and the soundtracks to popular games such as the &quot;Dragon Quest&quot; and &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; series began to be released separately. In addition to compositions written specifically for video games, the advent of CD technology allowed developers to incorporate licensed songs into their soundtrack (the &quot;Grand Theft Auto&quot; series is a good example of this). Furthermore, when Microsoft released the Xbox in 2001, it featured an option allowing users to customize the soundtrack for certain games by ripping a CD to the hard-drive.

==Theme park, cruise ship, and event soundtracks==
As in &quot;Sound of Music Live!&quot; the music or dialogue in question was prepared specifically for use in or at an event such as that described above.

In the case of theme parks, actors may be ensconced in large costumes where their faces may be obscured. They mime along to a prerecorded music, effects and narration track that may sound as if it was lifted from a movie, or may sound as if it had been overly dramatized for effect.

In the case of cruise ships, the small stage spaces do not allow for full orchestration, so that possibly the larger instruments may be pre-recorded onto a backing track and the remaining instruments may play live, or the reverse may occur in such instances as &quot;&quot; or &quot;Sinatra: His Voice. His World. His Way&quot; both of which use isolated vocal and video performances accompanied by a live band.

In the case of event soundtracks, large public gatherings such as &quot;Hands Across America&quot;, The &quot;Live Aid&quot; Concert, the 200th Anniversary Celebration of the U.S. Constitution in Philadelphia, &quot;The MUSE Concerts&quot; or the various &quot;Greenpeace&quot; events (i.e. &quot;The First International Greenpeace Record Project&quot;, &quot;Rainbow Warriors&quot; and &quot;Alternative NRG&quot;) all had special music, effects and dialogue written especially for the event which later went on sale to the record and later video-buying public.

== Book soundtracks ==

Only a few cases exist of an entire soundtrack being written specifically for a book.

&#x27;Kaladin&#x27;, a book soundtrack to popular fantasy novelist Brandon Sanderson&#x27;s book, &#x27;The Way of Kings&#x27;, was written by The Black Piper. The Black Piper, hailing from Provo, Utah, is a combined group of composers who share a love for fantasy literature. &#x27;Kaladin&#x27; was funded through Kickstarter and raised over $112,000. It was released December 2017. 

A New York Times Bestselling series, &quot;Green Rider&quot; by Kristen Britain, celebrated its 25th anniversary with the release of a book soundtrack by the same name. It was recorded in Utah, featuring artist Jenny Oaks Baker and William Arnold and was released in 2018.

A soundtrack for J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;The Hobbit&quot; and &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; was composed by Craig Russell for the San Luis Obispo Youth Symphony. Commissioned in 1995, it was finally put on disk in 2000 by the San Luis Obispo Symphony. 

For the 1996 &quot;Star Wars&quot; novel &quot;Shadows of the Empire&quot; (written by author Steve Perry), Lucasfilm chose Joel McNeely to write a score. This was an eccentric, experimental project, in contrast to all other soundtracks, as the composer was allowed to convey general moods and themes, rather than having to write music to flow for specific scenes. A project called &quot;Sine Fiction&quot; has made some soundtracks to novels by science fiction writers like Isaac Asimov and Arthur C. Clarke, and has thus far released 19 soundtracks to science-fiction novels or short stories. All of them are available for free download.

Author L. Ron Hubbard composed and recorded a soundtrack album to his novel &quot;Battlefield Earth&quot; entitled &quot;Space Jazz&quot;. He marketed the concept album as &quot;the only original sound track ever produced for a book before it becomes a movie&quot;. There are two other soundtracks to Hubbard novels, being &quot;Mission Earth&quot; by Edgar Winter and &quot;To the Stars&quot; by Chick Corea.

The 1985 novel &quot;Always Coming Home&quot; by Ursula K. Le Guin originally came in a box set with an audiocassette entitled &quot;Music and Poetry of the Kesh&quot;, featuring three performances of poetry, and ten musical compositions by Todd Barton.

In comics, Daniel Clowes&#x27; graphic novel &quot;Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron&quot; had an official soundtrack album. The original black-and-white Nexus #3 from Capitol comics included the Flexi-Nexi which was a soundtrack flexi-disc for the issue. &quot;Trosper&quot; by Jim Woodring included a soundtrack album composed and performed by Bill Frisell, and the Absolute Edition of &quot;The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen: Black Dossier&quot; is planned to include an original vinyl record. &quot;The Crow&quot; released a soundtrack album called &quot;Fear and Bullets&quot; to coincide with the limited edition hardcover copy of the graphic novel. The comic book &quot;Hellblazer&quot; released an annual with a song called &quot;Venus of the Hardsell&quot;, which was then recorded and a music video to accompany with.

The Brazilian graphic novel &quot;Achados e Perdidos&quot; (&quot;Lost and Found&quot;), by Eduardo Damasceno and Luís Felipe Garrocho, had an original soundtrack composed by musician Bruno Ito. The book was self-published in 2011 after a crowdfunding campaign and was accompanied by a CD with eight songs (one for each chapter of the story). In 2012, this graphic novel won the Troféu HQ Mix (Brazilian most important comic book award) in the category &quot;Special Homage&quot;.

As Internet access became more widespread, a similar practice developed of accompanying a printed work with a downloadable theme song, rather than a complete and physically published album. The theme songs for &quot;Nextwave&quot;, &quot;Runaways&quot;, &quot;Achewood&quot;, and &quot;Dinosaur Comics&quot; are examples of this. The novella &quot;Chasing Homer&quot; (2019) by László Krasznahorkai was published with an original soundtrack by Miklos Szilveszter, accessible through a QR code at the start of each chapter.

In Japan, such examples of music inspired by a work and not intended to soundtrack a radio play or motion picture adaptation of it are known as an &quot;image album&quot; or &quot;image song&quot;, though this definition also includes such things as film score demos inspired by concept art and songs inspired by a TV series that are not featured in them. Many audiobooks have some form of musical accompaniment, but these are generally not extensive enough to be released as a separate soundtrack.

== See also ==
* Audio restoration
* Cast recording – for musical theater
* Film score
* Filmi – term used for Indian film soundtracks
* Image song
* Jingle
* List of film score composers
* Hindi film music
* Musivisual language
* Soundtrack album
* Soundtrack.Net
* Production music

== References ==
== External links ==
* SoundtrackTracklist Database
* the Soundtrack INFO project
* Internet Movie Soundtracks Database
* FilmMusicSite.com Soundtracks Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="2" end="12" title="Soundtrack" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650799" start="27" end="39" title="audio signal" label="audio signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q571" start="89" end="93" title="book" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="95" end="100" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="102" end="116" title="motion picture" label="motion picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555508" start="118" end="131" title="radio program" label="radio program"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="133" end="151" title="television show" label="television program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="156" end="166" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176708" start="206" end="222" title="soundtrack album" label="soundtrack album"/>
<link wikidata="Q20682774" start="357" end="384" title="Sound-on-film" label="synchronised recorded sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="426" end="437" title="sound film" label="sound track"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="479" end="494" title="film production" label="film production"/>
<link wikidata="Q648877" start="498" end="513" title="post-production" label="post-production"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="729" end="736" title="dubbing" label="dubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381612" start="1215" end="1224" title="Photoplay" label="Photoplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q217199" start="2166" end="2191" title="Soundtrack" label="original soundtrack (OST)"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="2348" end="2361" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="2430" end="2442" title="Musical film" label="Musical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698545" start="2559" end="2565" title="Grease (1978 soundtrack)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123818" start="2579" end="2584" title="Evita (soundtrack)" label="Evita"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="2594" end="2604" title="Film score" label="Film score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187341" start="2708" end="2720" title="Blade Runner (soundtrack)" label="Blade Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061394" start="2734" end="2750" title="Music of Star Wars" label="Star Wars series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639870" start="2859" end="2883" title="List of songs featured in Shrek" label="&amp;quot;Shrek&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q108079909" start="2885" end="2922" title="Music of the Back to the Future franchise" label="&amp;quot;Back to the Future&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628321" start="3031" end="3038" title="Top Gun (soundtrack)" label="Top Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q664539" start="3052" end="3065" title="The Bodyguard (soundtrack)" label="The Bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062702" start="3075" end="3097" title="Video game soundtracks" label="Video game soundtracks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3412" end="3429" title="Music of the Final Fantasy VII series#Original Soundtrack" label="Final Fantasy VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q120734014" start="3443" end="3464" title="Music of Red Dead Redemption 2" label="Red Dead Redemption 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q122767801" start="3551" end="3565" title="Reservoir Dogs (soundtrack)" label="Reservoir Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q56379599" start="3579" end="3593" title="A Star Is Born (2018 soundtrack)" label="A Star Is Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548355" start="3602" end="3616" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (soundtrack)" label="The soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="3629" end="3640" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="3661" end="3692" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="3769" end="3787" title="RCA Victor Records" label="RCA Victor Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="4120" end="4123" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166879" start="4160" end="4169" title="Show Boat" label="Show Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q313270" start="4185" end="4196" title="Jerome Kern" label="Jerome Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q430852" start="4204" end="4227" title="Till the Clouds Roll By" label="Till the Clouds Roll By"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881437" start="5078" end="5089" title="MGM Records" label="MGM Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248839" start="5152" end="5166" title="Decca Broadway" label="Decca Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15283137" start="7045" end="7069" title="The Sound of Music Live!" label="The Sound of Music Live!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561460" start="7913" end="7922" title="Good News (1947 film)" label="Good News"/>
<link wikidata="Q957893" start="7936" end="7949" title="Easter Parade (film)" label="Easter Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263921" start="7963" end="7981" title="Annie Get Your Gun (film)" label="Annie Get Your Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q309153" start="7995" end="8019" title="Singin&amp;#x27; in the Rain" label="Singin&amp;#x27; in the Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556456" start="8033" end="8042" title="Show Boat (1951 film)" label="Show Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508130" start="8056" end="8070" title="The Band Wagon" label="The Band Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q662679" start="8084" end="8115" title="Seven Brides for Seven Brothers (film)" label="Seven Brides for Seven Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q577757" start="8133" end="8137" title="Gigi (1958 film)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q841983" start="8228" end="8234" title="LP album" label="LP era"/>
<link wikidata="Q349448" start="8281" end="8291" title="Alex North" label="Alex North"/>
<link wikidata="Q212129" start="8340" end="8364" title="A Streetcar Named Desire (1951 film)" label="A Streetcar Named Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="8403" end="8418" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q350704" start="8506" end="8517" title="Max Steiner" label="Max Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="8584" end="8602" title="Gone with the Wind (film)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q627091" start="8906" end="8919" title="Rhino Records" label="Rhino Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q131285" start="9091" end="9104" title="John Williams" label="John Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="9138" end="9147" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q53040" start="9433" end="9450" title="Franco Zeffirelli" label="Franco Zeffirelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q517265" start="9465" end="9481" title="Romeo and Juliet (1968 film)" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q325643" start="9659" end="9695" title="Who&amp;#x27;s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (film)" label="Who&amp;#x27;s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="9803" end="9813" title="RCA Victor" label="RCA Victor"/>
<link wikidata="Q218999" start="9915" end="9936" title="A Man for All Seasons (1966 film)" label="A Man for All Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="9944" end="9957" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640322" start="9990" end="10006" title="Man of La Mancha (film)" label="Man of La Mancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104471" start="10017" end="10035" title="Disney Music Group" label="Disney Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q74229" start="10126" end="10136" title="The Hobbit (1977 film)" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="10271" end="10276" title="music album" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="10411" end="10421" title="film score" label="film score"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353390" start="10636" end="10652" title="background music" label="background music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553078" start="10703" end="10718" title="closing credits" label="closing credits"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="11469" end="11478" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q848399" start="12008" end="12022" title="easy listening" label="easy listening"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="12080" end="12089" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529400" start="12093" end="12104" title="urban music" label="urban music"/>
<link wikidata="Q150445" start="12116" end="12135" title="Camille Saint-Saëns" label="Camille Saint-Saëns"/>
<link wikidata="Q185928" start="12317" end="12330" title="Henry Mancini" label="Henry Mancini"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="12343" end="12353" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="12362" end="12368" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247770" start="12398" end="12408" title="Peter Gunn" label="Peter Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="12571" end="12579" title="Musical film" label="musicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="13393" end="13413" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q476590" start="13418" end="13437" title="Music psychology" label="psychology of music"/>
<link wikidata="Q970687" start="14262" end="14273" title="Eye tracking" label="eyetracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410891" start="14278" end="14290" title="pupillometry" label="pupillometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q768807" start="14948" end="14960" title="sound effect" label="sound effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q599443" start="15082" end="15093" title="Rob Hubbard" label="Rob Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281963" start="15098" end="15111" title="Martin Galway" label="Martin Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="15185" end="15197" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q356782" start="15208" end="15218" title="Koji Kondo" label="Koji Kondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="15259" end="15267" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179465" start="15303" end="15313" title="polyphonic" label="polyphonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137211" start="15363" end="15373" title="Monophony" label="monophonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q615908" start="15465" end="15477" title="Dragon Quest" label="Dragon Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12391356" start="15494" end="15507" title="Final Fantasy" label="Final Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132730" start="15724" end="15759" title="Grand Theft Auto" label="&amp;quot;Grand Theft Auto&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="15806" end="15815" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="15829" end="15833" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647565" start="16938" end="16958" title="Hands Across America" label="Hands Across America"/>
<link wikidata="Q193740" start="16976" end="16984" title="Live Aid" label="Live Aid"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17082" end="17099" title="No Nukes: The Muse Concerts for a Non-Nuclear Future" label="The MUSE Concerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="17127" end="17137" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399448" start="17971" end="17982" title="Green Rider" label="Green Rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437754" start="17992" end="18007" title="Kristen Britain" label="Kristen Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="18219" end="18235" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q74287" start="18249" end="18259" title="The Hobbit" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="18276" end="18297" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181402" start="18320" end="18333" title="Craig Russell (American composer)" label="Craig Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="18485" end="18494" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18513" end="18534" title="Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire (novel)" label="Shadows of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368134" start="18560" end="18571" title="Steve Perry (author)" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q242446" start="18574" end="18583" title="Lucasfilm" label="Lucasfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382830" start="18590" end="18602" title="Joel McNeely" label="Joel McNeely"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="18912" end="18927" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="18941" end="18953" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Isaac Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="18958" end="18974" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="19114" end="19128" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723311" start="19189" end="19206" title="Battlefield Earth (novel)" label="Battlefield Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572403" start="19228" end="19238" title="Space Jazz" label="Space Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878586" start="19436" end="19449" title="Mission Earth (album)" label="Mission Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q559349" start="19459" end="19471" title="Edgar Winter" label="Edgar Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811315" start="19482" end="19494" title="To the Stars (album)" label="To the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q192465" start="19504" end="19515" title="Chick Corea" label="Chick Corea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677090" start="19539" end="19557" title="Always Coming Home" label="Always Coming Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="19567" end="19584" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3684212" start="19824" end="19856" title="Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron" label="Like a Velvet Glove Cast in Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288072" start="20002" end="20012" title="flexi-disc" label="flexi-disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689246" start="20051" end="20063" title="Jim Woodring" label="Jim Woodring"/>
<link wikidata="Q434968" start="20118" end="20130" title="Bill Frisell" label="Bill Frisell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204587" start="20140" end="20156" title="DC Comics Absolute Edition" label="Absolute Edition"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20166" end="20218" title="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen: Black Dossier" label="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen: Black Dossier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="20259" end="20271" title="vinyl record" label="vinyl record"/>
<link wikidata="Q466708" start="20279" end="20287" title="The Crow" label="The Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439356" start="20335" end="20351" title="Fear and Bullets" label="Fear and Bullets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035139" start="20453" end="20463" title="Hellblazer" label="Hellblazer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20514" end="20535" title="Venus of the Hardsell" label="Venus of the Hardsell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20639" end="20657" title="Achados e Perdidos" label="Achados e Perdidos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20697" end="20714" title="Eduardo Damasceno" label="Eduardo Damasceno"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20719" end="20739" title="Luís Felipe Garrocho" label="Luís Felipe Garrocho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20789" end="20798" title="Bruno Ito" label="Bruno Ito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844979" start="20984" end="20997" title="Troféu HQ Mix" label="Troféu HQ Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="21090" end="21098" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193470" start="21210" end="21220" title="theme song" label="theme song"/>
<link wikidata="Q67573526" start="21303" end="21311" title="Nextwave" label="Nextwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140112" start="21325" end="21333" title="Runaways (comics)" label="Runaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4673641" start="21347" end="21355" title="Achewood" label="Achewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q291886" start="21373" end="21388" title="Dinosaur Comics" label="Dinosaur Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q117662262" start="21435" end="21448" title="Chasing Homer" label="Chasing Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q512062" start="21465" end="21485" title="László Krasznahorkai" label="László Krasznahorkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203" start="21572" end="21579" title="QR code" label="QR code"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="21614" end="21619" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="21696" end="21706" title="radio drama" label="radio play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625206" start="21791" end="21801" title="image song" label="image song"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="21872" end="21877" title="Demo (music)" label="demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123841" start="21890" end="21901" title="concept art" label="concept art"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="21972" end="21981" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819882" start="22128" end="22145" title="Audio restoration" label="Audio restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049564" start="22148" end="22162" title="Cast recording" label="Cast recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="22187" end="22197" title="Film score" label="Film score"/>
<link wikidata="Q544440" start="22200" end="22205" title="Filmi" label="Filmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625206" start="22248" end="22258" title="Image song" label="Image song"/>
<link wikidata="Q264922" start="22261" end="22267" title="Jingle" label="Jingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288539" start="22270" end="22298" title="List of film score composers" label="List of film score composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942022" start="22301" end="22317" title="Hindi film music" label="Hindi film music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942716" start="22320" end="22339" title="Musivisual language" label="Musivisual language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176708" start="22342" end="22358" title="Soundtrack album" label="Soundtrack album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564978" start="22361" end="22375" title="Soundtrack.Net" label="Soundtrack.Net"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111784" start="22378" end="22394" title="Production music" label="Production music"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46622" wikidata="Q2607241" url="?curid=46622" title="Mise-en-scène">
<text> (; or &quot;what is put into the scene&quot;) is the stage design and arrangement of actors in scenes for a theatre or film production, both in the visual arts through storyboarding, visual themes, and cinematography and in narrative-storytelling through directions. The term is also commonly used to refer to single scenes that are representative of a film. 

 has been called film criticism&#x27;s &quot;grand undefined term.&quot; It has been criticized for its focus on the dramatic design aspects rather than the plot itself, as those who utilize tend to look at what is &quot;put before the camera&quot; rather than the story. The use of is significant as it allows the director to convey messages to the viewer through what is placed in the scene, not just the content of the scene. allows the director to not only convey their message but also to implement their aesthetic, as such, each director has their own unique . refers to everything in front of the camera, including the set design, lighting, and actors, and the ultimate way that this influences how the scene comes together for the audience.

==Definition in film studies==

When applied to the cinema, refers to everything that appears before the camera—the sets, props, costumes, actors, and even the lighting. These elements help to express a film&#x27;s vision by generating a sense of time and space, as well as setting a mood. can be used to suggest a character&#x27;s state of mind, whether that be happy with bright colors, or sad with darker colors. 

 also includes the composition, which consists of the positioning and movement of actors, as well as objects, in the shot, as overseen by the director and production designer. The director (who controls props, costumes, lighting and sound) all have input on the ; they work together to make sure it fits the film well before production begins. The production designer is generally responsible for the look of the movie, and thus leads the various departments in charge of individual sets, locations, props, and costumes, among other things. André Bazin, a French film critic and film theorist, describes the aesthetic as emphasizing choreographed movement within the scene rather than through editing.

&#x27;, as a term, is also sometimes used by screenwriters to refer to the descriptive paragraphs between the dialog used in shot blocking.

==Key aspects==

===Set design===

An important element of is set design—the setting of a scene and the objects (props) visible in a scene. Set design can be used to amplify character emotion or to set the mood, which effects the physical, social, psychological, emotional, economic, and cultural significance in the film. Set design often influences many themes or parts of a film.

 can also affect the decision whether to shoot on location or set. Shooting on a set is more commonly done than shooting on location for reasons of cost efficiency and simplicity, on a set, you can create the entire background and arrange the props within it. On the other hand, if shooting on location the natural background must be considered—if there is a boulder, barn, or field in the background it must either be worked around or integrated.

===Lighting===
The intensity, direction, and quality of lighting can influence an audience&#x27;s understanding of characters, actions, themes, and mood. Light (and shade) can emphasize texture, shape, distance, mood, time of day, season, and glamour; it affects the way colors are rendered, both in terms of hue and depth, and can focus attention on particular elements of the composition. Highlights, for example, call attention to shapes and textures, while shadows often conceal things, creating a sense of mystery or fear. For this reason, lighting must be thoroughly planned to ensure its desired effect on an audience. Cinematographers are a large part of this process, as they coordinate the camera and lighting crews. Lighting is the last factor of that ties together texture, setting, and characters; it directs each scene, directing the viewers&#x27; gaze and attention.

===Space===
The use of space also affects the of a film. The depth, proximity, size, and proportions of places and objects can be manipulated through lighting, set design, and camera placement and lenses—effectively determining the mood and relationships between elements. Space is the most overlooked component of , yet the use of space determines whether the screen is too compact or too empty for the themes, characters&#x27; emotions, or major events. For example, an empty space may represent peace and an empty mind. 

===Composition===
Composition is the organization of objects, actors and space within the frame, often by use of balance and symmetry for the distribution of light, color, objects and figures in a shot. Composition also includes the intentional use of misalignment, often to emphasize certain portions of the screen and distract the viewers from the background. This works because audiences are more inclined to pay attention to something off balance, out of place, or abnormal. Through these , directors carefully compose the frame to control the narrative and induce viewers to pay attention to certain characters or points of interest in a scene.

===Costume===
Costume design refers to all the clothes that characters wear. By using particular colors or designs, narrative cinema uses costumes to make clear distinctions between characters or to signify a particular character. While costume design is a subtle component of , it is an important one, with an Oscar awarded annually for the best costume design. Designers often use specific colors to enhance emotions, whether that be red to draw attention or using light versus dark colors. Often, costume designs are used to attract the attention of the audience, communicate details of a character&#x27;s personality to the audience, and help actors transform into believable characters.

===Makeup and hairstyles===
While makeup and hairstyles can be included in costumes and design, they are often viewed separately as they can take hours to apply daily. Actors may wake up hours before shooting begins to get makeup applied, sometimes including prosthetics or even full-body makeup. Makeup and hairstyles establish periods, reveal character traits, and signal changes within a character.

===Acting===
There is enormous historical and cultural variation in performance styles in the cinema. In the early years of cinema, stage acting was difficult to differentiate from film acting, as most film actors had previously been stage actors and therefore knew no other method of acting. Eventually, the melodramatic styles of 19th-century theatre gave way, in Western cinema, to a relatively naturalistic style. This more naturalistic style of acting is largely influenced by Konstantin Stanislavski&#x27;s theory of method acting, which involves the actor fully immersing themselves in their character. The art of acting uses movement, gesture, and intonation to realize a character for the stage, motion picture, or television. The acting, setting, themes, and other factors must align to fit the .

===Film===
The film medium itself affects the . The film stock may be black-and-white or color, fine-grain or grainy. Likewise, different aspect ratios yield different ways of looking at the world and the expressive meaning of the film.

===Actor blocking===

The terms &#x27;blocking&#x27; and &#x27;blocks&#x27; were both used as early as 1961. In theatre, blocking is the precise staging of actors to facilitate the performance of a play, ballet, film or opera; it is a set of instructions incorporated by the director to ensure the appropriate of the film. In contemporary theatre, the director usually determines blocking during the rehearsal, telling actors where they should stand for the proper dramatic effect, ensure sight lines for the audience and work with the lighting design of the scene.

==See also==
* Choreography
* Montage
* Filmmaking technique of Luis Buñuel
 

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2607241" start="0" end="0" title="Mise-en-scène" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q987061" start="54" end="66" title="stage design" label="stage design"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="109" end="116" title="theatre" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="120" end="124" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="149" end="160" title="visual arts" label="visual arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q334667" start="169" end="182" title="storyboarding" label="storyboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="203" end="217" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="225" end="234" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q989963" start="235" end="247" title="storytelling" label="storytelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="256" end="266" title="film director" label="directions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4482" start="379" end="393" title="film criticism" label="film criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758354" start="519" end="523" title="Plot (narrative)" label="plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q987061" start="988" end="998" title="Scenic design" label="set design"/>
<link wikidata="Q15328" start="1217" end="1223" title="camera" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030906" start="1228" end="1232" title="Set construction" label="sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q942297" start="1234" end="1239" title="Theatrical properties" label="props"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387717" start="1672" end="1680" title="Theatre director" label="director"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962070" start="1685" end="1704" title="production designer" label="production designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q362544" start="2071" end="2082" title="André Bazin" label="André Bazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4482" start="2093" end="2104" title="film critic" label="film critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28793" start="2109" end="2122" title="film theorist" label="film theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="2138" end="2147" title="aesthetic" label="aesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="2278" end="2291" title="screenwriters" label="screenwriters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630964" start="2363" end="2371" title="Blocking (stage)" label="blocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q987061" start="2436" end="2446" title="Scenic design" label="set design"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133352" start="2805" end="2816" title="Location shooting" label="on location"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3263" end="3271" title="Cinematography#Lighting" label="lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q222344" start="3833" end="3848" title="Cinematographer" label="Cinematographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="4113" end="4118" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q462437" start="4633" end="4644" title="Composition (visual arts)" label="Composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16331597" start="5280" end="5294" title="Costume design" label="Costume design"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="5993" end="5999" title="Cosmetics" label="makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q327496" start="6004" end="6014" title="Hairstyle" label="hairstyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038541" start="6694" end="6714" title="Nineteenth-century theatre" label="19th-century theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q49484" start="6844" end="6867" title="Konstantin Stanislavski" label="Konstantin Stanislavski"/>
<link wikidata="Q560589" start="6885" end="6898" title="method acting" label="method acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745370" start="7222" end="7232" title="film stock" label="film stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="7240" end="7255" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441762" start="7308" end="7321" title="Aspect ratio (image)" label="aspect ratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="7612" end="7618" title="ballet" label="ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="7620" end="7624" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="7628" end="7633" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q180856" start="7990" end="8002" title="Choreography" label="Choreography"/>
<link wikidata="Q239298" start="8005" end="8012" title="Montage (filmmaking)" label="Montage"/>
<link wikidata="Q50300664" start="8015" end="8050" title="Filmmaking technique of Luis Buñuel" label="Filmmaking technique of Luis Buñuel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46628" wikidata="Q81235" url="?curid=46628" title="ATM">
<text>An automated teller machine (ATM) is an electronic telecommunications device that enables customers of financial institutions to perform financial transactions, such as cash withdrawals, deposits, funds transfers, balance inquiries or account information inquiries, at any time and without the need for direct interaction with bank staff.

ATMs are known by a variety of other names, including automatic teller machines (ATMs) in the United States (sometimes redundantly as &quot;ATM machine&quot;). In Canada, the term automated banking machine (ABM) is also used, although ATM is also very commonly used in Canada, with many Canadian organizations using ATM rather than ABM. In British English, the terms cashpoint, cash machine and hole in the wall are also used. ATMs that are not operated by a financial institution are known as &quot;white-label&quot; ATMs.

Using an ATM, customers can access their bank deposit or credit accounts in order to make a variety of financial transactions, most notably cash withdrawals and balance checking, as well as transferring credit to and from mobile phones. ATMs can also be used to withdraw cash in a foreign country. If the currency being withdrawn from the ATM is different from that in which the bank account is denominated, the money will be converted at the financial institution&#x27;s exchange rate. Customers are typically identified by inserting a plastic ATM card (or some other acceptable payment card) into the ATM, with authentication being by the customer entering a personal identification number (PIN), which must match the PIN stored in the chip on the card (if the card is so equipped), or in the issuing financial institution&#x27;s database.

According to the ATM Industry Association (ATMIA), , there were close to 3.5 million ATMs installed worldwide. However, the use of ATMs is gradually declining with the increase in cashless payment systems.

== History ==

The idea of out-of-hours cash distribution was first put into practice in Japan, the United Kingdom and Sweden.

In 1960, Armenian-American inventor Luther Simjian invented an automated deposit machine (accepting coins, cash and cheques) although it did not have cash dispensing features. His US patent was first filed on 30 June 1960 and granted on 26 February 1963. The roll-out of this machine, called Bankograph, was delayed by a couple of years, due in part to Simjian&#x27;s Reflectone Electronics Inc. being acquired by Universal Match Corporation. An experimental Bankograph was installed in New York City in 1961 by the City Bank of New York, but removed after six months due to the lack of customer acceptance.

In 1962 Adrian Ashfield invented the idea of a card system to securely identify a user and control and monitor the dispensing of goods or services. This was granted UK Patent 959,713 in June 1964 and assigned to Kins Developments Limited.

=== Invention ===
A Japanese device called the &quot;Computer Loan Machine&quot; supplied cash as a three-month loan at 5% p.a. after inserting a credit card. The device was operational in 1966. However, little is known about the device.
A cash machine was put into use by Barclays Bank, Enfield, north London in the United Kingdom, on 27 June 1967, which is recognized as the world&#x27;s first ATM. This machine was inaugurated by English actor Reg Varney. This invention is credited to the engineering team led by John Shepherd-Barron of printing firm De La Rue, who was awarded an OBE in the 2005 New Year Honours. Transactions were initiated by inserting paper cheques issued by a teller or cashier, marked with carbon-14 for machine readability and security, which in a later model were matched with a four-digit personal identification number (PIN). Shepherd-Barron stated: 
The Barclays–De La Rue machine (called De La Rue Automatic Cash System or DACS) beat the Swedish saving banks&#x27; and a company called Metior&#x27;s machine (a device called Bankomat) by a mere nine days and British Westminster Bank&#x27;s Smith Industries Chubb system (called Chubb MD2) by a month. The online version of the Swedish machine is listed to have been operational on 6 May 1968, while claiming to be the first online ATM in the world, ahead of similar claims by IBM and Lloyds Bank in 1971, and Oki in 1970. The collaboration of a small start-up called Speytec and Midland Bank developed a fourth machine which was marketed after 1969 in Europe and the US by the Burroughs Corporation. The patent for this device (GB1329964) was filed in September 1969 (and granted in 1973) by John David Edwards, Leonard Perkins, John Henry Donald, Peter Lee Chappell, Sean Benjamin Newcombe, and Malcom David Roe. Both the DACS and MD2 accepted only a single-use token or voucher which was retained by the machine, while the Speytec worked with a card with a magnetic stripe at the back. They used principles including Carbon-14 and low-coercivity magnetism in order to make fraud more difficult.

The idea of a PIN stored on the card was developed by a group of engineers working at Smiths Group on the Chubb MD2 in 1965 and which has been credited to James Goodfellow (patent GB1197183 filed on 2 May 1966 with Anthony Davies). The essence of this system was that it enabled the verification of the customer with the debited account without human intervention. This patent is also the earliest instance of a complete &quot;currency dispenser system&quot; in the patent record. This patent was filed on 5 March 1968 in the US (US 3543904) and granted on 1 December 1970. It had a profound influence on the industry as a whole. Not only did future entrants into the cash dispenser market such as NCR Corporation and IBM licence Goodfellow&#x27;s PIN system, but a number of later patents reference this patent as &quot;Prior Art Device&quot;.

=== Propagation ===
Devices designed by British (i.e. Chubb, De La Rue) and Swedish (i.e. Asea Meteor) manufacturers quickly spread out. For example, given its link with Barclays, Bank of Scotland deployed a DACS in 1968 under the &#x27;Scotcash&#x27; brand. Customers were given personal code numbers to activate the machines, similar to the modern PIN. They were also supplied with £10 vouchers. These were fed into the machine, and the corresponding amount debited from the customer&#x27;s account.

A Chubb-made ATM appeared in Sydney in 1969. This was the first ATM installed in Australia. The machine only dispensed $25 at a time and the bank card itself would be mailed to the user after the bank had processed the withdrawal.
Asea Metior&#x27;s Bancomat was the first ATM installed in Spain on 9 January 1969, in central Madrid by Banesto. This device dispensed 1,000 peseta bills (1 to 5 max). Each user had to introduce a security personal key using a combination of the ten numeric buttons. In March of the same year an ad with the instructions to use the Bancomat was published in the same newspaper.

In West Germany, the first ATM was installed in the 50,000-people university city of Tübingen on May 27, 1968, by Kreissparkasse Tübingen. It was built by Aalen-based safe builder Ostertag AG in cooperation with AEG-Telefunken. Each of the 1,000 selected users were given a double-bit key to open the safe with &quot;Geldausgabe&quot; written on it, a plastic identification card, and ten punched cards. One punch card functioned as a withdrawal slip for a 100 DM bill, the maximum limit for daily use was 400 DM.

===Docutel in the United States===

After looking firsthand at the experiences in Europe, in 1968 the ATM was pioneered in the U.S. by Donald Wetzel, who was a department head at a company called Docutel. Docutel was a subsidiary of Recognition Equipment Inc of Dallas, Texas, which was producing optical scanning equipment and had instructed Docutel to explore automated baggage handling and automated gasoline pumps.

On 2 September 1969, Chemical Bank installed a prototype ATM in the U.S. at its branch in Rockville Centre, New York. The first ATMs were designed to dispense a fixed amount of cash when a user inserted a specially coded card. A Chemical Bank advertisement boasted &quot;On Sept. 2 our bank will open at 9:00 and never close again.&quot; Chemical&#x27;s ATM, initially known as a Docuteller was designed by Donald Wetzel and his company Docutel. Chemical executives were initially hesitant about the electronic banking transition given the high cost of the early machines. Additionally, executives were concerned that customers would resist having machines handling their money. In 1995, the Smithsonian National Museum of American History recognised Docutel and Wetzel as the inventors of the networked ATM. To show confidence in Docutel, Chemical installed the first four production machines in a marketing test that proved they worked reliably, customers would use them and even pay a fee for usage. Based on this, banks around the country began to experiment with ATM installations.

By 1974, Docutel had acquired 70 percent of the U.S. market; but as a result of the early 1970s worldwide recession and its reliance on a single product line, Docutel lost its independence and was forced to merge with the U.S. subsidiary of Olivetti.

In 1973, Wetzel was granted U.S. Patent # 3,761,682 ; the application had been filed in October 1971. However, the U.S. patent record cites at least three previous applications from Docutel, all relevant to the development of the ATM and where Wetzel does not figure, namely US Patent # 3,662,343 , U.S. Patent # 3651976 and U.S. Patent # 3,68,569 . These patents are all credited to Kenneth S. Goldstein, MR Karecki, TR Barnes, GR Chastian and John D. White.
===Further advances===
In April 1971, Busicom began to manufacture ATMs based on the first commercial microprocessor, the Intel 4004. Busicom manufactured these microprocessor-based automated teller machines for several buyers, with NCR Corporation as the main customer.

Mohamed Atalla invented the first hardware security module (HSM), dubbed the &quot;Atalla Box&quot;, a security system which encrypted PIN and ATM messages, and protected offline devices with an un-guessable PIN-generating key. In March 1972, Atalla filed for his PIN verification system, which included an encoded card reader and described a system that utilized encryption techniques to assure telephone link security while entering personal ID information that was transmitted to a remote location for verification.

He founded Atalla Corporation (now Utimaco Atalla) in 1972, and commercially launched the &quot;Atalla Box&quot; in 1973. The product was released as the Identikey. It was a card reader and customer identification system, providing a terminal with plastic card and PIN capabilities. The Identikey system consisted of a card reader console, two customer PIN pads, intelligent controller and built-in electronic interface package. The device consisted of two keypads, one for the customer and one for the teller. It allowed the customer to type in a secret code, which is transformed by the device, using a microprocessor, into another code for the teller. During a transaction, the customer&#x27;s account number was read by the card reader. This process replaced manual entry and avoided possible key stroke errors. It allowed users to replace traditional customer verification methods such as signature verification and test questions with a secure PIN system. The success of the &quot;Atalla Box&quot; led to the wide adoption of hardware security modules in ATMs. Its PIN verification process was similar to the later IBM 3624. Atalla&#x27;s HSM products protect 250million card transactions every day as of 2013, and secure the majority of the world&#x27;s ATM transactions as of 2014.

The IBM 2984 was a modern ATM and came into use at Lloyds Bank, High Street, Brentwood, Essex, the UK in December 1972. The IBM 2984 was designed at the request of Lloyds Bank. The 2984 Cash Issuing Terminal was a true ATM, similar in function to today&#x27;s machines and named Cashpoint by Lloyds Bank. Cashpoint is still a registered trademark of Lloyds Banking Group in the UK but is often used as a generic trademark to refer to ATMs of all UK banks. All were online and issued a variable amount which was immediately deducted from the account. A small number of 2984s were supplied to a U.S. bank. A couple of well known historical models of ATMs include the Atalla Box, IBM 3614, IBM 3624 and 473x series, Diebold 10xx and TABS 9000 series, NCR 1780 and earlier NCR 770 series.

The first switching system to enable shared automated teller machines between banks went into production operation on 3 February 1979, in Denver, Colorado, in an effort by Colorado National Bank of Denver and Kranzley and Company of Cherry Hill, New Jersey.

In 2012, a new ATM at Royal Bank of Scotland allowed customers to withdraw cash up to £130 without a card by inputting a six-digit code requested through their smartphones.

== Location ==
ATMs can be placed at any location but are most often placed near or inside banks, shopping centers, airports, railway stations, metro stations, grocery stores, gas stations, restaurants, and other locations. ATMs are also found on cruise ships and on some US Navy ships, where sailors can draw out their pay.

ATMs may be on- and off-premises. On-premises ATMs are typically more advanced, multi-function machines that complement a bank branch&#x27;s capabilities, and are thus more expensive. Off-premises machines are deployed by financial institutions where there is a simple need for cash, so they are generally cheaper single-function devices. Independent ATM deployers unaffiliated with banks install and maintain white-label ATMs.

In the US, Canada and some Gulf countries, banks may have drive-thru lanes providing access to ATMs using an automobile.

In recent times, countries like India and some countries in Africa are installing solar-powered ATMs in rural areas.

The world&#x27;s highest ATM is located at the Khunjerab Pass in Pakistan. Installed at an elevation of by the National Bank of Pakistan, it is designed to work in temperatures as low as -40-degree Celsius.

== Financial networks ==

Most ATMs are connected to interbank networks, enabling people to withdraw and deposit money from machines not belonging to the bank where they have their accounts or in the countries where their accounts are held (enabling cash withdrawals in local currency). Some examples of interbank networks include NYCE, PULSE, PLUS, Cirrus, AFFN, Interac, Interswitch, STAR, LINK, MegaLink, and BancNet.

ATMs rely on the authorization of a financial transaction by the card issuer or other authorizing institution on a communications network. This is often performed through an ISO 8583 messaging system.

Many banks charge ATM usage fees. In some cases, these fees are charged solely to users who are not customers of the bank that operates the ATM; in other cases, they apply to all users.

In order to allow a more diverse range of devices to attach to their networks, some interbank networks have passed rules expanding the definition of an ATM to be a terminal that either has the vault within its footprint or utilises the vault or cash drawer within the merchant establishment, which allows for the use of a scrip cash dispenser.

ATMs typically connect directly to their host or ATM Controller on either ADSL or dial-up modem over a telephone line or directly on a leased line. Leased lines are preferable to plain old telephone service (POTS) lines because they require less time to establish a connection. Less-trafficked machines will usually rely on a dial-up modem on a POTS line rather than using a leased line, since a leased line may be comparatively more expensive to operate compared to a POTS line. That dilemma may be solved as high-speed Internet VPN connections become more ubiquitous. Common lower-level layer communication protocols used by ATMs to communicate back to the bank include SNA over SDLC, a multidrop protocol over Async, X.25, and TCP/IP over Ethernet.

In addition to methods employed for transaction security and secrecy, all communications traffic between the ATM and the Transaction Processor may also be encrypted using methods such as SSL.

== Global use ==

There are no hard international or government-compiled numbers totaling the complete number of ATMs in use worldwide. Estimates developed by ATMIA placed the number of ATMs in use at 3 million units, or approximately 1 ATM per 3,000 people in the world.

To simplify the analysis of ATM usage around the world, financial institutions generally divide the world into seven regions, based on the penetration rates, usage statistics, and features deployed. Four regions (USA, Canada, Europe, and Japan) have high numbers of ATMs per million people. Despite the large number of ATMs, there is additional demand for machines in the Asia/Pacific area as well as in Latin America. Macau may have the highest density of ATMs at 254 ATMs per 100,000 adults.

With the uptake of cashless payment solutions in the late 2010s, ATM numbers and usage started to decline. This happened first in developed countries at a time when ATM number were still increasing in Asia and Africa. , there had been a global decline in the number of ATMs in use, with the average dropping to 39 per 100,000 adults from a peak of 41 per 100,000 adults in 2020.

== Hardware ==
An ATM is typically made up of the following devices:
* CPU (to control the user interface and transaction devices)
* Magnetic or chip card reader (to identify the customer)
* a PIN pad for accepting and encrypting personal identification number EPP4 (similar in layout to a touch tone or calculator keypad), manufactured as part of a secure enclosure
* Secure cryptoprocessor, generally within a secure enclosure
* Display (used by the customer for performing the transaction)
* Function key buttons (usually close to the display) or a touchscreen (used to select the various aspects of the transaction)
* Record printer (to provide the customer with a record of the transaction)
* Vault (to store the parts of the machinery requiring restricted access)
* Housing (for aesthetics and to attach signage to)
* Sensors and indicators

Due to heavier computing demands and the falling price of personal computer–like architectures, ATMs have moved away from custom hardware architectures using microcontrollers or application-specific integrated circuits and have adopted the hardware architecture of a personal computer, such as USB connections for peripherals, Ethernet and IP communications, and use personal computer operating systems.

Business owners often lease ATMs from service providers. However, based on the economies of scale, the price of equipment has dropped to the point where many business owners are simply paying for ATMs using a credit card.

New ADA voice and text-to-speech guidelines imposed in 2010, but required by March 2012 have forced many ATM owners to either upgrade non-compliant machines or dispose them if they are not upgradable, and purchase new compliant equipment. This has created an avenue for hackers and thieves to obtain ATM hardware at junkyards from improperly disposed decommissioned machines.

The vault of an ATM is within the footprint of the device itself and is where items of value are kept. Scrip cash dispensers, which print a receipt or scrip instead of cash, do not incorporate a vault.

Mechanisms found inside the vault may include:
* Dispensing mechanism (to provide cash or other items of value)
* Deposit mechanism including a cheque processing module and bulk note acceptor (to allow the customer to make deposits)
* Security sensors (magnetic, thermal, seismic, gas)
* Locks (to control access to the contents of the vault)
* Journaling systems; many are electronic (a sealed flash memory device based on in-house standards) or a solid-state device (an actual printer) which accrues all records of activity including access timestamps, number of notes dispensed, etc. This is considered sensitive data and is secured in similar fashion to the cash as it is a similar liability.

ATM vaults are supplied by manufacturers in several grades. Factors influencing vault grade selection include cost, weight, regulatory requirements, ATM type, operator risk avoidance practices and internal volume requirements. Industry standard vault configurations include Underwriters Laboratories UL-291 &quot;Business Hours&quot; and Level 1 Safes, RAL TL-30 derivatives, and CEN EN 1143-1 - CEN III and CEN IV.

ATM manufacturers recommend that a vault be attached to the floor to prevent theft, though there is a record of a theft conducted by tunnelling into an ATM floor.

== Software ==

With the migration to commodity Personal Computer hardware, standard commercial &quot;off-the-shelf&quot; operating systems and programming environments can be used inside of ATMs. Typical platforms previously used in ATM development include RMX or OS/2.

Today, the vast majority of ATMs worldwide use Microsoft Windows. In early 2014, 95% of ATMs were running Windows XP. A small number of deployments may still be running older versions of the Windows OS, such as Windows NT, Windows CE, or Windows 2000, even though Microsoft still supports only Windows 10 and Windows 11.

There is a computer industry security view that general public desktop operating systems have greater risks as operating systems for cash dispensing machines than other types of operating systems like (secure) real-time operating systems (RTOS). RISKS Digest has many articles about ATM operating system vulnerabilities.

Linux is also finding some reception in the ATM marketplace. An example of this is Banrisul, the largest bank in the south of Brazil, which has replaced the MS-DOS operating systems in its ATMs with Linux. Banco do Brasil is also migrating ATMs to Linux. Indian-based Vortex Engineering is manufacturing ATMs that operate only with Linux.
Common application layer transaction protocols, such as Diebold 91x (911 or 912) and NCR NDC or NDC+ provide emulation of older generations of hardware on newer platforms with incremental extensions made over time to address new capabilities, although companies like NCR continuously improve these protocols issuing newer versions (e.g. NCR&#x27;s AANDC v3.x.y, where x.y are subversions). Most major ATM manufacturers provide software packages that implement these protocols. Newer protocols such as IFX have yet to find wide acceptance by transaction processors.

With the move to a more standardised software base, financial institutions have been increasingly interested in the ability to pick and choose the application programs that drive their equipment. WOSA/XFS, now known as CEN XFS (or simply XFS), provides a common API for accessing and manipulating the various devices of an ATM. J/XFS is a Java implementation of the CEN XFS API.

While the perceived benefit of XFS is similar to the Java&#x27;s &quot;write once, run anywhere&quot; mantra, often different ATM hardware vendors have different interpretations of the XFS standard. The result of these differences in interpretation means that ATM applications typically use a middleware to even out the differences among various platforms.

With the onset of Windows operating systems and XFS on ATMs, the software applications have the ability to become more intelligent. This has created a new breed of ATM applications commonly referred to as programmable applications. These types of applications allows for an entirely new host of applications in which the ATM terminal can do more than only communicate with the ATM switch. It is now empowered to connected to other content servers and video banking systems.

Notable ATM software that operates on XFS platforms include Triton PRISM, Diebold Agilis EmPower, NCR APTRA Edge, Absolute Systems AbsoluteINTERACT, KAL Kalignite Software Platform, Phoenix Interactive VISTAatm, Wincor Nixdorf ProTopas, Euronet EFTS and Intertech inter-ATM.

With the move of ATMs to industry-standard computing environments, concern has risen about the integrity of the ATM&#x27;s software stack.

== Impact on labor ==
The number of tellers in the United States increased from approximately 300,000 in 1970 to approximately 600,000 in 2010. A contributing factor may have been the introduction of automated teller machines. ATMs allow a branch to operate with fewer tellers, making it more economical for banks to open more branches, necessitating more tellers to staff those additional branches. Further automation and online banking, however, may reverse this increase resulting in a trend toward fewer bank teller positions.

== Security ==

ATM security has several dimensions. ATMs also provide a practical demonstration of a number of security systems and concepts operating together and how various security concerns are addressed.

=== Physical ===

Early ATM security focused on making the terminals invulnerable to physical attack; they were effectively safes with dispenser mechanisms. A number of attacks resulted, with thieves attempting to steal entire machines by ram-raiding. Since the late 1990s, criminal groups operating in Japan improved ram-raiding by stealing and using a truck loaded with heavy construction machinery to effectively demolish or uproot an entire ATM and any housing to steal its cash.

Another attack method, &quot;plofkraak&quot; (a Dutch term), is to seal all openings of the ATM with silicone and fill the vault with a combustible gas or to place an explosive inside, attached, or near the machine. This gas or explosive is ignited and the vault is opened or distorted by the force of the resulting explosion and the criminals can break in.

ATM bombings began in the Netherlands, but as the nation reduced the number of machines in the country from 20000 to 5000 and discouraged cash use, the mostly Moroccan-Dutch gangs expert in the attacks moved elsewhere. Such theft has also occurred in Belgium, France, Denmark, Germany, Australia, and the United Kingdom. When anti-gas explosion prevention devices and reinforced ATMs were installed, criminals began using leaf blowers to remove smoke, and more powerful solid explosives. Despite German banks spending more than €300 million on additional security, the Federal Criminal Police Office estimated that 60% of attacks on ATMs in the country succeeded.

Several attacks in the UK (at least one of which was successful) have involved digging a concealed tunnel under the ATM and cutting through the reinforced base to remove the money.

Modern ATM physical security, per other modern money-handling security, concentrates on denying the use of the money inside the machine to a thief, by using different types of Intelligent Banknote Neutralisation Systems.

A common method is to simply rob the staff filling the machine with money. To avoid this, the schedule for filling them is kept secret, varying and random. The money is often kept in cassettes, which will dye the money if incorrectly opened.

=== Transactional secrecy and integrity ===

The security of ATM transactions relies mostly on the integrity of the secure cryptoprocessor: the ATM often uses general commodity components that sometimes are not considered to be &quot;trusted systems&quot;.

Encryption of personal information, required by law in many jurisdictions, is used to prevent fraud. Sensitive data in ATM transactions are usually encrypted with DES, but transaction processors now usually require the use of Triple DES. Remote Key Loading techniques may be used to ensure the secrecy of the initialisation of the encryption keys in the ATM. Message Authentication Code (MAC) or Partial MAC may also be used to ensure messages have not been tampered with while in transit between the ATM and the financial network.

=== Customer identity integrity ===
There have also been a number of incidents of fraud by man-in-the-middle attacks, where criminals have attached fake keypads or card readers to existing machines. These have then been used to record customers&#x27; PINs and bank card information in order to gain unauthorised access to their accounts. Various ATM manufacturers have put in place countermeasures to protect the equipment they manufacture from these threats.

Alternative methods to verify cardholder identities have been tested and deployed in some countries, such as finger and palm vein patterns, iris, and facial recognition technologies. Cheaper mass-produced equipment has been developed and is being installed in machines globally that detect the presence of foreign objects on the front of ATMs, current tests have shown 99% detection success for all types of skimming devices.

=== Device operation integrity ===

Openings on the customer side of ATMs are often covered by mechanical shutters to prevent tampering with the mechanisms when they are not in use. Alarm sensors are placed inside ATMs and their servicing areas to alert their operators when doors have been opened by unauthorised personnel.

To protect against hackers, ATMs have a built-in firewall. Once the firewall has detected malicious attempts to break into the machine remotely, the firewall locks down the machine.

Rules are usually set by the government or ATM operating body that dictate what happens when integrity systems fail. Depending on the jurisdiction, a bank may or may not be liable when an attempt is made to dispense a customer&#x27;s money from an ATM and the money either gets outside of the ATM&#x27;s vault, or was exposed in a non-secure fashion, or they are unable to determine the state of the money after a failed transaction. Customers often commented that it is difficult to recover money lost in this way, but this is often complicated by the policies regarding suspicious activities typical of the criminal element.

=== Customer security ===
In some countries, multiple security cameras and security guards are a common feature. In the United States, The New York State Comptroller&#x27;s Office has advised the New York State Department of Banking to have more thorough safety inspections of ATMs in high crime areas.

Consultants of ATM operators assert that the issue of customer security should have more focus by the banking industry; it has been suggested that efforts are now more concentrated on the preventive measure of deterrent legislation than on the problem of ongoing forced withdrawals.

At least as far back as 30 July 1986, consultants of the industry have advised for the adoption of an emergency PIN system for ATMs, where the user is able to send a silent alarm in response to a threat. Legislative efforts to require an emergency PIN system have appeared in Illinois, Kansas and Georgia, but none has succeeded yet. In January 2009, Senate Bill 1355 was proposed in the Illinois Senate that revisits the issue of the reverse emergency PIN system. The bill is again supported by the police and opposed by the banking lobby.

In 1998, three towns outside Cleveland, Ohio, in response to an ATM crime wave, adopted legislation requiring that an emergency telephone number switch be installed at all outdoor ATMs within their jurisdiction. In the wake of a homicide in Sharon Hill, Pennsylvania, the city council passed an ATM security bill as well.

In China and elsewhere, many efforts to promote security have been made. On-premises ATMs are often located inside the bank&#x27;s lobby, which may be accessible 24 hours a day. These lobbies have extensive security camera coverage, a courtesy telephone for consulting with the bank staff, and a security guard on the premises. Bank lobbies that are not guarded 24 hours a day may also have secure doors that can only be opened from outside by swiping the bank card against a wall-mounted scanner, allowing the bank to identify which card enters the building. Most ATMs will also display on-screen safety warnings and may also be fitted with convex mirrors above the display allowing the user to see what is happening behind them.

As of 2013, the only claim available about the extent of ATM-connected homicides is that they range from 500 to 1,000 per year in the US, covering only cases where the victim had an ATM card and the card was used by the killer after the known time of death.

===Jackpotting===
The term is used to describe one method criminals utilize to steal money from an ATM. The thieves gain physical access through a small hole drilled in the machine. They disconnect the existing hard drive and connect an external drive using an industrial endoscope. They then depress an internal button that reboots the device so that it is now under the control of the external drive. They can then have the ATM dispense all of its cash.

===Encryption===
In recent years, many ATMs also encrypt the hard disk. This means that actually creating the software for jackpotting is more difficult, and provides more security for the ATM.

== Uses ==
ATMs were originally developed as cash dispensers, and have evolved to provide many other bank-related functions: 
* Paying routine bills, fees, and taxes (utilities, phone bills, social security, legal fees, income taxes, etc.)
* Printing or ordering bank statements
* Updating passbooks
* Cash advances
* Cheque Processing Module
* Paying (in full or partially) the credit balance on a card linked to a specific current account.
* Transferring money between linked accounts (such as transferring between accounts)
* Deposit currency recognition, acceptance, and recycling
In some countries, especially those which benefit from a fully integrated cross-bank network (e.g.: Multibanco in Portugal), ATMs include many functions that are not directly related to the management of one&#x27;s own bank account, such as:
* Loading monetary value into stored-value cards
* Adding pre-paid cell phone / mobile phone credit.
* Purchasing
** Concert tickets
** Gold
** Lottery tickets
** Movie tickets
** Postage stamps.
** Train tickets
** Shopping mall gift certificates.
* Donating to charities

Increasingly, banks are seeking to use the ATM as a sales device to deliver pre approved loans and targeted advertising using products such as ITM (the Intelligent Teller Machine) from Aptra Relate from NCR. ATMs can also act as an advertising channel for other companies.*
However, several different ATM technologies have not yet reached worldwide acceptance, such as:
* Videoconferencing with human tellers, known as video tellers
* Biometrics, where authorization of transactions is based on the scanning of a customer&#x27;s fingerprint, iris, face, etc.
* Cheque/cash Acceptance, where the machine accepts and recognises cheques and/or currency without using envelopes Expected to grow in importance in the US through Check 21 legislation.
* Bar code scanning
* On-demand printing of &quot;items of value&quot; (such as movie tickets, traveler&#x27;s cheques, etc.)
* Dispensing additional media (such as phone cards)
* Co-ordination of ATMs with mobile phones
* Integration with non-banking equipment
* Games and promotional features
* CRM through the ATM
Videoconferencing teller machines are currently referred to as Interactive Teller Machines. Benton Smith writes in the Idaho Business Review, &quot;The software that allows interactive teller machines to function was created by a Salt Lake City-based company called uGenius, a producer of video banking software. NCR, a leading manufacturer of ATMs, acquired uGenius in 2013 and married its own ATM hardware with uGenius&#x27; video software.&quot;
*Pharmacy dispensing units

== Reliability ==
Before an ATM is placed in a public place, it typically has undergone extensive testing with both test money and the backend computer systems that allow it to perform transactions. Banking customers also have come to expect high reliability in their ATMs, which provides incentives to ATM providers to minimise machine and network failures. Financial consequences of incorrect machine operation also provide high degrees of incentive to minimise malfunctions.

ATMs and the supporting electronic financial networks are generally very reliable, with industry benchmarks typically producing 98.25% customer availability for ATMs and up to 99.999% availability for host systems that manage the networks of ATMs. If ATM networks do go out of service, customers could be left without the ability to make transactions until the beginning of their bank&#x27;s next time of opening hours.
This said, not all errors are to the detriment of customers; there have been cases of machines giving out money without debiting the account, or giving out higher value notes as a result of incorrect denomination of banknote being loaded in the money cassettes. The result of receiving too much money may be influenced by the card holder agreement in place between the customer and the bank.

Errors that can occur may be mechanical (such as card transport mechanisms; keypads; hard disk failures; envelope deposit mechanisms); software (such as operating system; device driver; application); communications; or purely down to operator error.

To aid in reliability, some ATMs print each transaction to a roll-paper journal that is stored inside the ATM, which allows its users and the related financial institutions to settle things based on the records in the journal in case there is a dispute. In some cases, transactions are posted to an electronic journal to remove the cost of supplying journal paper to the ATM and for more convenient searching of data.

Improper money checking can cause the possibility of a customer receiving counterfeit banknotes from an ATM. While bank personnel are generally trained better at spotting and removing counterfeit cash, the resulting ATM money supplies used by banks provide no guarantee for proper banknotes, as the Federal Criminal Police Office of Germany has confirmed that there are regularly incidents of false banknotes having been dispensed through ATMs. Some ATMs may be stocked and wholly owned by outside companies, which can further complicate this problem.
Bill validation technology can be used by ATM providers to help ensure the authenticity of the cash before it is stocked in the machine; those with cash recycling capabilities include this capability.

In India, whenever a transaction fails with an ATM due to network or technical issues and if the amount does not get dispensed in spite of the account being debited then the banks are supposed to return the debited amount to the customer within seven working days from the day of receipt of a complaint. Banks are also liable to pay the late fees in case of delay in repayment of funds post seven days.

== Fraud ==


As with any device containing objects of value, ATMs and the systems they depend on to function are the targets of fraud. Fraud against ATMs and people&#x27;s attempts to use them takes several forms.

The first known instance of a fake ATM was installed at a shopping mall in Manchester, Connecticut, in 1993. By modifying the inner workings of a Fujitsu model 7020 ATM, a criminal gang known as the Bucklands Boys stole information from cards inserted into the machine by customers.

WAVY-TV reported an incident in Virginia Beach in September 2006 where a hacker, who had probably obtained a factory-default administrator password for a filling station&#x27;s white-label ATM, caused the unit to assume it was loaded with US$5 bills instead of $20s, enabling himself—and many subsequent customers—to walk away with four times the money withdrawn from their accounts. This type of scam was featured on the TV series &quot;The Real Hustle&quot;.

ATM behaviour can change during what is called &quot;stand-in&quot; time, where the bank&#x27;s cash dispensing network is unable to access databases that contain account information (possibly for database maintenance). In order to give customers access to cash, customers may be allowed to withdraw cash up to a certain amount that may be less than their usual daily withdrawal limit, but may still exceed the amount of available money in their accounts, which could result in fraud if the customers intentionally withdraw more money than they had in their accounts.

=== Card fraud ===
In an attempt to prevent criminals from shoulder surfing the customer&#x27;s personal identification number (PIN), some banks draw privacy areas on the floor.

For a low-tech form of fraud, the easiest is to simply steal a customer&#x27;s card along with its PIN. A later variant of this approach is to trap the card inside of the ATM&#x27;s card reader with a device often referred to as a Lebanese loop. When the customer gets frustrated by not getting the card back and walks away from the machine, the criminal is able to remove the card and withdraw cash from the customer&#x27;s account, using the card and its PIN.

This type of fraud has spread globally. Although somewhat replaced in terms of volume by skimming incidents, a re-emergence of card trapping has been noticed in regions such as Europe, where EMV chip and PIN cards have increased in circulation.

Another simple form of fraud involves attempting to get the customer&#x27;s bank to issue a new card and its PIN and stealing them from their mail.

By contrast, a newer high-tech method of operating, sometimes called card skimming or card cloning, involves the installation of a magnetic card reader over the real ATM&#x27;s card slot and the use of a wireless surveillance camera or a modified digital camera or a false PIN keypad to observe the user&#x27;s PIN. Card data is then cloned into a duplicate card and the criminal attempts a standard cash withdrawal. The availability of low-cost commodity wireless cameras, keypads, card readers, and card writers has made it a relatively simple form of fraud, with comparatively low risk to the fraudsters.

In an attempt to stop these practices, countermeasures against card cloning have been developed by the banking industry, in particular by the use of smart cards which cannot easily be copied or spoofed by unauthenticated devices, and by attempting to make the outside of their ATMs tamper evident. Older chip-card security systems include the French Carte Bleue, Visa Cash, Mondex, Blue from American Express and EMV &#x27;96 or EMV 3.11. The most actively developed form of smart card security in the industry today is known as EMV 2000 or EMV 4.x.

EMV is widely used in the UK (Chip and PIN) and other parts of Europe, but when it is not available in a specific area, ATMs must fall back to using the easy–to–copy magnetic stripe to perform transactions. This fallback behaviour can be exploited. However, the fallback option has been removed on the ATMs of some UK banks, meaning if the chip is not read, the transaction will be declined.

Card cloning and skimming can be detected by the implementation of magnetic card reader heads and firmware that can read a signature embedded in all magnetic stripes during the card production process. This signature, known as a &quot;MagnePrint&quot; or &quot;BluPrint&quot;, can be used in conjunction with common two-factor authentication schemes used in ATM, debit/retail point-of-sale and prepaid card applications.

The concept and various methods of copying the contents of an ATM card&#x27;s magnetic stripe onto a duplicate card to access other people&#x27;s financial information were well known in the hacking communities by late 1990.

In 1996, Andrew Stone, a computer security consultant from Hampshire in the UK, was convicted of stealing more than £1 million by pointing high-definition video cameras at ATMs from a considerable distance and recording the card numbers, expiry dates, etc. from the embossed detail on the ATM cards along with video footage of the PINs being entered. After getting all the information from the videotapes, he was able to produce clone cards which not only allowed him to withdraw the full daily limit for each account, but also allowed him to sidestep withdrawal limits by using multiple copied cards. In court, it was shown that he could withdraw as much as £10,000 per hour by using this method. Stone was sentenced to five years and six months in prison.

== Related devices ==

A talking ATM is a type of ATM that provides audible instructions so that people who cannot read a screen can independently use the machine, therefore effectively eliminating the need for assistance from an external, potentially malevolent source. All audible information is delivered privately through a standard headphone jack on the face of the machine. Alternatively, some banks such as the Nordea and Swedbank use a built-in external speaker which may be invoked by pressing the talk button on the keypad. Information is delivered to the customer either through pre-recorded sound files or via text-to-speech speech synthesis.

A postal interactive kiosk may share many components of an ATM (including a vault), but it only dispenses items related to postage.

A scrip cash dispenser or cashless ATM may have many components in common with an ATM, but it lacks the ability to dispense physical cash and consequently requires no vault. Instead, the customer requests a withdrawal transaction from the machine, which prints a receipt or scrip. The customer then takes this receipt to a nearby sales clerk, who then exchanges it for cash from the till.

A teller assist unit (TAU) is distinct in that it is designed to be operated solely by trained personnel and not by the general public, does integrate directly into interbank networks, and usually is controlled by a computer that is not directly integrated into the overall construction of the unit.

A Web ATM is an online interface for ATM card banking that uses a smart card reader. All the usual ATM functions are available, except for withdrawing cash. Most banks in Taiwan provide these online services.

== See also ==

* ATM Industry Association (ATMIA)
* Automated cash handling
* Banknote counter
* Bitcoin ATM
* Cash register
* EFTPOS
* Electronic funds transfer
* Financial cryptography
* Key management
* Payroll
* Phantom withdrawal
* RAS syndrome
* Self service
* Teller system
* Verification and validation

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Ali, Peter Ifeanyichukwu. &quot;Impact of automated teller machine on banking services delivery in Nigeria: a stakeholder analysis.&quot; &quot;Brazilian Journal of Education, Technology and Society&quot; 9.1 (2016): 64–72. online
* Bátiz-Lazo, Bernardo. &quot;Cash and Dash: How ATMs and Computers Changed Banking&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2018). online review
* Batiz-Lazo, Bernardo. &quot;Emergence and evolution of ATM networks in the UK, 1967–2000.&quot; &quot;Business History&quot; 51.1 (2009): 1-27. 
* Batiz-Lazo, Bernardo, and Gustavo del Angel. &quot;The Dawn of the Plastic Jungle: The Introduction of the Credit Card in Europe and North America, 1950-1975&quot; (Hoover Institution, 2016), abstract
* Bessen, J. &quot;Learning by Doing: The Real Connection between Innovation, Wages, and Wealth&quot; (Yale UP, 2015)
* Hota, Jyotiranjan, Saboohi Nasim, and Sasmita Mishra. &quot;Drivers and Barriers to Adoption of Multivendor ATM Technology in India: Synthesis of Three Empirical Studies.&quot; &quot;Journal of Technology Management for Growing Economies&quot; 9.1 (2018): 89–102. 
* McDysan, David E., and Darren L. Spohn. &quot;ATM theory and applications&quot; (McGraw-Hill Professional, 1998).
* Mkpojiogu, Emmanuel OC, and A. Asuquo. &quot;The user experience of ATM users in Nigeria: a systematic review of empirical papers.&quot; &quot;Journal of Research in National Development&quot; (2018). online 

===Primary sources===

== External links ==


* &quot;The Money Machines&quot;: an account of US cash machine history; by Ellen Florian, Fortune.com
* World Map and Chart of Automated Teller Machines per 100,000 Adults by Lebanese-economy-forum, World Bank data</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="3" end="27" title="ATM" label="automated teller machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="29" end="32" title="ATM" label="ATM"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="51" end="69" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q650241" start="103" end="124" title="financial institution" label="financial institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166072" start="137" end="158" title="financial transaction" label="financial transaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="394" end="426" title="ATM" label="automatic teller machines (ATMs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579812" start="459" end="470" title="RAS syndrome" label="redundantly"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="520" end="551" title="ATM" label="automated banking machine (ABM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="707" end="716" title="ATM" label="cashpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="718" end="730" title="ATM" label="cash machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="735" end="751" title="ATM" label="hole in the wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134360" start="781" end="820" title="Independent ATM deployer" label="not operated by a financial institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994959" start="840" end="851" title="White-label ABMs" label="white-label"/>
<link wikidata="Q10948641" start="906" end="918" title="bank deposit" label="bank deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q693464" start="1005" end="1009" title="cash" label="cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q66100" start="1337" end="1350" title="exchange rate" label="exchange rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207171" start="1410" end="1418" title="ATM card" label="ATM card"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="1526" end="1556" title="personal identification number" label="personal identification number"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134359" start="1725" end="1757" title="ATMIA" label="ATM Industry Association (ATMIA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q336176" start="2079" end="2093" title="Luther Simjian" label="Luther Simjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q857063" start="2559" end="2580" title="Citibank" label="City Bank of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q117599471" start="3165" end="3187" title="Barclays Bank, Enfield" label="Barclays Bank, Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q679983" start="3339" end="3349" title="Reg Varney" label="Reg Varney"/>
<link wikidata="Q336950" start="3409" end="3429" title="John Shepherd-Barron" label="John Shepherd-Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q699810" start="3447" end="3456" title="De La Rue" label="De La Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="3477" end="3480" title="Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604665" start="3488" end="3509" title="2005 New Year Honours" label="2005 New Year Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q840660" start="3609" end="3618" title="carbon-14" label="carbon-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="3711" end="3741" title="personal identification number" label="personal identification number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813369" start="3863" end="3883" title="List of banks in Sweden" label="Swedish saving banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740021" start="3992" end="4015" title="National Westminster Bank" label="Westminster Bank&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295406" start="4016" end="4032" title="Smiths Group" label="Smith Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115255" start="4033" end="4038" title="Chubb Locks" label="Chubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="4252" end="4255" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152764" start="4260" end="4271" title="Lloyds Banking Group" label="Lloyds Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q786947" start="4285" end="4288" title="OKI (company)" label="Oki"/>
<link wikidata="Q994112" start="4355" end="4367" title="Midland Bank" label="Midland Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q256593" start="4453" end="4474" title="Burroughs Corporation" label="Burroughs Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="4895" end="4904" title="radiation" label="Carbon-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="4924" end="4933" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="4988" end="4991" title="Personal identification number" label="PIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295406" start="5060" end="5072" title="Smiths Group" label="Smiths Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4151649" start="5129" end="5145" title="James Goodfellow" label="James Goodfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="5672" end="5687" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="5692" end="5695" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q245343" start="5990" end="5998" title="Barclays" label="Barclays"/>
<link wikidata="Q627381" start="6000" end="6016" title="Bank of Scotland" label="Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="6352" end="6358" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="6649" end="6655" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q806425" start="6659" end="6666" title="Banesto" label="Banesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q189097" start="6696" end="6702" title="Spanish peseta" label="peseta"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="6937" end="6949" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806" start="7019" end="7027" title="Tübingen" label="Tübingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951" start="7089" end="7094" title="Aalen" label="Aalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q158276" start="7146" end="7160" title="AEG-Telefunken" label="AEG-Telefunken"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="7323" end="7335" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="7395" end="7397" title="Deutsche Mark" label="DM"/>
<link wikidata="Q110939640" start="7584" end="7597" title="Donald Wetzel" label="Donald Wetzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="7711" end="7717" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="7719" end="7724" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090395" start="7890" end="7903" title="Chemical Bank" label="Chemical Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q961808" start="7959" end="7985" title="Rockville Centre, New York" label="Rockville Centre, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q110939640" start="8276" end="8289" title="Donald Wetzel" label="Donald Wetzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q148584" start="8561" end="8608" title="Smithsonian National Museum of American History" label="Smithsonian National Museum of American History"/>
<link wikidata="Q673267" start="9198" end="9206" title="Olivetti" label="Olivetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017523" start="9707" end="9714" title="Busicom" label="Busicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="9771" end="9785" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q205509" start="9791" end="9801" title="Intel 4004" label="Intel 4004"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="9902" end="9917" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759109" start="9941" end="9955" title="Mohamed Atalla" label="Mohamed Atalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432354" start="9975" end="9999" title="hardware security module" label="hardware security module"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="10076" end="10079" title="Personal identification number" label="PIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q912405" start="10256" end="10267" title="card reader" label="card reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="10305" end="10315" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513355" start="10472" end="10490" title="Atalla Corporation" label="Atalla Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513355" start="10496" end="10510" title="Utimaco Atalla" label="Utimaco Atalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988434" start="10651" end="10681" title="Identity verification service" label="customer identification system"/>
<link wikidata="Q109973930" start="10709" end="10721" title="plastic card" label="plastic card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340113" start="10814" end="10821" title="PIN pad" label="PIN pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009740" start="10918" end="10925" title="keypads" label="keypads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166072" start="11125" end="11136" title="Financial transaction" label="transaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042071" start="11158" end="11200" title="Bank card number" label="account number was read by the card reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968641" start="11582" end="11590" title="IBM 3624" label="IBM 3624"/>
<link wikidata="Q28458657" start="11638" end="11655" title="Card Transaction Data" label="card transactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152847" start="11916" end="11927" title="Lloyds Bank (historic)" label="Lloyds Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="12078" end="12098" title="registered trademark" label="registered trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125395" start="12156" end="12173" title="List of generic and genericized trademarks" label="generic trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513355" start="12417" end="12427" title="Atalla Corporation" label="Atalla Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968641" start="12439" end="12447" title="IBM 3624" label="IBM 3624"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274506" start="12465" end="12477" title="Diebold 10xx" label="Diebold 10xx"/>
<link wikidata="Q160126" start="12819" end="12841" title="Royal Bank of Scotland" label="Royal Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="13062" end="13066" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11315" start="13069" end="13084" title="shopping center" label="shopping center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="13087" end="13094" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="13097" end="13112" title="railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q928830" start="13115" end="13128" title="metro station" label="metro station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295201" start="13131" end="13144" title="grocery store" label="grocery store"/>
<link wikidata="Q205495" start="13147" end="13158" title="Filling station" label="gas station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707" start="13161" end="13171" title="restaurant" label="restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="13218" end="13229" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="13243" end="13250" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134360" start="13636" end="13660" title="Independent ATM deployer" label="Independent ATM deployer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994959" start="13707" end="13722" title="white-label ATM" label="white-label ATM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218629" start="13753" end="13767" title="Arab states of the Persian Gulf" label="Gulf countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q14253958" start="13784" end="13794" title="drive-thru" label="drive-thru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137017" start="14013" end="14027" title="Khunjerab Pass" label="Khunjerab Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="14031" end="14039" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883425" start="14077" end="14102" title="National Bank of Pakistan" label="National Bank of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976393" start="14227" end="14244" title="interbank network" label="interbank network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956033" start="14505" end="14509" title="NYCE" label="NYCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259647" start="14511" end="14516" title="Pulse (interbank network)" label="PULSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423111" start="14518" end="14522" title="Plus (interbank network)" label="PLUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093128" start="14524" end="14530" title="Cirrus (interbank network)" label="Cirrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792984" start="14532" end="14536" title="AFFN" label="AFFN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153067" start="14538" end="14545" title="Interac" label="Interac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7394670" start="14560" end="14564" title="STAR (interbank network)" label="STAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458752" start="14566" end="14570" title="LINK (UK)" label="LINK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808050" start="14572" end="14580" title="MegaLink" label="MegaLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854033" start="14586" end="14593" title="BancNet" label="BancNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166072" start="14632" end="14653" title="financial transaction" label="financial transaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654839" start="14770" end="14778" title="ISO 8583" label="ISO 8583"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499460" start="14816" end="14830" title="ATM usage fees" label="ATM usage fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="15307" end="15327" title="scrip cash dispenser" label="scrip cash dispenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949271" start="15379" end="15393" title="ATMC" label="ATM Controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="15404" end="15408" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="15420" end="15425" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="15433" end="15442" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462168" start="15509" end="15536" title="plain old telephone service" label="plain old telephone service"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="15860" end="15863" title="VPN" label="VPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503167" start="16002" end="16005" title="Systems Network Architecture" label="SNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517778" start="16011" end="16015" title="Synchronous Data Link Control" label="SDLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952283" start="16019" end="16037" title="Multidrop bus" label="multidrop protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q752739" start="16043" end="16048" title="Asynchronous communication" label="Async"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="16050" end="16054" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="16060" end="16066" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="16072" end="16080" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="16270" end="16273" title="Secure Sockets Layer" label="SSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134359" start="16435" end="16440" title="ATMIA" label="ATMIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="16968" end="16973" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q25548518" start="17063" end="17089" title="Cashless society" label="cashless payment solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="17495" end="17498" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907797" start="17557" end="17565" title="Magnetic stripe card" label="Magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41349" start="17569" end="17578" title="chip card" label="chip card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340113" start="17617" end="17624" title="PIN pad" label="PIN pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="17654" end="17684" title="personal identification number" label="personal identification number"/>
<link wikidata="Q941685" start="17714" end="17724" title="touch tone" label="touch tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="17728" end="17738" title="calculator" label="calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698833" start="17793" end="17815" title="Secure cryptoprocessor" label="Secure cryptoprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25423" start="17919" end="17931" title="Function key" label="Function key"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="17976" end="17987" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501496" start="18122" end="18127" title="Bank vault" label="Vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="18209" end="18219" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="18330" end="18347" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="18430" end="18445" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="18450" end="18489" title="application-specific integrated circuit" label="application-specific integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902809" start="19380" end="19385" title="Scrip" label="Scrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q693464" start="19562" end="19566" title="cash" label="cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324421" start="20452" end="20477" title="Underwriters Laboratories" label="Underwriters Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q285845" start="21017" end="21020" title="RMX (operating system)" label="RMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="21024" end="21028" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="21078" end="21095" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="21242" end="21252" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q488244" start="21254" end="21264" title="Windows CE" label="Windows CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="21269" end="21281" title="Windows 2000" label="Windows 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="21325" end="21335" title="Windows 10" label="Windows 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q107269746" start="21340" end="21350" title="Windows 11" label="Windows 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q213666" start="21563" end="21589" title="real-time operating system" label="real-time operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276830" start="21599" end="21611" title="RISKS Digest" label="RISKS Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="21675" end="21680" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857098" start="21758" end="21766" title="Banrisul" label="Banrisul"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="21801" end="21807" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="21832" end="21838" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q610817" start="21881" end="21896" title="Banco do Brasil" label="Banco do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941915" start="21943" end="21961" title="Vortex Engineering" label="Vortex Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220078" start="22070" end="22077" title="Diebold" label="Diebold"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="22099" end="22114" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR NDC or NDC+"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656406" start="22123" end="22132" title="Hardware emulation" label="emulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q383167" start="22776" end="22784" title="WOSA/XFS" label="WOSA/XFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q383167" start="22799" end="22822" title="CEN/XFS" label="CEN XFS (or simply XFS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="22842" end="22845" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q383167" start="22908" end="22913" title="J/XFS" label="J/XFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075657" start="23031" end="23055" title="write once, run anywhere" label="write once, run anywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q146768" start="23253" end="23263" title="middleware" label="middleware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927892" start="23769" end="23782" title="video banking" label="video banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220078" start="23867" end="23874" title="Diebold" label="Diebold"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="23891" end="23905" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR APTRA Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325082" start="23942" end="23973" title="KAL (Korala Associates Limited)" label="KAL Kalignite Software Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q702394" start="24005" end="24028" title="Wincor Nixdorf" label="Wincor Nixdorf ProTopas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412010" start="24030" end="24037" title="Euronet Worldwide" label="Euronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526135" start="24761" end="24769" title="security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q522291" start="25191" end="25202" title="ram-raiding" label="ram-raiding"/>
<link wikidata="Q14906899" start="25466" end="25475" title="ATM blow up" label="plofkraak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="25485" end="25490" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q146439" start="25538" end="25546" title="silicone" label="silicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913086" start="25955" end="25969" title="Moroccan-Dutch" label="Moroccan-Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450186" start="26218" end="26230" title="leaf blowers" label="leaf blowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q56030" start="26365" end="26395" title="Federal Criminal Police Office (Germany)" label="Federal Criminal Police Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509171" start="26819" end="26862" title="Intelligent banknote neutralisation system" label="Intelligent Banknote Neutralisation Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698833" start="27231" end="27246" title="cryptoprocessor" label="cryptoprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456680" start="27342" end="27356" title="trusted system" label="trusted system"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="27514" end="27523" title="encryption" label="encrypted"/>
<link wikidata="Q135035" start="27529" end="27532" title="Data Encryption Standard" label="DES"/>
<link wikidata="Q134983" start="27592" end="27602" title="Triple DES" label="Triple DES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="27725" end="27752" title="Message Authentication Code" label="Message Authentication Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="27762" end="27773" title="Partial MAC" label="Partial MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q554830" start="27990" end="28014" title="man-in-the-middle attack" label="man-in-the-middle attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672722" start="28500" end="28504" title="Iris recognition" label="iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192553" start="28510" end="28528" title="facial recognition system" label="facial recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873" start="28768" end="28776" title="Skimming (credit card fraud)" label="skimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135310" start="29978" end="29993" title="security camera" label="security camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q856887" start="29999" end="30013" title="security guard" label="security guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="30044" end="30057" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="30063" end="30077" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131087" start="30678" end="30690" title="panic alarm" label="silent alarm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="30788" end="30796" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="30798" end="30804" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="30809" end="30816" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q694554" start="31172" end="31198" title="emergency telephone number" label="emergency telephone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="32948" end="32959" title="jackpotting" label="jackpotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413339" start="33283" end="33297" title="bank statement" label="bank statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q676506" start="33310" end="33318" title="passbook" label="passbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q161380" start="33322" end="33334" title="Cash advance" label="Cash advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q695430" start="33445" end="33460" title="Current account (banking)" label="current account"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952330" start="33705" end="33715" title="Multibanco" label="Multibanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8428168" start="33877" end="33894" title="stored-value card" label="stored-value card"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="33914" end="33924" title="cell phone" label="cell phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="33927" end="33939" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="33983" end="33987" title="Gold" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q189409" start="33991" end="33998" title="Lottery" label="Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="34027" end="34040" title="Postage stamp" label="Postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34046" end="34059" title="Public transport#Ticket systems" label="Train tickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="34063" end="34076" title="Shopping mall" label="Shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q554910" start="34077" end="34093" title="gift certificate" label="gift certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="34493" end="34510" title="Videoconferencing" label="Videoconferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q177765" start="34556" end="34566" title="Biometrics" label="Biometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089069" start="34844" end="34852" title="Check 21" label="Check 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q807980" start="34868" end="34885" title="Barcode reader" label="Bar code scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061429" start="34961" end="34983" title="traveler&amp;#x27;s cheque" label="traveler&amp;#x27;s cheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q485643" start="35163" end="35166" title="Customer relationship management" label="CRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705784" start="35776" end="35786" title="Test Money" label="test money"/>
<link wikidata="Q620167" start="35795" end="35802" title="Front and back ends" label="backend"/>
<link wikidata="Q918448" start="36759" end="36771" title="denomination (currency)" label="denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q47433" start="36775" end="36783" title="banknote" label="banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q11019" start="36981" end="36991" title="Machine" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408770" start="37037" end="37054" title="hard disk failure" label="hard disk failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="37087" end="37095" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="37105" end="37121" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="37123" end="37136" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="37138" end="37149" title="application software" label="application"/>
<link wikidata="Q4350200" start="37152" end="37166" title="information transfer" label="communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="37696" end="37707" title="counterfeit" label="counterfeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q56030" start="37921" end="37962" title="Federal Criminal Police Office (Germany)" label="Federal Criminal Police Office of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q552504" start="38174" end="38189" title="Bill validator" label="Bill validation"/>
<link wikidata="Q753909" start="39071" end="39094" title="Manchester, Connecticut" label="Manchester, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="39142" end="39149" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946847" start="39280" end="39287" title="WAVY-TV" label="WAVY-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039694" start="39718" end="39733" title="The Real Hustle" label="The Real Hustle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108340" start="40370" end="40386" title="shoulder surfing (computer security)" label="shoulder surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q674050" start="40407" end="40437" title="personal identification number" label="personal identification number"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510992" start="40721" end="40734" title="Lebanese loop" label="Lebanese loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q41349" start="42106" end="42116" title="smart card" label="smart card"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681758" start="42239" end="42253" title="tamper-evident" label="tamper evident"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117353" start="42307" end="42318" title="Carte Bleue" label="Carte Bleue"/>
<link wikidata="Q496745" start="42320" end="42329" title="Visa Cash" label="Visa Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269340" start="42331" end="42337" title="Mondex" label="Mondex"/>
<link wikidata="Q194360" start="42339" end="42365" title="Blue from American Express" label="Blue from American Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q923066" start="42370" end="42394" title="EMV 96" label="EMV &amp;#x27;96 or EMV 3.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q923066" start="42486" end="42505" title="EMV 2000" label="EMV 2000 or EMV 4.x"/>
<link wikidata="Q923066" start="42508" end="42511" title="EMV" label="EMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q923066" start="42538" end="42550" title="Chip and PIN" label="Chip and PIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q83873" start="42918" end="42926" title="Skimming (credit card fraud)" label="skimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679802" start="44333" end="44344" title="talking ATM" label="talking ATM"/>
<link wikidata="Q394226" start="44645" end="44659" title="headphone jack" label="headphone jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123823" start="44726" end="44732" title="Nordea" label="Nordea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145493" start="44737" end="44745" title="Swedbank" label="Swedbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="44911" end="44916" title="sound" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q16346" start="44945" end="44961" title="speech synthesis" label="speech synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370241" start="44973" end="44990" title="interactive kiosk" label="interactive kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902809" start="45371" end="45376" title="scrip" label="scrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q787342" start="45489" end="45507" title="teller assist unit" label="teller assist unit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45854" end="45871" title="Card reader#Smart card readers" label="smart card reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="45959" end="45965" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134359" start="46016" end="46048" title="ATMIA" label="ATM Industry Association (ATMIA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826443" start="46051" end="46074" title="Automated cash handling" label="Automated cash handling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194984" start="46077" end="46093" title="Banknote counter" label="Banknote counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15734048" start="46096" end="46107" title="Bitcoin ATM" label="Bitcoin ATM"/>
<link wikidata="Q235041" start="46110" end="46123" title="Cash register" label="Cash register"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323005" start="46126" end="46132" title="EFTPOS" label="EFTPOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326019" start="46135" end="46160" title="Electronic funds transfer" label="Electronic funds transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q936407" start="46163" end="46185" title="Financial cryptography" label="Financial cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320561" start="46188" end="46202" title="Key management" label="Key management"/>
<link wikidata="Q59434791" start="46205" end="46212" title="Payroll" label="Payroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180629" start="46215" end="46233" title="Phantom withdrawal" label="Phantom withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579812" start="46236" end="46248" title="RAS syndrome" label="RAS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369310" start="46251" end="46263" title="Self service" label="Self service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697593" start="46266" end="46279" title="Teller system" label="Teller system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919644" start="46282" end="46309" title="Verification and validation" label="Verification and validation"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="47920" end="47927" title="Fortune magazine" label="Fortune"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46630" wikidata="Q193040" url="?curid=46630" title="Embedded system">
<text>An embedded system is a specialized computer system—a combination of a computer processor, computer memory, and input/output peripheral devices—that has a dedicated function within a larger mechanical or electronic system. It is embedded as part of a complete device often including electrical or electronic hardware and mechanical parts. 
Because an embedded system typically controls physical operations of the machine that it is embedded within, it often has real-time computing constraints. Embedded systems control many devices in common use. , it was estimated that ninety-eight percent of all microprocessors manufactured were used in embedded systems.

Modern embedded systems are often based on microcontrollers (i.e. microprocessors with integrated memory and peripheral interfaces), but ordinary microprocessors (using external chips for memory and peripheral interface circuits) are also common, especially in more complex systems. In either case, the processor(s) used may be types ranging from general purpose to those specialized in a certain class of computations, or even custom designed for the application at hand. A common standard class of dedicated processors is the digital signal processor (DSP).

Since the embedded system is dedicated to specific tasks, design engineers can optimize it to reduce the size and cost of the product and increase its reliability and performance. Some embedded systems are mass-produced, benefiting from economies of scale.

Embedded systems range in size from portable personal devices such as digital watches and MP3 players to bigger machines like home appliances, industrial assembly lines, robots, transport vehicles, traffic light controllers, and medical imaging systems. Often they constitute subsystems of other machines like avionics in aircraft and astrionics in spacecraft. Large installations like factories, pipelines, and electrical grids rely on multiple embedded systems networked together. Generalized through software customization, embedded systems such as programmable logic controllers frequently comprise their functional units.

Embedded systems range from those low in complexity, with a single microcontroller chip, to very high with multiple units, peripherals and networks, which may reside in equipment racks or across large geographical areas connected via long-distance communications lines.

==History==
=== Background ===
The origins of the microprocessor and the microcontroller can be traced back to the MOS integrated circuit, which is an integrated circuit chip fabricated from MOSFETs (metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistors) and was developed in the early 1960s. By 1964, MOS chips had reached higher transistor density and lower manufacturing costs than bipolar chips. MOS chips further increased in complexity at a rate predicted by Moore&#x27;s law, leading to large-scale integration (LSI) with hundreds of transistors on a single MOS chip by the late 1960s. The application of MOS LSI chips to computing was the basis for the first microprocessors, as engineers began recognizing that a complete computer processor system could be contained on several MOS LSI chips.

The first multi-chip microprocessors, the Four-Phase Systems AL1 in 1969 and the Garrett AiResearch MP944 in 1970, were developed with multiple MOS LSI chips. The first single-chip microprocessor was the Intel 4004, released in 1971. It was developed by Federico Faggin, using his silicon-gate MOS technology, along with Intel engineers Marcian Hoff and Stan Mazor, and Busicom engineer Masatoshi Shima.

=== Development ===
One of the first recognizably modern embedded systems was the Apollo Guidance Computer, developed ca. 1965 by Charles Stark Draper at the MIT Instrumentation Laboratory. At the project&#x27;s inception, the Apollo guidance computer was considered the riskiest item in the Apollo project as it employed the then newly developed monolithic integrated circuits to reduce the computer&#x27;s size and weight.

An early mass-produced embedded system was the Autonetics D-17 guidance computer for the Minuteman missile, released in 1961. When the Minuteman II went into production in 1966, the D-17 was replaced with a new computer that represented the first high-volume use of integrated circuits.

Since these early applications in the 1960s, embedded systems have come down in price and there has been a dramatic rise in processing power and functionality. An early microprocessor, the Intel 4004 (released in 1971), was designed for calculators and other small systems but still required external memory and support chips. By the early 1980s, memory, input and output system components had been integrated into the same chip as the processor forming a microcontroller. Microcontrollers find applications where a general-purpose computer would be too costly. As the cost of microprocessors and microcontrollers fell, the prevalence of embedded systems increased.

A comparatively low-cost microcontroller may be programmed to fulfill the same role as a large number of separate components. With microcontrollers, it became feasible to replace, even in consumer products, expensive knob-based analog components such as potentiometers and variable capacitors with up/down buttons or knobs read out by a microprocessor. Although in this context an embedded system is usually more complex than a traditional solution, most of the complexity is contained within the microcontroller itself. Very few additional components may be needed and most of the design effort is in the software. Software prototype and test can be quicker compared with the design and construction of a new circuit not using an embedded processor.

==Applications==
Embedded systems are commonly found in consumer, industrial, automotive, home appliances, medical, telecommunication, commercial, aerospace and military applications.

Telecommunications systems employ numerous embedded systems from telephone switches for the network to cell phones at the end user. Computer networking uses dedicated routers and network bridges to route data.

Consumer electronics include MP3 players, television sets, mobile phones, video game consoles, digital cameras, GPS receivers, and printers. Household appliances, such as microwave ovens, washing machines and dishwashers, include embedded systems to provide flexibility, efficiency and features. Advanced heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems use networked thermostats to more accurately and efficiently control temperature that can change by time of day and season. Home automation uses wired and wireless networking that can be used to control lights, climate, security, audio/visual, surveillance, etc., all of which use embedded devices for sensing and controlling.

Transportation systems from flight to automobiles increasingly use embedded systems. New airplanes contain advanced avionics such as inertial guidance systems and GPS receivers that also have considerable safety requirements. Spacecraft rely on astrionics systems for trajectory correction. Various electric motors — brushless DC motors, induction motors and DC motors — use electronic motor controllers. Automobiles, electric vehicles, and hybrid vehicles increasingly use embedded systems to maximize efficiency and reduce pollution. Other automotive safety systems using embedded systems include anti-lock braking system (ABS), electronic stability control (ESC/ESP), traction control (TCS) and automatic four-wheel drive.

Medical equipment uses embedded systems for monitoring, and various medical imaging (positron emission tomography (PET), single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for non-invasive internal inspections. Embedded systems within medical equipment are often powered by industrial computers.

Embedded systems are used for safety-critical systems in aerospace and defense industries. Unless connected to wired or wireless networks via on-chip 3G cellular or other methods for IoT monitoring and control purposes, these systems can be isolated from hacking and thus be more secure. For fire safety, the systems can be designed to have a greater ability to handle higher temperatures and continue to operate. In dealing with security, the embedded systems can be self-sufficient and be able to deal with cut electrical and communication systems.

Miniature wireless devices called motes are networked wireless sensors. Wireless sensor networking makes use of miniaturization made possible by advanced integrated circuit (IC) design to couple full wireless subsystems to sophisticated sensors, enabling people and companies to measure a myriad of things in the physical world and act on this information through monitoring and control systems. These motes are completely self-contained and will typically run off a battery source for years before the batteries need to be changed or charged.

==Characteristics==
Embedded systems are designed to perform a specific task, in contrast with general-purpose computers designed for multiple tasks. Some have real-time performance constraints that must be met, for reasons such as safety and usability; others may have low or no performance requirements, allowing the system hardware to be simplified to reduce costs.

Embedded systems are not always standalone devices. Many embedded systems are a small part within a larger device that serves a more general purpose. For example, the Gibson Robot Guitar features an embedded system for tuning the strings, but the overall purpose of the Robot Guitar is to play music. Similarly, an embedded system in an automobile provides a specific function as a subsystem of the car itself.
The program instructions written for embedded systems are referred to as firmware, and are stored in read-only memory or flash memory chips. They run with limited computer hardware resources: little memory, small or non-existent keyboard or screen.

===User interfaces===
Embedded systems range from no user interface at all, in systems dedicated to one task, to complex graphical user interfaces that resemble modern computer desktop operating systems. Simple embedded devices use buttons, light-emitting diodes (LED), graphic or character liquid-crystal displays (LCD) with a simple menu system. More sophisticated devices that use a graphical screen with touch sensing or screen-edge soft keys provide flexibility while minimizing space used: the meaning of the buttons can change with the screen, and selection involves the natural behavior of pointing at what is desired.

Some systems provide user interface remotely with the help of a serial (e.g. RS-232) or network (e.g. Ethernet) connection. This approach extends the capabilities of the embedded system, avoids the cost of a display, simplifies the board support package (BSP) and allows designers to build a rich user interface on the PC. A good example of this is the combination of an embedded HTTP server running on an embedded device (such as an IP camera or a network router). The user interface is displayed in a web browser on a PC connected to the device.

===Processors in embedded systems===
Examples of properties of typical embedded computers when compared with general-purpose counterparts, are low power consumption, small size, rugged operating ranges, and low per-unit cost. This comes at the expense of limited processing resources.

Numerous microcontrollers have been developed for embedded systems use. General-purpose microprocessors are also used in embedded systems, but generally, require more support circuitry than microcontrollers.

====Ready-made computer boards====
PC/104 and PC/104+ are examples of standards for ready-made computer boards intended for small, low-volume embedded and ruggedized systems. These are mostly x86-based and often physically small compared to a standard PC, although still quite large compared to most simple (8/16-bit) embedded systems. They may use DOS, FreeBSD, Linux, NetBSD, OpenHarmony or an embedded real-time operating system (RTOS) such as MicroC/OS-II, QNX or VxWorks.

In certain applications, where small size or power efficiency are not primary concerns, the components used may be compatible with those used in general-purpose x86 personal computers. Boards such as the VIA EPIA range help to bridge the gap by being PC-compatible but highly integrated, physically smaller or have other attributes making them attractive to embedded engineers. The advantage of this approach is that low-cost commodity components may be used along with the same software development tools used for general software development. Systems built in this way are still regarded as embedded since they are integrated into larger devices and fulfill a single role. Examples of devices that may adopt this approach are automated teller machines (ATM) and arcade machines, which contain code specific to the application.

However, most ready-made embedded systems boards are not PC-centered and do not use the ISA or PCI busses. When a system-on-a-chip processor is involved, there may be little benefit to having a standardized bus connecting discrete components, and the environment for both hardware and software tools may be very different.

One common design style uses a small system module, perhaps the size of a business card, holding high density BGA chips such as an ARM-based system-on-a-chip processor and peripherals, external flash memory for storage, and DRAM for runtime memory. The module vendor will usually provide boot software and make sure there is a selection of operating systems, usually including Linux and some real-time choices. These modules can be manufactured in high volume, by organizations familiar with their specialized testing issues, and combined with much lower volume custom mainboards with application-specific external peripherals. Prominent examples of this approach include Arduino and Raspberry Pi.

====ASIC and FPGA SoC solutions====
A system on a chip (SoC) contains a complete system - consisting of multiple processors, multipliers, caches, even different types of memory and commonly various peripherals like interfaces for wired or wireless communication on a single chip. Often graphics processing units (GPU) and DSPs are included such chips. SoCs can be implemented as an application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) or using a field-programmable gate array (FPGA) which typically can be reconfigured.

ASIC implementations are common for very-high-volume embedded systems like mobile phones and smartphones. ASIC or FPGA implementations may be used for not-so-high-volume embedded systems with special needs in kind of signal processing performance, interfaces and reliability, like in avionics.

===Peripherals===
Embedded systems talk with the outside world via peripherals, such as:
* Serial communication interfaces (SCI): RS-232, RS-422, RS-485, etc.
* Synchronous Serial Interface: I2C, SPI, SSC and ESSI (Enhanced Synchronous Serial Interface)
* Universal Serial Bus (USB)
* Media cards (SD cards, CompactFlash, etc.)
* Network interface controller: Ethernet, WiFi, etc.
* Fieldbuses: CAN bus, LIN-Bus, PROFIBUS, etc.
* Timers: Phase-locked loops, programmable interval timers
* General Purpose Input/Output (GPIO)
* Analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters
* Debugging: JTAG, In-system programming, background debug mode interface port, BITP, and DB9 ports.

===Tools===
As with other software, embedded system designers use compilers, assemblers, and debuggers to develop embedded system software. However, they may also use more specific tools:
* In circuit debuggers or emulators (see next section).
* Utilities to add a checksum or CRC to a program, so the embedded system can check if the program is valid.
* For systems using digital signal processing, developers may use a computational notebook to simulate the mathematics.
* System-level modeling and simulation tools help designers to construct simulation models of a system with hardware components such as processors, memories, DMA, interfaces, buses and software behavior flow as a state diagram or flow diagram using configurable library blocks. Simulation is conducted to select the right components by performing power vs. performance trade-offs, reliability analysis and bottleneck analysis. Typical reports that help a designer to make architecture decisions include application latency, device throughput, device utilization, power consumption of the full system as well as device-level power consumption.
* A model-based development tool creates and simulates graphical data flow and UML state chart diagrams of components like digital filters, motor controllers, communication protocol decoding and multi-rate tasks.
* Custom compilers and linkers may be used to optimize specialized hardware.
* An embedded system may have its own special language or design tool, or add enhancements to an existing language such as Forth or Basic.
* Another alternative is to add a RTOS or embedded operating system
* Modeling and code generating tools often based on state machines

Software tools can come from several sources:
* Software companies that specialize in the embedded market
* Ported from the GNU software development tools
* Sometimes, development tools for a personal computer can be used if the embedded processor is a close relative to a common PC processor

Embedded software often requires a variety of development tools, including programming languages such as C++, Rust, or Python, and frameworks like Qt for graphical interfaces. These tools enable developers to create efficient, scalable, and feature-rich applications tailored to the specific requirements of embedded systems. The choice of tools is driven by factors such as real-time performance, integration with hardware, or energy efficiency.

As the complexity of embedded systems grows, higher-level tools and operating systems are migrating into machinery where it makes sense. For example, cellphones, personal digital assistants and other consumer computers often need significant software that is purchased or provided by a person other than the manufacturer of the electronics. In these systems, an open programming environment such as Linux, NetBSD, FreeBSD, OSGi or Embedded Java is required so that the third-party software provider can sell to a large market.

==Debugging==
Embedded debugging may be performed at different levels, depending on the facilities available. Considerations include: does it slow down the main application, how close is the debugged system or application to the actual system or application, how expressive are the triggers that can be set for debugging (e.g., inspecting the memory when a particular program counter value is reached), and what can be inspected in the debugging process (such as, only memory, or memory and registers, etc.).

From simplest to most sophisticated debugging techniques and systems are roughly grouped into the following areas:
* Interactive resident debugging, using the simple shell provided by the embedded operating system (e.g. Forth and Basic)
* Software-only debuggers have the benefit that they do not need any hardware modification but have to carefully control what they record in order to conserve time and storage space.
* External debugging using logging or serial port output to trace operation using either a monitor in flash or using a debug server like the Remedy Debugger that even works for heterogeneous multicore systems.
* An in-circuit debugger (ICD), a hardware device that connects to the microprocessor via a JTAG or Nexus interface. This allows the operation of the microprocessor to be controlled externally, but is typically restricted to specific debugging capabilities in the processor. 
* An in-circuit emulator (ICE) replaces the microprocessor with a simulated equivalent, providing full control over all aspects of the microprocessor.
* A complete emulator provides a simulation of all aspects of the hardware, allowing all of it to be controlled and modified, and allowing debugging on a normal PC. The downsides are expense and slow operation, in some cases up to 100 times slower than the final system.
* For SoC designs, the typical approach is to verify and debug the design on an FPGA prototype board. Tools such as Certus are used to insert probes in the FPGA implementation that make signals available for observation. This is used to debug hardware, firmware and software interactions across multiple FPGAs in an implementation with capabilities similar to a logic analyzer.

Unless restricted to external debugging, the programmer can typically load and run software through the tools, view the code running in the processor, and start or stop its operation. The view of the code may be as high-level programming language, assembly code or mixture of both.

===Tracing===
Real-time operating systems often support tracing of operating system events. A graphical view is presented by a host PC tool, based on a recording of the system behavior. The trace recording can be performed in software, by the RTOS, or by special tracing hardware. RTOS tracing allows developers to understand timing and performance issues of the software system and gives a good understanding of the high-level system behaviors. Trace recording in embedded systems can be achieved using hardware or software solutions. Software-based trace recording does not require specialized debugging hardware and can be used to record traces in deployed devices, but it can have an impact on CPU and RAM usage. One example of a software-based tracing method used in RTOS environments is the use of empty macros which are invoked by the operating system at strategic places in the code, and can be implemented to serve as hooks.

===Reliability===
Embedded systems often reside in machines that are expected to run continuously for years without error, and in some cases recover by themselves if an error occurs. Therefore, the software is usually developed and tested more carefully than that for personal computers, and unreliable mechanical moving parts such as disk drives, switches or buttons are avoided.

Specific reliability issues may include:
* The system cannot safely be shut down for repair, or it is too inaccessible to repair. Examples include space systems, undersea cables, navigational beacons, bore-hole systems, and automobiles.
* The system must be kept running for safety reasons. Reduced functionality in the event of failure may be intolerable. Often backups are selected by an operator. Examples include aircraft navigation, reactor control systems, safety-critical chemical factory controls, train signals.
* The system will lose large amounts of money when shut down: Telephone switches, factory controls, bridge and elevator controls, funds transfer and market making, automated sales and service.

A variety of techniques are used, sometimes in combination, to recover from errors—both software bugs such as memory leaks, and also soft errors in the hardware:
* watchdog timer that resets and restarts the system unless the software periodically notifies the watchdog subsystems
* Designing with a trusted computing base (TCB) architecture ensures a highly secure and reliable system environment
* A hypervisor designed for embedded systems is able to provide secure encapsulation for any subsystem component so that a compromised software component cannot interfere with other subsystems, or privileged-level system software. This encapsulation keeps faults from propagating from one subsystem to another, thereby improving reliability. This may also allow a subsystem to be automatically shut down and restarted on fault detection.
* Immunity-aware programming can help engineers produce more reliable embedded systems code. Guidelines and coding rules such as MISRA C/C++ aim to assist developers produce reliable, portable firmware in a number of different ways: typically by advising or mandating against coding practices which may lead to run-time errors (memory leaks, invalid pointer uses), use of run-time checks and exception handling (range/sanity checks, divide-by-zero and buffer index validity checks, default cases in logic checks), loop bounding, production of human-readable, well commented and well structured code, and avoiding language ambiguities which may lead to compiler-induced inconsistencies or side-effects (expression evaluation ordering, recursion, certain types of macro). These rules can often be used in conjunction with code static checkers or bounded model checking for functional verification purposes, and also assist in determination of code timing properties.

===High vs. low volume===
For high-volume systems such as mobile phones, minimizing cost is usually the primary design consideration. Engineers typically select hardware that is just good enough to implement the necessary functions.

For low-volume or prototype embedded systems, general-purpose computers may be adapted by limiting the programs or by replacing the operating system with an RTOS.

==Embedded software architectures==
In 1978 National Electrical Manufacturers Association released ICS 3-1978, a standard for programmable microcontrollers, including almost any computer-based controllers, such as single-board computers, numerical, and event-based controllers.

There are several different types of software architecture in common use.

===Simple control loop===
In this design, the software simply has a loop which monitors the input devices. The loop calls subroutines, each of which manages a part of the hardware or software. Hence it is called a simple control loop or programmed input-output.

===Interrupt-controlled system===
Some embedded systems are predominantly controlled by interrupts. This means that tasks performed by the system are triggered by different kinds of events; an interrupt could be generated, for example, by a timer at a predefined interval, or by a serial port controller receiving data.

This architecture is used if event handlers need low latency, and the event handlers are short and simple. These systems run a simple task in a main loop also, but this task is not very sensitive to unexpected delays. Sometimes the interrupt handler will add longer tasks to a queue structure. Later, after the interrupt handler has finished, these tasks are executed by the main loop. This method brings the system close to a multitasking kernel with discrete processes.

===Cooperative multitasking===
Cooperative multitasking is very similar to the simple control loop scheme, except that the loop is hidden in an API. The programmer defines a series of tasks, and each task gets its own environment to run in. When a task is idle, it calls an idle routine which passes control to another task.

The advantages and disadvantages are similar to that of the control loop, except that adding new software is easier, by simply writing a new task, or adding to the queue.

===Preemptive multitasking or multi-threading===
In this type of system, a low-level piece of code switches between tasks or threads based on a timer invoking an interrupt. This is the level at which the system is generally considered to have an operating system kernel. Depending on how much functionality is required, it introduces more or less of the complexities of managing multiple tasks running conceptually in parallel.

As any code can potentially damage the data of another task (except in systems using a memory management unit) programs must be carefully designed and tested, and access to shared data must be controlled by some synchronization strategy such as message queues, semaphores or a non-blocking synchronization scheme.

Because of these complexities, it is common for organizations to use an off-the-shelf RTOS, allowing the application programmers to concentrate on device functionality rather than operating system services. The choice to include an RTOS brings in its own issues, however, as the selection must be made prior to starting the application development process. This timing forces developers to choose the embedded operating system for their device based on current requirements and so restricts future options to a large extent. 

The level of complexity in embedded systems is continuously growing as devices are required to manage peripherals and tasks such as serial, USB, TCP/IP, Bluetooth, Wireless LAN, trunk radio, multiple channels, data and voice, enhanced graphics, multiple states, multiple threads, numerous wait states and so on. These trends are leading to the uptake of embedded middleware in addition to an RTOS.

===Microkernels and exokernels===
A microkernel allocates memory and switches the CPU to different threads of execution. User-mode processes implement major functions such as file systems, network interfaces, etc.

Exokernels communicate efficiently by normal subroutine calls. The hardware and all the software in the system are available to and extensible by application programmers.

===Monolithic kernels===
A monolithic kernel is a relatively large kernel with sophisticated capabilities adapted to suit an embedded environment. This gives programmers an environment similar to a desktop operating system like Linux or Microsoft Windows, and is therefore very productive for development. On the downside, it requires considerably more hardware resources, is often more expensive, and, because of the complexity of these kernels, can be less predictable and reliable.

Common examples of embedded monolithic kernels are embedded Linux, VXWorks and Windows CE.

Despite the increased cost in hardware, this type of embedded system is increasing in popularity, especially on the more powerful embedded devices such as wireless routers and GPS navigation systems.

===Additional software components===
In addition to the core operating system, many embedded systems have additional upper-layer software components. These components include networking protocol stacks like CAN, TCP/IP, FTP, HTTP, and HTTPS, and storage capabilities like FAT and flash memory management systems. If the embedded device has audio and video capabilities, then the appropriate drivers and codecs will be present in the system. In the case of the monolithic kernels, many of these software layers may be included in the kernel. In the RTOS category, the availability of additional software components depends upon the commercial offering.

===Domain-specific architectures===
In the automotive sector, AUTOSAR is a standard architecture for embedded software.

==See also==
* Communications server
* Cyber-physical system
* Electronic control unit
* Information appliance
* Integrated development environment
* Photonically Optimized Embedded Microprocessors
* Silicon compiler
* Software engineering
* System on module
* Ubiquitous computing

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* Embedded Systems course with mbed YouTube, ongoing from 2015
* Trends in Cyber Security and Embedded Systems Dan Geer, November 2013
* Modern Embedded Systems Programming Video Course YouTube, ongoing from 2013
* Embedded Systems Week (ESWEEK) yearly event with conferences, workshops and tutorials covering all aspects of embedded systems and software
* , workshop covering educational aspects of embedded systems
* Developing Embedded Systems - A Tools Introduction</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="3" end="18" title="Embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="36" end="51" title="computer system" label="computer system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466064" start="71" end="89" title="computer processor" label="computer processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="91" end="106" title="computer memory" label="computer memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="112" end="124" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="204" end="214" title="Electronics" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="462" end="481" title="real-time computing" label="real-time computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q165678" start="704" end="719" title="microcontroller" label="microcontroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="1189" end="1213" title="digital signal processor" label="digital signal processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779650" start="1280" end="1295" title="design engineer" label="design engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="1459" end="1477" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q178794" start="1550" end="1563" title="digital watch" label="digital watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="1570" end="1580" title="MP3 player" label="MP3 player"/>
<link wikidata="Q212920" start="1606" end="1621" title="home appliances" label="home appliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="1634" end="1648" title="assembly lines" label="assembly lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="1650" end="1656" title="robots" label="robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832507" start="1678" end="1703" title="Traffic light control and coordination" label="traffic light controllers"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="1709" end="1724" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q221329" start="1790" end="1798" title="avionics" label="avionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="1802" end="1810" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811463" start="1815" end="1825" title="astrionics" label="astrionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="1829" end="1839" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="1866" end="1875" title="factories" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="1877" end="1886" title="pipelines" label="pipelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096907" start="1892" end="1907" title="electrical grid" label="electrical grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188674" start="2032" end="2061" title="programmable logic controller" label="programmable logic controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="2231" end="2241" title="peripheral" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q431000" start="2277" end="2291" title="equipment rack" label="equipment rack"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777977" start="2494" end="2516" title="MOS integrated circuit" label="MOS integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="2530" end="2548" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="2554" end="2564" title="semiconductor device fabrication" label="fabricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="2570" end="2576" title="MOSFET" label="MOSFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q176097" start="2605" end="2628" title="field-effect transistor" label="field-effect transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623746" start="2707" end="2725" title="transistor density" label="transistor density"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="2761" end="2768" title="bipolar junction transistor" label="bipolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="2841" end="2857" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="2870" end="2893" title="large-scale integration" label="large-scale integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="2917" end="2928" title="transistors" label="transistors"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="3005" end="3014" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466064" start="3107" end="3125" title="computer processor" label="computer processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474890" start="3221" end="3243" title="Four-Phase Systems AL1" label="Four-Phase Systems AL1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494445" start="3260" end="3278" title="Garrett AiResearch" label="Garrett AiResearch"/>
<link wikidata="Q902535" start="3279" end="3284" title="MP944" label="MP944"/>
<link wikidata="Q205509" start="3383" end="3393" title="Intel 4004" label="Intel 4004"/>
<link wikidata="Q667095" start="3433" end="3448" title="Federico Faggin" label="Federico Faggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478108" start="3460" end="3472" title="silicon-gate" label="silicon-gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="3500" end="3505" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q462096" start="3516" end="3528" title="Marcian Hoff" label="Marcian Hoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442751" start="3533" end="3543" title="Stan Mazor" label="Stan Mazor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017523" start="3549" end="3556" title="Busicom" label="Busicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414244" start="3566" end="3581" title="Masatoshi Shima" label="Masatoshi Shima"/>
<link wikidata="Q138875" start="3666" end="3690" title="Apollo Guidance Computer" label="Apollo Guidance Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41378" start="3714" end="3734" title="Charles Stark Draper" label="Charles Stark Draper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876029" start="3742" end="3772" title="MIT Instrumentation Laboratory" label="MIT Instrumentation Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="3931" end="3960" title="monolithic integrated circuit" label="monolithic integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203228" start="4057" end="4090" title="D-17B" label="Autonetics D-17 guidance computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q861662" start="4099" end="4116" title="Minuteman missile" label="Minuteman missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q205509" start="4487" end="4497" title="Intel 4004" label="Intel 4004"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="4535" end="4545" title="calculator" label="calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q174925" start="5193" end="5199" title="Analogue electronics" label="analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q187868" start="5219" end="5232" title="potentiometer" label="potentiometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347410" start="5238" end="5256" title="variable capacitor" label="variable capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="5795" end="5805" title="automotive" label="automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q212920" start="5807" end="5821" title="home appliance" label="home appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="5902" end="5927" title="Telecommunications system" label="Telecommunications system"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="5967" end="5983" title="telephone switch" label="telephone switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="6005" end="6015" title="cell phone" label="cell phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q528074" start="6024" end="6032" title="end user" label="end user"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="6069" end="6076" title="Router (computing)" label="routers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188635" start="6081" end="6095" title="network bridge" label="network bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="6113" end="6133" title="Consumer electronics" label="Consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872571" start="6142" end="6152" title="MP3 player" label="MP3 player"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="6155" end="6169" title="television set" label="television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="6172" end="6184" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="6187" end="6205" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="6208" end="6222" title="digital camera" label="digital camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486497" start="6225" end="6237" title="GPS receiver" label="GPS receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q82" start="6244" end="6252" title="computer printer" label="printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="6284" end="6298" title="microwave oven" label="microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q124441" start="6301" end="6316" title="washing machine" label="washing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186263" start="6322" end="6333" title="dishwashers" label="dishwashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="6418" end="6460" title="heating, ventilation, and air conditioning" label="heating, ventilation, and air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q187665" start="6490" end="6500" title="thermostat" label="thermostat"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="6592" end="6598" title="season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q848436" start="6600" end="6615" title="Home automation" label="Home automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221329" start="6920" end="6928" title="avionics" label="avionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="6937" end="6961" title="inertial guidance system" label="inertial guidance system"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="7030" end="7040" title="Spacecraft" label="Spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811463" start="7049" end="7059" title="astrionics" label="astrionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q734949" start="7121" end="7139" title="brushless DC motor" label="brushless DC motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207450" start="7142" end="7157" title="induction motor" label="induction motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842034" start="7163" end="7171" title="DC motor" label="DC motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131382027" start="7190" end="7206" title="motor controller" label="motor controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="7209" end="7219" title="Automobile" label="Automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q13629441" start="7222" end="7238" title="electric vehicle" label="electric vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193075" start="7245" end="7259" title="hybrid vehicle" label="hybrid vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="7403" end="7427" title="anti-lock braking system" label="anti-lock braking system"/>
<link wikidata="Q595839" start="7435" end="7463" title="electronic stability control" label="electronic stability control"/>
<link wikidata="Q433478" start="7475" end="7491" title="traction control" label="traction control"/>
<link wikidata="Q214833" start="7512" end="7528" title="four-wheel drive" label="four-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="7531" end="7548" title="Medical equipment" label="Medical equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421432" start="7575" end="7585" title="Monitoring (medicine)" label="monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="7599" end="7614" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="7616" end="7644" title="positron emission tomography" label="positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q849737" start="7652" end="7694" title="single-photon emission computed tomography" label="single-photon emission computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="7704" end="7723" title="computed tomography" label="computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="7734" end="7760" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996307" start="7922" end="7944" title="safety-critical system" label="safety-critical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866206" start="8478" end="8483" title="mote (sensor)" label="motes"/>
<link wikidata="Q336038" start="8516" end="8542" title="Wireless sensor networking" label="Wireless sensor networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="8598" end="8616" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="9149" end="9158" title="Real-time computing" label="real-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q598668" start="9526" end="9545" title="Gibson Robot Guitar" label="Gibson Robot Guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="9696" end="9706" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="9843" end="9851" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="9891" end="9903" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592285" start="10070" end="10087" title="Headless computer" label="no user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="10141" end="10165" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q870870" start="10252" end="10259" title="Push-button" label="buttons"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="10261" end="10281" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="10311" end="10333" title="liquid-crystal display" label="liquid-crystal display"/>
<link wikidata="Q846925" start="10355" end="10366" title="menu (computing)" label="menu system"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="10428" end="10441" title="touch screen" label="touch sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297555" start="10457" end="10465" title="soft key" label="soft key"/>
<link wikidata="Q191895" start="10725" end="10731" title="RS-232" label="RS-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="10750" end="10758" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063962" start="10880" end="10901" title="board support package" label="board support package"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480046" start="11019" end="11039" title="embedded HTTP server" label="embedded HTTP server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427360" start="11082" end="11091" title="IP camera" label="IP camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="11097" end="11111" title="network router" label="network router"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="11151" end="11162" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506558" start="11483" end="11508" title="List of common microcontrollers" label="Numerous microcontrollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353776" start="11727" end="11733" title="PC/104" label="PC/104"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="12041" end="12044" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="12046" end="12053" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="12055" end="12060" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="12062" end="12068" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q102553047" start="12070" end="12081" title="OpenHarmony" label="OpenHarmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q213666" start="12097" end="12123" title="real-time operating system" label="real-time operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839097" start="12139" end="12151" title="MicroC/OS-II" label="MicroC/OS-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="12153" end="12156" title="QNX" label="QNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q757165" start="12160" end="12167" title="VxWorks" label="VxWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275648" start="12378" end="12382" title="EPIA" label="EPIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q81235" start="12898" end="12922" title="automated teller machine" label="automated teller machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349717" start="12934" end="12949" title="arcade machines" label="arcade machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q273326" start="13088" end="13091" title="Industry Standard Architecture" label="ISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="13095" end="13098" title="Peripheral Component Interconnect" label="PCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="13114" end="13130" title="system-on-a-chip" label="system-on-a-chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q570628" start="13434" end="13437" title="Ball grid array" label="BGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="13455" end="13458" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="13465" end="13481" title="system-on-a-chip" label="system-on-a-chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="13518" end="13530" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="13548" end="13552" title="DRAM" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="13701" end="13706" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q175957" start="13996" end="14003" title="Arduino" label="Arduino"/>
<link wikidata="Q245" start="14008" end="14020" title="Raspberry Pi" label="Raspberry Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q610398" start="14061" end="14077" title="system on a chip" label="system on a chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="14405" end="14444" title="application-specific integrated circuit" label="application-specific integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="14463" end="14492" title="field-programmable gate array" label="field-programmable gate array"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="14613" end="14625" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="14631" end="14641" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="14900" end="14910" title="peripheral" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q280409" start="14924" end="14954" title="Serial communication interface" label="Serial communication interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q191895" start="14963" end="14969" title="RS-232" label="RS-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q608019" start="14971" end="14977" title="RS-422" label="RS-422"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047466" start="14979" end="14985" title="RS-485" label="RS-485"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464914" start="14994" end="15022" title="Synchronous Serial Interface" label="Synchronous Serial Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q750469" start="15024" end="15027" title="I2C" label="I2C"/>
<link wikidata="Q849492" start="15029" end="15032" title="Serial Peripheral Interface Bus" label="SPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="15089" end="15109" title="Universal Serial Bus" label="Universal Serial Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="15131" end="15138" title="SD card" label="SD card"/>
<link wikidata="Q678615" start="15141" end="15153" title="CompactFlash" label="CompactFlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q165233" start="15163" end="15191" title="Network interface controller" label="Network interface controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="15193" end="15201" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="15203" end="15207" title="WiFi" label="WiFi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141640" start="15216" end="15224" title="Fieldbus" label="Fieldbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q728183" start="15228" end="15235" title="CAN bus" label="CAN bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867168" start="15237" end="15244" title="Local Interconnect Network" label="LIN-Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q533123" start="15246" end="15254" title="PROFIBUS" label="PROFIBUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q52637" start="15271" end="15288" title="Phase-locked loop" label="Phase-locked loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112160" start="15291" end="15318" title="programmable interval timer" label="programmable interval timer"/>
<link wikidata="Q260798" start="15322" end="15350" title="General Purpose Input/Output" label="General Purpose Input/Output"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="15360" end="15377" title="Analog-to-digital converter" label="Analog-to-digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="15382" end="15409" title="digital-to-analog converter" label="digital-to-analog converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q545306" start="15424" end="15428" title="JTAG" label="JTAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q373805" start="15430" end="15451" title="In-system programming" label="In-system programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839640" start="15453" end="15484" title="background debug mode interface" label="background debug mode interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="15579" end="15587" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="15590" end="15600" title="Assembly language" label="assemblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193231" start="15606" end="15614" title="debugger" label="debugger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15742" end="15754" title="#Debugging" label="next section"/>
<link wikidata="Q245471" start="15790" end="15793" title="Cyclic redundancy check" label="CRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="15886" end="15911" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405706" start="15934" end="15956" title="computational notebook" label="computational notebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="16134" end="16142" title="memories" label="memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="16144" end="16147" title="Direct memory access" label="DMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808" start="16149" end="16158" title="Interface (computing)" label="interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q275472" start="17042" end="17047" title="Forth (programming language)" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q640596" start="17051" end="17056" title="BASIC Stamp" label="Basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139923" start="17100" end="17125" title="embedded operating system" label="embedded operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467310" start="17157" end="17162" title="UML tool" label="tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431942" start="17178" end="17192" title="UML state machine" label="state machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q44571" start="17318" end="17321" title="GNU" label="GNU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="17593" end="17596" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q575650" start="17598" end="17602" title="Rust (programming language)" label="Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="17607" end="17613" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q201904" start="17635" end="17637" title="Qt (software)" label="Qt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="18086" end="18095" title="cellphone" label="cellphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="18098" end="18124" title="personal digital assistant" label="personal digital assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="18335" end="18340" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="18342" end="18348" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="18350" end="18357" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156326" start="18359" end="18363" title="OSGi" label="OSGi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334980" start="18367" end="18380" title="Embedded Java" label="Embedded Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q845566" start="18487" end="18496" title="debugging" label="debugging"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="18832" end="18847" title="program counter" label="program counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311616" start="19535" end="19550" title="Remedy Debugger" label="Remedy Debugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q555032" start="19585" end="19594" title="multicore" label="multicore"/>
<link wikidata="Q545306" start="19696" end="19700" title="JTAG" label="JTAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021281" start="19704" end="19709" title="Nexus (standard)" label="Nexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660551" start="19885" end="19904" title="in-circuit emulator" label="in-circuit emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="20044" end="20052" title="emulator" label="emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="20896" end="20927" title="high-level programming language" label="high-level programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="20929" end="20942" title="assembly code" label="assembly code"/>
<link wikidata="Q322229" start="21020" end="21027" title="tracing (software)" label="tracing"/>
<link wikidata="Q629579" start="21774" end="21780" title="Macro (computer science)" label="macros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203383" start="21891" end="21896" title="Hooking" label="hooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q751740" start="23106" end="23117" title="memory leak" label="memory leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658917" start="23129" end="23139" title="soft error" label="soft error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334191" start="23160" end="23174" title="watchdog timer" label="watchdog timer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492632" start="23296" end="23318" title="trusted computing base" label="trusted computing base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077480" start="23398" end="23408" title="hypervisor" label="hypervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191161" start="23961" end="23972" title="MISRA C" label="MISRA C/C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329550" start="24657" end="24672" title="Static program analysis" label="static checkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569697" start="24684" end="24698" title="model checking" label="model checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q362858" start="24778" end="24795" title="Worst-case execution time" label="timing properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="24856" end="24868" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967109" start="25240" end="25285" title="National Electrical Manufacturers Association" label="National Electrical Manufacturers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q944780" start="25410" end="25431" title="single-board computer" label="single-board computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="25618" end="25622" title="loop (computing)" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="25672" end="25682" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q220764" start="25901" end="25910" title="interrupt" label="interrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969336" start="26638" end="26662" title="Cooperative multitasking" label="Cooperative multitasking"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="26751" end="26754" title="API" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="27621" end="27643" title="memory management unit" label="memory management unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065525" start="27779" end="27792" title="message queue" label="message queue"/>
<link wikidata="Q221682" start="27795" end="27805" title="semaphore (programming)" label="semaphores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985141" start="27811" end="27839" title="non-blocking synchronization" label="non-blocking synchronization"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="28529" end="28538" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="28540" end="28552" title="Wireless LAN" label="Wireless LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q146923" start="28730" end="28749" title="embedded middleware" label="embedded middleware"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="28811" end="28822" title="microkernel" label="microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350261" start="28990" end="28999" title="Exokernel" label="Exokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q720353" start="29189" end="29206" title="monolithic kernel" label="monolithic kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="29390" end="29395" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="29399" end="29416" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199316" start="29699" end="29713" title="embedded Linux" label="embedded Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q757165" start="29715" end="29722" title="VXWorks" label="VXWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q488244" start="29727" end="29737" title="Windows CE" label="Windows CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407440" start="29895" end="29910" title="wireless router" label="wireless router"/>
<link wikidata="Q27731" start="29916" end="29938" title="Automotive navigation system" label="GPS navigation systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q728183" start="30148" end="30151" title="Controller–area network" label="CAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="30153" end="30159" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="30161" end="30164" title="FTP" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="30166" end="30170" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="30176" end="30181" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q190167" start="30213" end="30216" title="File Allocation Table" label="FAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q300113" start="30656" end="30663" title="AUTOSAR" label="AUTOSAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154229" start="30730" end="30751" title="Communications server" label="Communications server"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120057" start="30754" end="30775" title="Cyber-physical system" label="Cyber-physical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343700" start="30778" end="30801" title="Electronic control unit" label="Electronic control unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067263" start="30804" end="30825" title="Information appliance" label="Information appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="30828" end="30862" title="Integrated development environment" label="Integrated development environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q60751488" start="30865" end="30912" title="Photonically Optimized Embedded Microprocessors" label="Photonically Optimized Embedded Microprocessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515017" start="30915" end="30931" title="Silicon compiler" label="Silicon compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="30934" end="30954" title="Software engineering" label="Software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015580" start="30957" end="30973" title="System on module" label="System on module"/>
<link wikidata="Q541265" start="30976" end="30996" title="Ubiquitous computing" label="Ubiquitous computing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46632" wikidata="Q7776793" url="?curid=46632" title="The Young Ones">
<text>The Young One(s) or Young One(s) may refer to:

==Films==
* &quot;The Young Ones&quot; (1961 film), a musical starring Cliff Richard
* &quot;The Young Ones&quot; (1973 film), a Taiwanese film, spoken in Mandarin
* &quot;The Young One&quot;, a 1960 English language film directed by Luis Buñuel, also called &quot;La joven&quot;
* &quot;The Young One&quot; (2016 film), a French-Portuguese film, original title &quot;Jeunesse&quot;
* &quot;Young Ones&quot; (film), a 2014 science fiction film

==Television==
* &quot;The Young Ones&quot; (TV series), a 1980s British sitcom about four students living together
* &quot;The Young Ones&quot;, a 2010 British TV series about six well-known people in their 70s and 80s, which included Kenneth Kendall
==Music==
* &quot;The Young Ones&quot; (song), title song to the film and a number-one 1962 single, by Cliff Richard and the Shadows
* &quot;The Young Ones&quot; (album), the soundtrack album to the 1961 film
==Other==
* &quot;The Young Ones&quot; (video game), a video game based on the British comedy television series</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7776793" start="0" end="16" title="The Young Ones" label="The Young One(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776793" start="20" end="32" title="The Young Ones" label="Young One(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776794" start="60" end="98" title="The Young Ones (1961 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Young Ones&amp;quot; (1961 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031595" start="135" end="173" title="The Young Ones (1973 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Young Ones&amp;quot; (1973 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548052" start="220" end="233" title="The Young One" label="The Young One"/>
<link wikidata="Q26714904" start="330" end="367" title="The Young One (2016 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Young One&amp;quot; (2016 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14595113" start="433" end="462" title="Young Ones (film)" label="&amp;quot;Young Ones&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49022" start="510" end="548" title="The Young Ones (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Young Ones&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="729" end="744" title="Kenneth Kendall#Later life" label="Kenneth Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776795" start="757" end="790" title="The Young Ones (song)" label="&amp;quot;The Young Ones&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q609374" start="880" end="914" title="The Young Ones (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Young Ones&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187436" start="966" end="1005" title="The Young Ones (video game)" label="&amp;quot;The Young Ones&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46633" wikidata="Q4467269" url="?curid=46633" title="Turing tarpit">
<text>A Turing [[tarpit]] (or Turing tar-pit) is any programming language or computer interface that allows for flexibility in function but is difficult to learn and use because it offers little or no support for common tasks. The phrase was coined in 1982 by Alan Perlis in the &quot;Epigrams on Programming&quot;:

In any Turing complete language, it is possible to write any computer program, so in a very rigorous sense nearly all programming languages are equally capable. However, having that theoretical ability is not the same as usefulness in practice. Turing tarpits are characterized by having a simple abstract machine that requires the user to deal with many details in the solution of a problem. At the extreme opposite are interfaces that can perform very complex tasks with little human intervention but become obsolete if requirements change slightly.

Some esoteric programming languages, such as Brainfuck or Malbolge, are specifically referred to as &quot;Turing tarpits&quot; because they deliberately implement the minimum functionality necessary to be classified as Turing complete languages. Using such languages is a form of mathematical recreation: programmers can work out how to achieve basic programming constructs in an extremely difficult but mathematically Turing-equivalent language.

==See also==
* Greenspun&#x27;s tenth rule
* Zawinski&#x27;s law of software envelopment

==References==
==Further reading==
* G. Fischer, A.C. Lemke, &quot;Constrained Design Processes: Steps Toward Convivial Computing&quot;, Technical Report CU-CS-369-87, University of Colorado, USA.

* E.L. Hutchins, J.D. Hollan, D.A. Norman, . Also found in 

* Esolangs, Turing Tarpit.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4467269" start="2" end="19" title="Turing tarpit" label="Turing [[tarpit]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q4467269" start="24" end="38" title="Turing tarpit" label="Turing tar-pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="47" end="67" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808" start="71" end="89" title="computer interface" label="computer interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q62861" start="254" end="265" title="Alan Perlis" label="Alan Perlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382930" start="279" end="302" title="Epigrams on Programming" label="Epigrams on Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="318" end="333" title="Turing completeness" label="Turing complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q787114" start="608" end="624" title="abstract machine" label="abstract machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q610140" start="869" end="899" title="esoteric programming languages" label="esoteric programming languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q244627" start="909" end="918" title="Brainfuck" label="Brainfuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q517956" start="922" end="930" title="Malbolge" label="Malbolge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410503" start="1144" end="1167" title="mathematical recreation" label="mathematical recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159272" start="1327" end="1354" title="Greenspun&amp;#x27;s tenth rule" label="Greenspun&amp;#x27;s tenth rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q92958" start="1357" end="1400" title="Zawinski&amp;#x27;s law of software envelopment" label="Zawinski&amp;#x27;s law of software envelopment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206658" start="1570" end="1592" title="University of Colorado" label="University of Colorado"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46634" wikidata="Q1123649" url="?curid=46634" title="Xenu">
<text>Xenu ( ), also called Xemu, is a figure in the Church of Scientology&#x27;s secret &quot;Advanced Technology&quot;, a sacred and esoteric teaching. According to the &quot;Technology&quot;, Xenu was the extraterrestrial ruler of a &quot;Galactic Confederacy&quot; who brought billions of his people to Earth (then known as &quot;Teegeeack&quot;) in DC-8-like spacecraft 75 million years ago, stacked them around volcanoes, and killed them with hydrogen bombs. Official Scientology scriptures hold that the thetans (immortal spirits) of these aliens adhere to humans, causing spiritual harm.

These events are known within Scientology as &quot;Incident II&quot;, and the traumatic memories associated with them as &quot;The Wall of Fire&quot; or &quot;R6 implant&quot;. The narrative of Xenu is part of Scientologist teachings about extraterrestrial civilizations and alien interventions in earthly events, collectively described as &quot;space opera&quot; by L. Ron Hubbard. Hubbard detailed the story in Operating Thetan level III (OT III) in 1967, warning that the &quot;R6 implant&quot; (past trauma) was &quot;calculated to kill (by pneumonia, etc.) anyone who attempts to solve it&quot;.

The Church of Scientology normally only reveals the Xenu story to members who have completed a lengthy sequence of courses costing large amounts of money. The church avoids mention of Xenu in public statements and has gone to considerable effort to maintain the story&#x27;s confidentiality, including legal action on the grounds of copyright and trade secrecy. Officials of the Church of Scientology widely deny or try to hide the Xenu story. Despite this, much material on Xenu has leaked to the public via court documents and copies of Hubbard&#x27;s notes that have been distributed through the Internet.

In commentary on the impact of the Xenu text, academic scholars have discussed and analyzed Hubbard&#x27;s writings, their place within Scientology, and relationship to science fiction, UFO religions, Gnosticism, and creation myths.

== Summary ==

The story of Xenu is covered in OT III, part of Scientology&#x27;s secret &quot;Advanced Technology&quot; doctrines taught only to advanced members who have undergone many hours of auditing and reached the state of Clear followed by Operating Thetan levels 1 and 2. It is described in more detail in the accompanying confidential &quot;Assists&quot; lecture of October 3, 1968, and is dramatized in &quot;Revolt in the Stars&quot; (a screen-story – in the form of a novel – written by L. Ron Hubbard in 1977).

Hubbard wrote that Xenu was the ruler of a Galactic Confederacy 75 million years ago, which consisted of 26 stars and 76 planets including Earth, which was then known as &quot;Teegeeack&quot;. The planets were overpopulated, containing an average population of 178 billion. The Galactic Confederacy&#x27;s civilization was comparable to our own, with aliens &quot;walking around in clothes which looked very remarkably like the clothes they wear this very minute&quot; and using cars, trains and boats looking exactly the same as those &quot;circa 1950, 1960&quot; on Earth.

Xenu was about to be deposed from power, so he devised a plot to eliminate the excess population from his dominions. With the assistance of psychiatrists, he gathered billions of his citizens under the pretense of income tax inspections, then paralyzed them and froze them in a mixture of alcohol and glycol to capture their souls. The kidnapped populace was loaded into spacecraft for transport to the site of extermination, the planet of Teegeeack (Earth). The appearance of these spacecraft would later be subconsciously expressed in the design of the Douglas DC-8, the only difference being that &quot;the DC8 had fans, propellers on it and the space plane didn&#x27;t&quot;. When they had reached Teegeeack, the paralyzed citizens were off-loaded, and placed around the bases of volcanoes across the planet. Hydrogen bombs were then lowered into the volcanoes and detonated simultaneously, killing all but a few aliens. Hubbard described the scene in his film script, &quot;Revolt in the Stars&quot;:

The now-disembodied victims&#x27; souls, which Hubbard called &quot;thetans&quot;, were blown into the air by the blast. They were captured by Xenu&#x27;s forces using an &quot;electronic ribbon&quot; (&quot;which also was a type of standing wave&quot;) and sucked into &quot;vacuum zones&quot; around the world. The hundreds of billions of captured thetans were taken to a type of cinema, where they were forced to watch a &quot;three-D, super colossal motion picture&quot; for thirty-six days. This implanted what Hubbard termed &quot;various misleading data&quot; (collectively termed the R6 implant) into the memories of the hapless thetans, &quot;which has to do with God, the Devil, space opera, etcetera&quot;. This included all world religions; Hubbard specifically attributed Roman Catholicism and the image of the Crucifixion to the influence of Xenu. The two &quot;implant stations&quot; cited by Hubbard were said to have been located on Hawaii and Las Palmas in the Canary Islands.

In addition to implanting new beliefs in the thetans, the images deprived them of their sense of personal identity. When the thetans left the projection areas, they started to cluster together in groups of a few thousand, having lost the ability to differentiate between each other. Each cluster of thetans gathered into one of the few remaining bodies that survived the explosion. These became what are known as &quot;body thetans&quot;, which are said to be still clinging to and adversely affecting everyone except Scientologists who have performed the necessary steps to remove them.

A government faction known as the Loyal Officers finally overthrew Xenu and his renegades, and locked him away in &quot;an electronic mountain trap&quot; from which he has not escaped. Although the location of Xenu is sometimes said to be the Pyrenees on Earth, this is actually the location Hubbard gave elsewhere for an ancient &quot;Martian report station&quot;. Teegeeack was subsequently abandoned by the Galactic Confederacy and remains a pariah &quot;prison planet&quot; to this day, although it has suffered repeatedly from incursions by alien &quot;Invader Forces&quot; since that time.

In 1988, the cost of learning these secrets from the Church of Scientology was £3,830, or US$6,500. This is in addition to the cost of the prior courses which are necessary to be eligible for OT III, which in 2006 was often well over US$100,000 (roughly £77,000). Belief in Xenu and body thetans is a requirement for a Scientologist to progress further along the Bridge to Total Freedom. Those who do not experience the benefits of the OT III course are expected to take it and pay for it again.

== Scientology doctrine ==
Within Scientology, the Xenu story is referred to as &quot;The Wall of Fire&quot; or &quot;Incident II&quot;. Hubbard attached tremendous importance to it, saying that it constituted &quot;the secrets of a disaster which resulted in the decay of life as we know it in this sector of the galaxy&quot;. The broad outlines of the story—that 75 million years ago a great catastrophe happened in this sector of the galaxy which caused profoundly negative effects for everyone since then—are told to lower-level Scientologists; but the details are kept strictly confidential.

The OT III document asserts that Hubbard entered the Wall of Fire but emerged alive (&quot;probably the only one ever to do so in 75,000,000 years&quot;). He first publicly announced his &quot;breakthrough&quot; in &quot;Ron&#x27;s Journal 67&quot; (&quot;RJ67&quot;), a taped lecture recorded on September 20, 1967, to be sent to all Scientologists. According to Hubbard, his research was achieved at the cost of a broken back, knee, and arm. OT III contains a warning that the R6 implant is &quot;calculated to kill (by pneumonia etc.) anyone who attempts to solve it&quot;. Hubbard claimed that his &quot;tech development&quot;—i.e. his OT materials—had neutralized this threat, creating a safe path to redemption.

The Church of Scientology forbids individuals from reading the OT III Xenu cosmogony without first having taken prerequisite courses. Scientologists warn that reading the Xenu story without proper authorization could cause pneumonia.

In &quot;RJ67&quot;, Hubbard alludes to the devastating effect of Xenu&#x27;s purported genocide:

OT III also deals with &quot;Incident I&quot;, set four quadrillion years ago. (Scientific consensus places the age of the universe at approximately 13.8 billion years old.) In &quot;Incident I&quot;, the unsuspecting thetan was subjected to a loud snapping noise followed by a flood of luminescence, then saw a chariot followed by a trumpeting cherub. After a loud set of snaps, the thetan was overwhelmed by darkness. It is described that these traumatic memories alone separate thetans from their static (natural, godlike) state.

Hubbard uses the existence of body thetans to explain many of the physical and mental ailments of humanity which, he says, prevent people from achieving their highest spiritual levels. OT III tells the Scientologist to locate body thetans and release them from the effects of Incidents I and II. This is accomplished in solo auditing, where the Scientologist holds both cans of an E-meter in one hand and asks questions as an auditor. The Scientologist is directed to find a cluster of body thetans, address it telepathically as a cluster, and take first the cluster, then each individual member, through Incident II, then Incident I if needed. Hubbard warns that this is a painstaking procedure, and that OT levels IV to VII are necessary to continue dealing with one&#x27;s body thetans.

The Church of Scientology has objected to the Xenu story being used to paint Scientology as science fiction fantasy. Hubbard&#x27;s statements concerning the R6 implant have been a source of contention. Critics and some Christians state that Hubbard&#x27;s statements regarding R6 prove that Scientology doctrine is incompatible with Christianity, despite the Church&#x27;s statements to the contrary. In &quot;Assists&quot;, Hubbard says:

== Origins of the story ==
Hubbard wrote OT III in late 1966 and early 1967 in North Africa while on his way to Las Palmas to join the &quot;Enchanter&quot;, the first vessel of his private Scientology fleet. (OT III says &quot;In December 1967 I knew someone had to take the plunge&quot;, but the material was publicized well before this.) He emphasized later that OT III was his own personal discovery.

Critics of Scientology have suggested that other factors may have been at work. In a letter of the time to his wife Mary Sue, Hubbard said that, in order to assist his research, he was drinking alcohol and taking stimulants and depressants (&quot;I&#x27;m drinking lots of rum and popping pinks and greys&quot;). His assistant at the time, Virginia Downsborough, said that she had to wean him off the diet of drugs to which he had become accustomed. Russell Miller posits in &quot;Bare-faced Messiah&quot; that it was important for Hubbard to be found in a debilitated condition, so as to present OT III as &quot;a research accomplishment of immense magnitude&quot;.

Elements of the Xenu story appeared in Scientology before OT III. Hubbard&#x27;s descriptions of extraterrestrial conflicts were put forward as early as 1950 in his book &quot;Have You Lived Before This Life?&quot;, and were enthusiastically endorsed by Scientologists who documented their past lives on other planets.

== Influence of OT III on Scientology ==
The 1968 and subsequent reprints of &quot;&quot; have had covers depicting an exploding volcano, which is reportedly a reference to OT III. In a 1968 lecture, and in instructions to his marketing staff, Hubbard explained that these images would &quot;key in&quot; the submerged memories of Incident II and impel people to buy the books:

Since the 1980s, the volcano has also been depicted in television commercials advertising &quot;Dianetics&quot;. Scientology&#x27;s &quot;Sea Org&quot;, an elite group within the church that originated with Hubbard&#x27;s personal staff aboard his fleet of ships, takes many of its symbols from the story of Xenu and OT III. It is explicitly intended to be a revival of the &quot;Loyal Officers&quot; who overthrew Xenu. Its logo, a wreath with 26 leaves, represents the 26 stars of Xenu&#x27;s Galactic Confederacy. According to an official Scientology dictionary, &quot;the Sea Org symbol, adopted and used as the symbol of a Galactic Confederacy far back in the history of this sector, derives much of its power and authority from that association&quot;.

In the Advanced Orgs in Edinburgh and Los Angeles, Scientology staff were at one time ordered to wear all-white uniforms with silver boots, to mimic Xenu&#x27;s Galactic Patrol as depicted on the cover of &quot;&quot;. This was reportedly done on the basis of Hubbard&#x27;s declaration in his Flag Order 652 that mankind would accept regulation from that group which had last betrayed it—hence the imitation of Xenu&#x27;s henchmen. In Los Angeles, a nightwatch was ordered to watch for returning spaceships.

The Church of Scientology&#x27;s own organizational structure is said to be based on that of the Galactic Confederacy. The Church&#x27;s &quot;org board&quot; is &quot;a refined board ... of an old galactic civilization. ... We applied Scientology to it and found out why the civilization eventually failed. They lacked a couple of departments and that was enough to mess it all up. And they only lasted 80 trillion [years].&quot;

== Name ==
The name has been spelled both as &quot;Xenu&quot; and &quot;Xemu&quot;. The Class VIII course material includes a three-page text, handwritten by Hubbard, headed &quot;Data&quot;, in which the Xenu story is given in detail. Hubbard&#x27;s indistinct handwriting makes either spelling possible, particularly as the use of the name on the first page of OT III is the only known example of the name in his handwriting. In the &quot;Assists&quot; lecture, Hubbard speaks of &quot;Xenu, ahhh, could be spelled X-E-M-U&quot; and clearly says &quot;Xemu&quot; several times on the recording. The treatment of &quot;Revolt in the Stars&quot;—which is typewritten—uses &quot;Xenu&quot; exclusively.

It has been speculated that the name derives from Xemnu, an extraterrestrial comic book villain who first appeared in the story &quot;I Was a Slave of the Living Hulk!&quot; in &quot;Journey into Mystery&quot; #62 (November 1960). He was created by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby. Xemnu is a giant, hairy intergalactic criminal who escaped a prison planet, traveled to Earth, and hypnotized the entire human population. Upon Xemnu&#x27;s defeat by electrician Joe Harper, Xemnu is imprisoned in a state of continual electric shock in orbit around the Sun, and humanity is left with no memory of Xemnu&#x27;s existence.

== Church of Scientology&#x27;s position ==
In its public statements, the Church of Scientology has been reluctant to allow any mention of Xenu. A passing mention by a trial judge in 1997 prompted the Church&#x27;s lawyers to have the ruling sealed, although this was reversed. In the relatively few instances in which it has acknowledged Xenu, Scientology has stated the story&#x27;s true meaning can only be understood after years of study. They complain of critics using it to paint the religion as a science-fiction fantasy.

Senior members of the Church of Scientology have several times publicly denied or minimized the importance of the Xenu story, but others have affirmed its existence. In 1995, Scientology lawyer Earl Cooley hinted at the importance of Xenu in Scientology doctrine by stating that &quot;thousands of articles are written about Coca-Cola, and they don&#x27;t print the formula for Coca-Cola&quot;. Scientology has many graduated levels through which one can progress. Many who remain at lower levels in the church are unaware of much of the Xenu story which is first revealed on Operating Thetan level three, or &quot;OT III&quot;. Because the information imparted to members is to be kept secret from others who have not attained that level, the member must publicly deny its existence when asked. OT III recipients must sign an agreement promising never to reveal its contents before they are given the manila envelope containing the Xenu knowledge. Its knowledge is so dangerous, members are told, that anyone learning this material before they are ready could become afflicted with pneumonia.

Religious Technology Center director Warren McShane testified in a 1995 court case that the Church of Scientology receives a significant amount of its revenue from fixed donations paid by Scientologists to study the OT materials. McShane said that Hubbard&#x27;s work &quot;may seem weird&quot; to those that have not yet completed the prior levels of coursework in Scientology. McShane said the story had &quot;never&quot; been secret, although maintaining there were nevertheless trade secrets contained in OT III. McShane discussed the details of the story at some length and specifically attributed the authorship of the story to Hubbard.

When John Carmichael, the president of the Church of Scientology of New York, was asked about the Xenu story, he said, as reported in the September 9, 2007, edition of &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;: &quot;That&#x27;s not what we believe&quot;. When asked directly about the Xenu story by Ted Koppel on ABC&#x27;s &quot;Nightline&quot;, Scientology leader David Miscavige said that he was taking things Hubbard said out of context. However, in a 2006 interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, Mike Rinder, the then-director of the church&#x27;s Office of Special Affairs, said that &quot;It is not a &quot;story&quot;, it is an auditing level&quot;, when asked about the validity of the Xenu story.

In a BBC &quot;Panorama&quot; programme that aired on May 14, 2007, senior Scientologist Tommy Davis interrupted when celebrity members were asked about Xenu, saying: &quot;None of us know what you&#x27;re talking about. It&#x27;s loony. It&#x27;s weird.&quot; In March 2009, Davis was interviewed by investigative journalist Nathan Baca for KESQ-TV and was again asked about the OT III texts. Davis told Baca &quot;I&#x27;m familiar with the material&quot;, and called it &quot;the confidential scriptures of the Church&quot;. In an interview on ABC News &quot;Nightline&quot;, October 23, 2009, Davis walked off the set when Martin Bashir asked him about Xenu. He told Bashir, &quot;Martin, I am not going to discuss the disgusting perversions of Scientology beliefs that can be found now commonly on the internet and be put in the position of talking about things, talking about things that are so fundamentally offensive to Scientologists to discuss. ... It is in violation of my religious beliefs to talk about them.&quot; When Bashir repeated a question about Xenu, Davis pulled off his microphone and left the set.

In November 2009 the Church of Scientology&#x27;s representative in New Zealand, Mike Ferris, was asked in a radio interview about Xenu. The radio host asked, &quot;So what you&#x27;re saying is, Xenu is a part of the religion, but something that you don&#x27;t want to talk about&quot;. Ferris responded, &quot;Sure&quot;. Ferris acknowledged that Xenu &quot;is part of the esoterica of Scientology&quot;.

== Leaking of the story ==
Despite the Church of Scientology&#x27;s efforts to keep the story secret, details have been leaked over the years. OT III was first revealed in Robert Kaufman&#x27;s 1972 book &quot;Inside Scientology&quot;, in which Kaufman detailed his own experiences of OT III. It was later described in a 1981 Clearwater &quot;Sun&quot; article, and came to greater public fame in a 1985 court case brought against Scientology by Lawrence Wollersheim. The church failed to have the documents sealed and attempted to keep the case file checked out by a reader at all times, but the story was summarized in the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; and detailed in William Poundstone&#x27;s &quot;Bigger Secrets&quot; (1986) from information presented in the Wollersheim case. In 1987, a book by L. Ron Hubbard Jr., &quot;L. Ron Hubbard, Messiah or Madman?&quot; quoted the first page of OT III and summarized the rest of its content.
Since then, news media have mentioned Xenu in coverage of Scientology or its celebrity proponents such as Tom Cruise. In 1987, the BBC&#x27;s investigative news series &quot;Panorama&quot; aired a report titled &quot;The Road to Total Freedom?&quot; which featured an outline of the OT III story in cartoon form.

On December 24, 1994, the Xenu story was published on the Internet for the first time in a posting to the Usenet newsgroup alt.religion.scientology, through an anonymous remailer. This led to an online battle between Church of Scientology lawyers and detractors. Older versions of OT levels I to VII were brought as exhibits attached to a declaration by Steven Fishman on April 9, 1993, as part of &quot;Church of Scientology International v. Fishman and Geertz&quot;. The text of this declaration and its exhibits, collectively known as the Fishman Affidavit, were posted to the Internet newsgroup alt.religion.scientology in August 1995 by Arnie Lerma and on the World Wide Web by David S. Touretzky. This was a subject of great controversy and legal battles for several years. There was a copyright raid on Lerma&#x27;s house (leading to massive mirroring of the documents) and a suit against Dutch writer Karin Spaink—the Church bringing suit on copyright violation grounds for reproducing the source material, and also claiming rewordings would reveal a trade secret.

The Church of Scientology&#x27;s attempts to keep Xenu secret have been cited in court findings against it. In September 2003, a Dutch court, in a ruling in the case against Karin Spaink, stated that one objective in keeping OT II and OT III secret was to wield power over members of the Church of Scientology and prevent discussion about its teachings and practices:

Despite his claims that premature revelation of the OT III story was lethal, L. Ron Hubbard wrote a screenplay version under the title &quot;Revolt in the Stars&quot; in the 1970s. This revealed that Xenu had been assisted by beings named Chi (&quot;the Galactic Minister of Police&quot;) and Chu (&quot;the Executive President of the Galactic Interplanetary Bank&quot;). It has not been officially published, although the treatment was circulated around Hollywood in the early 1980s. Unofficial copies of the screenplay circulate on the Internet.

On March 10, 2001, a user posted the text of OT3 to the online community Slashdot. The site owners took down the comment after the Church of Scientology issued a legal notice under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. Critics of the Church of Scientology have used public protests to spread the Xenu secret. This has included creating web sites with &quot;xenu&quot; in the domain name, and displaying the name Xenu on banners and protest signs.

== In popular culture ==

Versions of the Xenu story have appeared in both television shows and stage productions. The Off-Broadway satirical musical &quot;A Very Merry Unauthorized Children&#x27;s Scientology Pageant&quot;, first staged in 2003 and winner of an Obie Award in 2004, featured children in alien costumes telling the story of Xenu.

The Xenu story was also satirized in a November 2005 episode of the animated television series &quot;South Park&quot; titled &quot;Trapped in the Closet&quot;. The Emmy-nominated episode, which also lampooned Scientologists Tom Cruise and John Travolta as closeted homosexuals, depicted Xenu as a vaguely humanoid alien with tentacles for arms, in a sequence that had the words &quot;This Is What Scientologists Actually Believe&quot; superimposed on screen. The episode became the subject of controversy when the musician Isaac Hayes, the voice of the character &quot;Chef&quot; and a Scientologist, quit the show in March 2006, just prior to the episode&#x27;s first scheduled re-screening, citing &quot;South Park&quot;″s &quot;inappropriate ridicule&quot; of his religion. Hayes&#x27; statement did not mention the episode in particular, but expressed his view that the show&#x27;s habit of parodying religion was part of a &quot;growing insensitivity toward personal spiritual beliefs&quot; in the media that was also reflected in the Muhammad cartoons controversy: &quot;There is a place in this world for satire, but there is a time when satire ends and intolerance and bigotry towards religious beliefs of others begins.&quot; Responding to Hayes&#x27; statement, &quot;South Park&quot; co-creator Matt Stone said his resignation had &quot;nothing to do with intolerance and bigotry and everything to do with the fact that Isaac Hayes is a Scientologist and that we recently featured Scientology in an episode of South Park ... In 10 years and over 150 episodes of South Park, Isaac never had a problem with the show making fun of Christians, Muslims, Mormons and Jews. He got a sudden case of religious sensitivity when it was his religion featured on the show. Of course we will release Isaac from his contract and we wish him well.&quot; Comedy Central cancelled the repeat at short notice, choosing instead to screen two episodes featuring Hayes. A spokesman said that &quot;in light of the events of earlier this week, we wanted to give Chef an appropriate tribute by airing two episodes he is most known for.&quot; It did eventually rebroadcast the episode on July 19, 2006. Stone and &quot;South Park&quot; co-creator Trey Parker felt that Comedy Central&#x27;s owners Viacom had cancelled the repeat because of the upcoming release of the Tom Cruise film &quot;&quot; by Paramount, another Viacom company: &quot;I only know what we were told, that people involved with &quot;MI3&quot; wanted the episode off the air and that is why Comedy Central had to do it. I don&#x27;t know why else it would have been pulled.&quot;

== Commentary ==
Writing in the book &quot;Scientology&quot; published by Oxford University Press, contributor Mikael Rothstein observes that, &quot;To my knowledge no real analysis of Scientology&#x27;s Xenu myth has appeared in scholarly publications. The most sober and enlightening text about the Xenu myth is probably the article on Wikipedia (English version) and, even if brief, Andreas Grünschloss&#x27;s piece on Scientology in Lewis (2000: 266–268).&quot; Rothstein places the Xenu text by L. Ron Hubbard within the context of a creation myth within the Scientology methodology, and characterizes it as &quot;one of Scientology&#x27;s more important religious narratives, the text that apparently constitutes the basic (sometimes implicit) mythology of the movement, the &quot;Xenu myth&quot;, which is basically a story of the origin of man on Earth and the human condition.&quot; Rothstein describes the phenomenon within a belief system inspired by science fiction, and notes that the &quot;myth about Xenu, ... in the shape of a science fiction-inspired anthropogony, &quot;explains&quot; the basic Scientological claims about the human condition.&quot;

Andreas Grünschloß analyzes the Xenu text in &quot;The Oxford Handbook of New Religious Movements&quot;, within the context of a discussion on UFO religions. He characterizes the text as &quot;Scientology&#x27;s secret mythology (contained especially in the OT III teachings)&quot;. Grünschloß points out that L. Ron Hubbard, &quot;also wrote a science fiction story called &quot;Revolt in the Stars&quot;, where he displays this otherwise arcane story about the ancient ruler Xenu in the form of an ordinary science fiction novel&quot;. Grünschloß posits, &quot;because of the connections between several motifs in Hubbard&#x27;s novels and specific Scientology teachings, one might perceive Scientology as one of the rare instances where science fiction (or fantasy literature generally) is related to the successful formation of a new spiritual movement.&quot; Comparing the fusion between the two genres of Hubbard&#x27;s science fiction writing and Scientology creation myth, Grünschloß writes, &quot;Although the science fiction novels are of a different genre than other &#x27;techno-logical&#x27; disclosures of Hubbard, they are highly appreciated by participants, and Hubbard&#x27;s literary output in this realm (including the latest movie, &quot;Battlefield Earth&quot;) is also well promoted by the organization.&quot; Writing in the book &quot;UFO Religions&quot; edited by Christopher Partridge, Grünschloß observes, &quot;the enthusiasm for ufology and science fiction was cultivated in the formative phase of Scientology. Indeed, even the highly arcane story of the intergalactic ruler Xenu ... is related by Hubbard in the style of a simple science fiction novel&quot;.

Several authors have pointed out structural similarities between the Xenu story and the mythology of gnosticism. James A. Herrick, writing about the Xenu text in &quot;The Making of the New Spirituality: The Eclipse of the Western Religious Tradition&quot;, notes that &quot;Hubbard&#x27;s gnostic leanings are evident in his account of human origins ... In Hubbard, ideas first expressed in science fiction are seamlessly transformed into a worldwide religion with affinities to gnosticism.&quot; Mary Farrell Bednarowski, writing in &quot;America&#x27;s Alternative Religions&quot;, similarly states that the outline of the Xenu mythology is &quot;not totally unfamiliar to the historian acquainted with ancient gnosticism&quot;, noting that many other religious traditions have the practice of reserving certain texts to high-level initiates. Nevertheless, she writes, the Xenu story arouses suspicion in the public about Scientology and adds fuel to &quot;the claims that Hubbard&#x27;s system is the product of his creativity as a science fiction writer rather than a theologian.&quot;

Authors Michael McDowell and Nathan Robert Brown discuss misconceptions about the Xenu text in their book &quot;World Religions at Your Fingertips&quot;, and observe, &quot;Probably the most controversial, misunderstood, and frequently misrepresented part of the Scientology religion has to do with a Scientology myth commonly referred to as the Legend of Xenu. While this story has now been undoubtedly proven a part of the religion (despite the fact that church representatives often deny its existence), the story&#x27;s true role in Scientology is often misrepresented by its critics as proof that they &#x27;believe in alien parasites.&#x27; While the story may indeed seem odd, this is simply not the case.&quot; The authors write that &quot;The story is actually meant to be a working myth, illustrating the Scientology belief that humans were at one time spiritual beings, existing on infinite levels of intergalactic and interdimensional realities. At some point, the beings that we once were became trapped in physical reality (where we remain to this day). This is supposed to be the underlying message of the Xenu story, not that humans are &quot;possessed by aliens&quot;. McDowell and Brown conclude that these inappropriate misconceptions about the Xenu text have had a negative impact, &quot;Such harsh statements are the reason many Scientologists now become passionately offended at even the mention of Xenu by nonmembers.&quot;

The free speech lawyer Mike Godwin analyzes actions by the Scientology organization to protect and keep secret the Xenu text, within a discussion in his book &quot;Cyber Rights&quot; about the application of trade secret law on the Internet. Godwin explains, &quot;trade secret law protects the information itself, not merely its particular expression. Trade secret law, unlike copyright, can protect ideas and facts directly.&quot; He puts forth the question, &quot;But did the material really qualify as &#x27;trade secrets&#x27;? Among the material the church has been trying to suppress is what might be called a &#x27;genesis myth of Scientology&#x27;: a story about a galactic despot named Xenu who decided 75 million years ago to kill a bunch of people by chaining them to volcanoes and dropping nuclear bombs on them.&quot; Godwin asks, &quot;Does a &#x27;church&#x27; normally have &#x27;competitors&#x27; in the trade secret sense? If the Catholics got hold of the full facts about Xenu, does this mean they&#x27;ll get more market share?&quot; He comments on the ability of the Scientology organization to utilize such laws in order to contain its secret texts, &quot;It seems likely, given what we know about the case now, that even a combination of copyright and trade secret law wouldn&#x27;t accomplish what the church would like to accomplish: the total suppression of any dissemination of church documents or doctrines.&quot; The author concludes, &quot;But the fact that the church was unlikely to gain any complete legal victories in its cases didn&#x27;t mean that they wouldn&#x27;t litigate. It&#x27;s indisputable that the mere threat of litigation, or the costs of actual litigation, may accomplish what the legal theories alone do not: the effective silencing of many critics of the church.&quot;

== See also ==
* Incident (Scientology)
* Science fiction
* &quot;Sinister Barrier&quot;, a 1939 novel with similar themes

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* &quot;OT III Released&quot; in online edition of &quot;What Is Scientology&quot;
* OT III Scholarship Page (David S. Touretzky; includes page scans, commentary, audio files)
* Revolt in the Stars summary (Grady Ward)
* Xenu Leaflet (Roland Rashleigh-Berry)
* The Fishman Affidavit: OT III (extracts and synopsis by Karin Spaink)
* A Scientific scrutiny of OT III (Peter Forde, June 1996) Claims about Xenu evaluated against scientific geology
* &quot;The History Of Xenu, As Explained By L. Ron Hubbard In 8 Minutes&quot; (Gawker.com) Extract from the &quot;Assists&quot; lecture of October 3, 1968
* Scientology and Christianity Examined ()
* Testimony under oath (pp274–275) from Robert Vaughn Young in &quot;RTC v. FactNet&quot;, Civil Action No. 95B2143, United States Courthouse, Denver, Colorado, September 11, 1995</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1123649" start="0" end="4" title="Xenu" label="Xenu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123649" start="22" end="26" title="Xenu" label="Xemu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="47" end="68" title="Church of Scientology" label="Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="129" end="137" title="Western esotericism" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q223315" start="348" end="352" title="Douglas DC-8" label="DC-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="411" end="418" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="443" end="457" title="Thermonuclear weapon" label="hydrogen bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970123" start="505" end="511" title="thetan" label="thetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936970" start="548" end="554" title="Body thetan" label="adhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007152" start="753" end="760" title="Implant (Scientology)" label="implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995857" start="937" end="948" title="Space opera in Scientology scripture" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="958" end="972" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424416" start="1004" end="1020" title="Operating Thetan" label="Operating Thetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="1136" end="1145" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433868" start="1495" end="1507" title="Scientology controversy" label="legal action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="1526" end="1535" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q602938" start="1540" end="1553" title="trade secret" label="trade secrecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260265" start="1792" end="1800" title="Scientology and the Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784735" start="1989" end="2001" title="UFO religion" label="UFO religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="2004" end="2014" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215304" start="2020" end="2033" title="creation myth" label="creation myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424416" start="2084" end="2090" title="OT III" label="OT III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347046" start="2233" end="2241" title="Auditing (Scientology)" label="auditing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873444" start="2267" end="2272" title="Clear (Scientology)" label="Clear"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424416" start="2285" end="2301" title="Operating Thetan" label="Operating Thetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040823" start="2457" end="2476" title="Revolt in the Stars" label="Revolt in the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="3279" end="3292" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatrists"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="3353" end="3363" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="3428" end="3435" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q194207" start="3440" end="3446" title="ethylene glycol" label="glycol"/>
<link wikidata="Q223315" start="3694" end="3706" title="Douglas DC-8" label="Douglas DC-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="3952" end="3966" title="Thermonuclear weapon" label="Hydrogen bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970123" start="4214" end="4220" title="thetan" label="thetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123300" start="4379" end="4392" title="standing wave" label="standing wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q229390" start="4576" end="4583" title="3D film" label="three-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007152" start="4741" end="4748" title="implant (Scientology)" label="implant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="4828" end="4833" title="Devil" label="Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995857" start="4835" end="4846" title="Space opera in Scientology doctrine" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957341" start="4882" end="4897" title="Major religious groups" label="world religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4931" end="4948" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="4970" end="4981" title="Crucifixion" label="Crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q95080" start="5107" end="5117" title="Province of Las Palmas" label="Las Palmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="5125" end="5139" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="5239" end="5256" title="Identity (social science)" label="personal identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936970" start="5561" end="5572" title="body thetan" label="body thetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="5974" end="5982" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447078" start="6289" end="6303" title="Alien invasion" label="Invader Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="6407" end="6408" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720093" start="6691" end="6714" title="Bridge to Total Freedom" label="Bridge to Total Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q170835" start="8217" end="8226" title="cosmogony" label="cosmogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="8465" end="8473" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191085" start="8532" end="8543" title="1,000,000,000,000,000" label="quadrillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q500699" start="8588" end="8607" title="age of the universe" label="age of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="8788" end="8795" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q185569" start="8821" end="8827" title="cherub" label="cherub"/>
<link wikidata="Q947578" start="9391" end="9398" title="E-meter" label="E-meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="9521" end="9535" title="telepathy" label="telepathically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995857" start="9893" end="9916" title="space opera in Scientology" label="science fiction fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11974" start="10354" end="10364" title="Las Palmas" label="Las Palmas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10383" end="10392" title="Sea Org#History" label="Enchanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4494372" start="10764" end="10772" title="Mary Sue Hubbard" label="Mary Sue"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="10861" end="10870" title="stimulant" label="stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976211" start="10876" end="10886" title="depressant" label="depressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860264" start="11129" end="11147" title="Bare-faced Messiah" label="Bare-faced Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="11606" end="11616" title="Reincarnation" label="past lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="12070" end="12092" title="Television advertisement" label="television commercials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572921" start="12153" end="12160" title="Sea Org" label="Sea Org"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="12798" end="12807" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q29096548" start="14470" end="14475" title="Xemnu" label="Xemnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270826" start="14603" end="14623" title="Journey into Mystery" label="Journey into Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q181900" start="14669" end="14677" title="Stan Lee" label="Stan Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q311607" start="14682" end="14692" title="Jack Kirby" label="Jack Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145405" start="15275" end="15281" title="Record sealing" label="sealed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="15888" end="15897" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661372" start="15929" end="15950" title="Coca-Cola formula" label="formula for Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424416" start="16139" end="16155" title="Operating Thetan" label="Operating Thetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q968419" start="16465" end="16480" title="Manila folder" label="manila envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672895" start="16658" end="16685" title="Religious Technology Center" label="Religious Technology Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596511" start="16695" end="16709" title="Warren McShane" label="Warren McShane"/>
<link wikidata="Q602938" start="17140" end="17152" title="trade secret" label="trade secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225210" start="17307" end="17322" title="John Carmichael (Scientology)" label="John Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="17476" end="17495" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096683" start="17592" end="17602" title="Ted Koppel" label="Ted Koppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="17606" end="17609" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768706" start="17623" end="17632" title="Nightline (US news program)" label="Nightline"/>
<link wikidata="Q586084" start="17659" end="17674" title="David Miscavige" label="David Miscavige"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="17775" end="17788" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857453" start="17796" end="17807" title="Mike Rinder" label="Mike Rinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810214" start="17848" end="17873" title="Office of Special Affairs" label="Office of Special Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433857" start="18008" end="18042" title="Scientology and Me" label="BBC &amp;quot;Panorama&amp;quot; programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819342" start="18092" end="18103" title="Thomas W. Davis" label="Tommy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127717" start="18304" end="18328" title="Investigative journalism" label="investigative journalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191360" start="18345" end="18352" title="KESQ-TV" label="KESQ-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="18550" end="18558" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768706" start="18565" end="18574" title="Nightline (U.S. news program)" label="Nightline"/>
<link wikidata="Q951095" start="18630" end="18643" title="Martin Bashir" label="Martin Bashir"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19744" end="19762" title="Inside Scientology: How I Joined Scientology and Became Superhuman" label="Inside Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504757" start="19980" end="20000" title="Lawrence Wollersheim" label="Lawrence Wollersheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="20165" end="20182" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017029" start="20205" end="20223" title="William Poundstone" label="William Poundstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364795" start="20336" end="20354" title="L. Ron Hubbard Jr." label="L. Ron Hubbard Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6456612" start="20362" end="20396" title="L. Ron Hubbard, Messiah or Madman?" label="L. Ron Hubbard, Messiah or Madman?"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="20581" end="20591" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="20606" end="20609" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247810" start="20649" end="20657" title="Panorama (TV series)" label="Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="20895" end="20901" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="20902" end="20911" title="newsgroup" label="newsgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735914" start="20912" end="20936" title="alt.religion.scientology" label="alt.religion.scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757877" start="20949" end="20967" title="anonymous remailer" label="anonymous remailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260265" start="20984" end="21050" title="Scientology versus the Internet" label="online battle between Church of Scientology lawyers and detractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614702" start="21143" end="21157" title="Steven Fishman" label="Steven Fishman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455111" start="21331" end="21348" title="Fishman Affidavit" label="Fishman Affidavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735914" start="21388" end="21412" title="alt.religion.scientology" label="alt.religion.scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794807" start="21431" end="21442" title="Arnaldo Lerma" label="Arnie Lerma"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="21454" end="21468" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176469" start="21472" end="21490" title="David S. Touretzky" label="David S. Touretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="21581" end="21590" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938536" start="21638" end="21647" title="mirror website" label="mirroring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370930" start="21698" end="21710" title="Karin Spaink" label="Karin Spaink"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="21739" end="21758" title="Copyright infringement" label="copyright violation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040823" start="22373" end="22392" title="Revolt in the Stars" label="Revolt in the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345947" start="22655" end="22664" title="film treatment" label="treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q59083" start="22854" end="22862" title="Slashdot" label="Slashdot"/>
<link wikidata="Q753379" start="22966" end="22998" title="Digital Millennium Copyright Act" label="Digital Millennium Copyright Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q32635" start="23156" end="23167" title="domain name" label="domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="23348" end="23360" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="23361" end="23370" title="satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819942" start="23385" end="23446" title="A Very Merry Unauthorized Children&amp;#x27;s Scientology Pageant" label="A Very Merry Unauthorized Children&amp;#x27;s Scientology Pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813995" start="23492" end="23502" title="Obie Award" label="Obie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="23677" end="23687" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q613126" start="23707" end="23728" title="Trapped in the Closet (South Park)" label="Trapped in the Closet"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="23740" end="23744" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="23800" end="23810" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="23815" end="23828" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574320" start="23832" end="23840" title="closeted" label="closeted"/>
<link wikidata="Q206439" start="24099" end="24110" title="Isaac Hayes" label="Isaac Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47594" start="24145" end="24149" title="Chef (South Park)" label="Chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q182776" start="24616" end="24645" title="Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy" label="Muhammad cartoons controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44410" start="24882" end="24892" title="Matt Stone" label="Matt Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q44414" start="25809" end="25820" title="Trey Parker" label="Trey Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q214346" start="25860" end="25866" title="Viacom (2005–present)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="25963" end="25972" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433851" start="26257" end="26268" title="Scientology (James R. Lewis book)" label="Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="26288" end="26311" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398699" start="26325" end="26341" title="Mikael Rothstein" label="Mikael Rothstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q215304" start="26753" end="26766" title="creation myth" label="creation myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755440" start="27383" end="27401" title="Andreas Grünschloß" label="Andreas Grünschloß"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784735" start="27526" end="27538" title="UFO religion" label="UFO religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113029" start="28771" end="28792" title="Christopher Partridge" label="Christopher Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="29173" end="29183" title="gnosticism" label="gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="31616" end="31627" title="free speech" label="free speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071976" start="31635" end="31646" title="Mike Godwin" label="Mike Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197722" start="31776" end="31788" title="Cyber Rights" label="Cyber Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q602938" start="31820" end="31832" title="trade secret" label="trade secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206565" start="33258" end="33318" title="Strategic lawsuit against public participation" label="mere threat of litigation, or the costs of actual litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014548" start="33452" end="33474" title="Incident (Scientology)" label="Incident (Scientology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="33477" end="33492" title="Science fiction" label="Science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524429" start="33501" end="33517" title="Sinister Barrier" label="Sinister Barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176469" start="33731" end="33749" title="David S. Touretzky" label="David S. Touretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541286" start="33828" end="33838" title="Grady Ward" label="Grady Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370930" start="33938" end="33950" title="Karin Spaink" label="Karin Spaink"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350592" start="34305" end="34324" title="Robert Vaughn Young" label="Robert Vaughn Young"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46636" wikidata="Q167651" url="?curid=46636" title="Maoism">
<text>Maoism, officially Mao Zedong Thought, is a variety of Marxism–Leninism that Mao Zedong developed while trying to realize a socialist revolution in the agricultural, pre-industrial society of the Republic of China and later the People&#x27;s Republic of China. A difference between Maoism and traditional Marxism–Leninism is that a united front of progressive forces in class society would lead the revolutionary vanguard in pre-industrial societies rather than communist revolutionaries alone. This theory, in which revolutionary praxis is primary and ideological orthodoxy is secondary, represents urban Marxism–Leninism adapted to pre-industrial China. Later theoreticians expanded on the idea that Mao had adapted Marxism–Leninism to Chinese conditions, arguing that he had in fact updated it fundamentally and that Maoism could be applied universally throughout the world. This ideology is often referred to as Marxism–Leninism–Maoism to distinguish it from the original ideas of Mao.

From the 1950s until the Chinese economic reforms of Deng Xiaoping in the late 1970s, Maoism was the political and military ideology of the Chinese Communist Party and Maoist revolutionary movements worldwide. After the Sino-Soviet split of the 1960s, the Chinese Communist Party and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union each claimed to be the sole heir and successor to Joseph Stalin concerning the correct interpretation of Marxism–Leninism and the ideological leader of world communism.

== History ==

=== Chinese intellectual tradition ===
At the turn of the 19th century, the contemporary Chinese intellectual tradition was defined by two central concepts: iconoclasm and nationalism.

==== Iconoclastic revolution and anti-Confucianism ====
By the turn of the 20th century, a proportionately small yet socially significant cross-section of China&#x27;s traditional elite (i.e., landlords and bureaucrats) found themselves increasingly sceptical of the efficacy and even the moral validity of Confucianism. These skeptical iconoclasts formed a new segment of Chinese society, a modern intelligentsia whose arrival—or as the historian of China Maurice Meisner would label it, their defection—heralded the beginning of the destruction of the gentry as a social class in China.

The fall of the Qing dynasty in 1911 marked the final failure of the Confucian moral order, and it did much to make Confucianism synonymous with political and social conservatism in the minds of Chinese intellectuals. This association of conservatism and Confucianism lent to the iconoclastic nature of Chinese intellectual thought during the first decades of the 20th century.

Chinese iconoclasm was expressed most clearly and vociferously by Chen Duxiu during the New Culture Movement, which occurred between 1915 and 1919. Proposing the &quot;total destruction of the traditions and values of the past&quot;, the New Culture Movement, spearheaded by the &quot;New Youth&quot;, a periodical published by Chen Duxiu, profoundly influenced the young Mao Zedong, whose first published work appeared in the magazine&#x27;s pages.

==== Nationalism and the appeal of Marxism ====
Along with iconoclasm, radical anti-imperialism dominated the Chinese intellectual tradition and slowly evolved into a fierce nationalist fervor which influenced Mao&#x27;s philosophy immensely and was crucial in adapting Marxism to the Chinese model. Vital to understanding Chinese nationalist sentiments of the time is the Treaty of Versailles, which was signed in 1919. The Treaty aroused a wave of bitter nationalist resentment in Chinese intellectuals as lands formerly ceded to Germany in Shandong were—without consultation with the Chinese—transferred to Japanese control rather than returned to Chinese sovereignty.

The adverse reaction culminated in the May Fourth Movement in 1919, during which a protest began with 3,000 students in Beijing displaying their anger at the announcement of the Versailles Treaty&#x27;s concessions to Japan. The protest turned violent as protesters began attacking the homes and offices of ministers who were seen as cooperating with or being in the direct pay of the Japanese. The popular movement which followed &quot;catalyzed the political awakening of a society which had long seemed inert and dormant.&quot;

Another international event would have a significant impact not only on Mao but also on the Chinese intelligentsia. The Russian Revolution elicited great interest among Chinese intellectuals, although the socialist revolution in China was not considered a viable option until after the 4 May Incident. Afterward, &quot;[t]o become a Marxist was one way for a Chinese intellectual to reject both the traditions of the Chinese past and Western domination of the Chinese present.&quot;

=== Yan&#x27;an period between November 1935 and March 1947 ===
Immediately following the Long March, Mao and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) were headquartered in the Yan&#x27;an Soviet in Shaanxi. During this period, Mao established himself as a Marxist theoretician and produced most of the works that would later be canonised as the &quot;Thought of Mao Zedong&quot;. The rudimentary philosophical base of Chinese Communist ideology is laid down in Mao&#x27;s numerous dialectical treatises and was conveyed to newly recruited party members. This period established ideological independence from Moscow for Mao and the CCP.

Although the Yan&#x27;an period did answer some of the ideological and theoretical questions raised by the Chinese Communist Revolution, it left many crucial questions unresolved, including how the Chinese Communist Party was supposed to launch a socialist revolution while wholly separated from the urban sphere.

=== Mao Zedong&#x27;s intellectual development ===

Mao&#x27;s intellectual development can be divided into five significant periods, namely:

# the initial Marxist period from 1920 to 1926
# the formative Maoist period from 1927 to 1935
# the mature Maoist period from 1935 to 1940
# the Civil-War period from 1940 to 1949
# the post-1949 period following the revolutionary victory

==== Initial Marxist period (1920–1926) ====
Marxist thinking employs immanent socioeconomic explanations, whereas Mao&#x27;s reasons were declarations of his enthusiasm. Mao did not believe education alone would transition from capitalism to communism for three main reasons. (1) the capitalists would not repent and turn towards communism on their own; (2) the rulers must be overthrown by the people; (3) &quot;the proletarians are discontented, and a demand for communism has arisen and had already become a fact.&quot;

==== Formative Maoist period (1927–1935) ====
In this period, Mao avoided all theoretical implications in his literature and employed a minimum of Marxist category thought. His writings in this period failed to elaborate on what he meant by the &quot;Marxist method of political and class analysis&quot;.

==== Mature Maoist period (1935–1940) ====
Intellectually, this was Mao&#x27;s most fruitful time. The orientation shift was apparent in his pamphlet &quot;Strategic Problems of China&#x27;s Revolutionary War&quot; (December 1936). This pamphlet tried to provide a theoretical veneer for his concern with revolutionary practice. Mao started to separate from the Soviet model since it was not automatically applicable to China. China&#x27;s unique set of historical circumstances demanded a correspondingly unique application of Marxist theory, an application that would have to diverge from the Soviet approach.

Beginning in the Yan&#x27;an period, Mao Zedong Thought became the ideological guide for developing revolutionary culture and a long-term social movement.

==== Civil War period (1940–1949) ====
Unlike the Mature period, this period was intellectually barren. Mao focused more on revolutionary practice and paid less attention to Marxist theory. He continued to emphasise theory as practice-oriented knowledge. The most crucial topic of the theory he delved into was in connection with the Cheng Feng movement of 1942. Here, Mao summarised the correlation between Marxist theory and Chinese practice: &quot;The target is the Chinese revolution, the arrow is Marxism–Leninism. We Chinese communists seek this arrow for no other purpose than to hit the target of the Chinese revolution and the revolution of the east.&quot; The only new emphasis was Mao&#x27;s concern with two types of subjectivist deviation: (1) dogmatism, the excessive reliance upon abstract theory; (2) empiricism, excessive dependence on experience.

In 1945, the party&#x27;s first historical resolution put forward Mao Zedong Thought as the party&#x27;s unified ideology. It was also incorporated into the party&#x27;s constitution.

==== Post-Civil War period (1949–1976) ====
To Mao, the victory of 1949 was a confirmation of theory and practice. &quot;Optimism is the keynote to Mao&#x27;s intellectual orientation in the post-1949 period.&quot; Mao assertively revised the theory to relate it to the new practice of socialist construction. These revisions are apparent in the 1951 version of &quot;On Contradiction&quot;. &quot;In the 1930s, when Mao talked about contradiction, he meant the contradiction between subjective thought and objective reality. In &quot;Dialectal Materialism&quot; of 1940, he saw idealism and materialism as two possible correlations between subjective thought and objective reality. In the 1940s, he introduced no new elements into his understanding of the subject-object contradiction. In the 1951 version of &quot;On Contradiction&quot;, he saw contradiction as a universal principle underlying all processes of development, yet with each contradiction possessed of its own particularity.&quot;

In 1956, Mao first fully theorized his view of continual revolution.

=== Differences from Marxism ===

Maoism and Marxism differ in how the proletariat is defined and in which political and economic conditions would start a communist revolution.
# For Marx, the proletariat was the urban working class, which was determined in the revolution by which the bourgeoisie overthrew feudalism. For Mao Zedong, the revolutionary class was the millions of peasants he referred to as &quot;the popular masses&quot;. Mao based his revolution upon the peasantry. They possessed, according to him, two qualities: (i) they were poor and (ii) they were a political blank slate; in Mao&#x27;s words, &quot;[a] clean sheet of paper has no blotches, and so the newest and most beautiful words can be written on it.&quot;
# For Marx, the proletarian revolution was internally fuelled by the capitalist mode of production; as capitalism developed, &quot;a tension arises between the productive forces and the mode of production.&quot; The political tension between the productive forces (the workers) and the owners of the means of production (the capitalists) would be an inevitable incentive for the proletarian revolution, resulting in a communist society. Mao did not subscribe to Marx&#x27;s theory of inevitable cyclicality in the economic system. His goal was to unify the Chinese nation and so realise progressive change for China in the form of communism; hence, a revolution was needed at once. In &quot;The Great Union of the Popular Masses&quot; (1919), Mao wrote that &quot;[t]he decadence of the state, the sufferings of humanity, and the darkness of society have all reached an extreme.&quot;

=== After Mao Zedong&#x27;s death ===

The CCP&#x27;s ideological framework distinguishes between political ideas described as &quot;Thought&quot; (as in Mao Zedong Thought) or as &quot;Theory&quot; (as in Deng Xiaoping Theory). Thought carries more weight than Theory and conveys the greater relative importance of a leader&#x27;s ideological and historical influence. The process of formalizing a leader&#x27;s political thinking in the Marxist tradition is important in establishing a leader&#x27;s ideological legitimacy.

Mao Zedong Thought is frequently described as the result of collaboration between the first-generation leaders of the Party and is principally based on Mao&#x27;s analysis of Marxism and Chinese history. It is often also described as the adaptation of Marxism to the Chinese context. Observing that concepts of both Marxism and Chinese culture were and are contested, academic Rebecca Karl writes that the development of Mao Zedong Thought is best viewed as the result of Mao&#x27;s mutual interpretation of these concepts producing Mao&#x27;s view of theory and revolutionary practice.

Mao Zedong Thought asserts that class struggle continues even if the proletariat has already overthrown the bourgeoisie and there are capitalist restorationist elements within the CCP itself. Maoism provided the CCP&#x27;s first comprehensive theoretical guideline regarding how to continue the socialist revolution, the creation of a socialist society, and socialist military construction and highlights various contradictions in society to be addressed by what is termed &quot;socialist construction&quot;. While it continues to be lauded to be the major force that defeated &quot;imperialism and feudalism&quot; and created a &quot;New China&quot; by the Chinese Communist Party, the ideology survives only in name on the Communist Party&#x27;s Constitution as Deng Xiaoping abolished most Maoist practices in 1978, advancing a guiding ideology called &quot;socialism with Chinese characteristics&quot;.

Shortly after Mao died in 1976, Deng Xiaoping initiated socialist market reforms in 1978, thereby beginning the radical change in Mao&#x27;s ideology in the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC). Although Mao Zedong Thought nominally remains the state ideology, Deng&#x27;s admonition to &quot;seek truth from facts&quot; means that state policies are judged on their practical consequences, and in many areas, the role of ideology in determining policy has thus been considerably reduced. Deng also separated Mao from Maoism, making it clear that Mao was fallible, and hence the truth of Maoism comes from observing social consequences rather than by using Mao&#x27;s quotations dogmatically.

On June 27, 1981, the Communist Party&#x27;s Central Committee adopted the &quot;Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People&#x27;s Republic of China&quot;. The &quot;Resolution&quot; assesses the legacy of the Mao era, describing Mao as first among equals in the development of Mao Zedong Thought before 1949 and deeming Mao Zedong Thought as successful in establishing national independence, transforming China&#x27;s social classes, the development of economic self-sufficiency, the expansion of education and health care, and China&#x27;s leadership role in the Third World. The &quot;Resolution&quot; describes setbacks during the period 1957 to 1964 (although it generally affirms this period) and major mistakes beginning in 1965. The &quot;Resolution&quot; describes upholding the guidance of Mao Zedong Thought and Marxism-Leninism as among the Communist Party&#x27;s cardinal principles.

Contemporary Maoists in China criticise the social inequalities created by the revisionist Communist Party. Some Maoists say that Deng&#x27;s &quot;Reform and Opening&quot; economic policies that introduced market principles spelled the end of Maoism in China. However, Deng asserted that his reforms were upholding Mao Zedong Thought in accelerating the output of the country&#x27;s productive forces. A recent example of a Chinese politician regarded as neo-Maoist in terms of political strategies and mass mobilisation via red songs was Bo Xilai in Chongqing.

Although Mao Zedong Thought is still listed as one of the Four Cardinal Principles of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, its historical role has been re-assessed. The Communist Party now says that Maoism was necessary to break China free from its feudal past, but it also says that the actions of Mao led to excesses during the Cultural Revolution.

The official view is that China has now reached an economic and political stage, known as the primary stage of socialism, in which China faces new and different problems completely unforeseen by Mao, and as such, the solutions that Mao advocated are no longer relevant to China&#x27;s current conditions. The 1981 &quot;Resolution&quot; reads:
Chief responsibility for the grave &#x27;Left&#x27; error of the &#x27;cultural revolution,&#x27; an error comprehensive in magnitude and protracted in duration, does indeed lie with Comrade Mao Zedong [...] [and] far from making a correct analysis of many problems, he confused right and wrong and the people with the enemy [...] herein lies his tragedy.

Scholars outside China see this re-working of the definition of Maoism as providing an ideological justification for what they see as the restoration of the essentials of capitalism in China by Deng and his successors, who sought to &quot;eradicate all ideological and physiological obstacles to economic reform&quot;. In 1978, this led to the Sino-Albanian split when Albanian leader Enver Hoxha denounced Deng as a revisionist, stating &quot;The events and facts are demonstrating ever more clearly that China is sinking deeper and deeper into revisionism, capitalism and imperialism&quot; and formed Hoxhaism as an anti-revisionist form of Marxism.
The CCP officially regards Mao himself as a &quot;great revolutionary leader&quot; for his role in fighting against the Japanese fascist invasion during the Second World War and creating the People&#x27;s Republic of China, but Maoism, as implemented between 1959 and 1976, is regarded by today&#x27;s CCP as an economic and political disaster. In Deng&#x27;s day, support of radical Maoism was regarded as a form of &quot;left deviationism&quot; and based on a cult of personality, although these &quot;errors&quot; are officially attributed to the Gang of Four rather than Mao himself. Thousands of Maoists were arrested in the Hua Guofeng period after 1976. The prominent Maoists Zhang Chunqiao and Jiang Qing were sentenced to death with a two-year-reprieve, while others were sentenced to life imprisonment or imprisonment for 15 years.

After the Tiananmen Square protests and massacre, Mao&#x27;s influence continued to be weaker. Although not very influential, some radical Maoists, disgruntled by the injustices suffered by migrant workers, organized a number of protests and strikes, including the Jasic incident. In the 2020s, influenced by the growing wealth gap and the 996 working hour system, Mao&#x27;s thoughts are being revived in China&#x27;s generation Z, as they question authority of the CCP. The Chinese government has censored some Maoist posts.

The 2021 The &quot;Resolution&quot; &quot;on the Major Achievements and Historical Experience of the Party over the Past Century&quot; describes Mao Zedong Thought as &quot;a summation of theories, principles, and experience on China&#x27;s revolution and construction that has been proven correct through practice, and [having] put forward a series of important theories for socialist construction.&quot;

== Components ==
=== New Democracy ===

The theory of the New Democracy was known to the Chinese revolutionaries from the late 1940s. This thesis held that for most people, the &quot;long road to socialism&quot; could only be opened by a &quot;national, popular, democratic, anti-feudal and anti-imperialist revolution, run by the communists&quot;.

=== People&#x27;s war ===
Holding that &quot;political power grows out of the barrel of a gun&quot;, Maoism emphasises the &quot;revolutionary struggle of the vast majority of people against the exploiting classes and their state structures&quot;, which Mao termed a &quot;people&#x27;s war&quot;. Mobilizing large parts of rural populations to revolt against established institutions by engaging in guerrilla warfare, Maoist Thought focuses on &quot;surrounding the cities from the countryside&quot;.

Maoism views the industrial-rural divide as a major division exploited by capitalism, identifying capitalism as involving industrial urban developed First World societies ruling over rural developing Third World societies. Maoism identifies peasant insurgencies in particular national contexts as part of a context of world revolution, in which Maoism views the global countryside as overwhelming the global cities. Due to this imperialism by the capitalist urban First World toward the rural Third World, Maoism has endorsed national liberation movements in the Third World.

=== Mass line ===

Building on the theory of the vanguard party by Vladimir Lenin, the theory of the mass line outlines a strategy for the revolutionary leadership of the masses, consolidation of the dictatorship of the proletariat, and strengthening of the party and the building of socialism. The mass line can be summarised as &quot;from the masses, to the masses&quot;. It has three components or stages:
# Gathering the diverse ideas of the masses.
# Processing or concentrating these ideas from the perspective of revolutionary Marxism, in light of the long-term, ultimate interests of the masses (which the masses may sometimes only dimly perceive) and in light of a scientific analysis of the objective situation.
# Returning these concentrated ideas to the masses in the form of a political line which will advance the mass struggle toward revolution.

These three steps should be applied repeatedly, reiteratively uplifting practice and knowledge to higher and higher stages.

=== Cultural Revolution ===
The theory of cultural revolution - rooted in Marxism-Leninism thought - states that the proletarian revolution and the dictatorship of the proletariat do not wipe out bourgeois ideology; the class struggle continues and even intensifies during socialism. Therefore, a constant struggle against bourgeois ideology, traditional cultural values, and the social roots that encourage both of them must be conducted in order to create and maintain a society in which socialism can succeed.

Practical examples of this theory&#x27;s application can be seen in the rapid social changes undergone by post-revolution Soviet Union in the late 1920s -1930s as well as pre-revolution China in the New Culture and May Fourth movements of the 1910s-1920s. Both of these sociocultural movements can be seen as shaping Maoist theory on the need for and goals of Cultural Revolution, and subsequently the mass cultural movements enacted by the CCP under Mao, which include the Great Leap Forward, the Anti-rightist movement of the 1950s, and the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution of the 1960s-1970s.

The social upheavals that occurred from the New Culture Movement - as well as the May Fourth Movement that followed it - largely focused around the dismantling of traditional Han Chinese cultural norms in which the majority of the populace were illiterate and largely uneducated. This consequence of this social dynamic was that political and economic power largely resided in the hands of a small group of educated elites, and Han Chinese culture formed around principles of respect and reverence for these educated and powerful authority figures. The aforementioned movements sought to combat these social norms through grassroots educational campaigns which were focused primarily around giving educational opportunities towards to people from traditionally uneducated families and normalising all people to be comfortable making challenges towards traditional figures of authority in Confucian society.

The cultural revolution experienced by the Soviet Union was similar to the New Culture and May Fourth movements experienced by China in that it also placed a great importance on mass education and the normalisation of challenging of traditional cultural norms in the realising of a socialist society. However, the movements occurring in the Soviet Union had a far more adversarial mindset towards proponents of traditional values, with leadership in the party taking action to censor and exile these &quot;enemies of change&quot; on over 200 occasions, rather than exclusively putting pressure on these forces by enacting additive social changes such as education campaigns.

The most prominent example of a Maoist application of cultural revolution can be seen in the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution of the 1960s and 1970s wherein Mao claimed that &quot;Revisionist&quot; forces had entered society and infiltrated the government, with the goal of reinstating traditionalism and capitalism in China. Leaning more on the example of the Soviet Union, which involved the silencing and subjugation of adversarial political forces to help bring about a cultural change, Mao called for his followers to speak openly and critically about revisionist forces that they were observing in society and to expel them, assuring them that their actions would be endorsed by the party and that their efforts would in no way be interfered with. This warrant granted to the public ultimately lead to roughly ten years in which those seen as &quot;Revisionist&quot; forces - largely understood to mean landlords, rich peasants, and the so-called &quot;bourgeoise academic&quot; - were publicly criticised and denounced in places of gathering, and in more extreme examples had physical violence inflicted on them, including being beaten, tortured, and/or killed for their perceived crimes.

Beginning in 1967, Mao and the PLA sought to restrain the mass organizations that had developed during the early phase of the Cultural Revolution, and began reframing the movement as one to study Mao Zedong Thought rather than using it as a guide to immediate action.

=== Contradiction ===
Mao drew from the writings of Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, and Vladimir Lenin in elaborating his theory. Philosophically, his most important reflections emerge on the concept of &quot;contradiction&quot; (&quot;maodun&quot;). In two major essays, &quot;On Contradiction&quot; and &quot;On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People&quot;, he adopts the idea that contradiction is present in matter itself and thus also in the ideas of the brain. Matter always develops through a dialectical contradiction: &quot;The interdependence of the contradictory aspects present in all things and the struggle between these aspects determine the life of things and push their development forward. There is nothing that does not contain contradiction; without contradiction nothing would exist&quot;.

Mao held that contradictions were the essential feature of society, and a wide range of contradictions dominates society, this calls for various strategies. Revolution is necessary to resolve antagonistic contradictions between labour and capital fully. Contradictions within the revolutionary movement call for an ideological correction to prevent them from becoming antagonistic. Furthermore, each contradiction (including class struggle, the contradiction holding between relations of production and the concrete development of forces of production) expresses itself in a series of other contradictions, some dominant, others not. &quot;There are many contradictions in the process of development of a complex thing, and one of them is necessarily the principal contradiction whose existence and development determine or influence the existence and development of the other contradictions&quot;.

The principal contradiction should be tackled with priority when trying to make the fundamental contradiction &quot;solidify&quot;. Mao elaborates on this theme in the essay &quot;On Practice&quot;, &quot;on the relation between knowledge and practice, between knowing and doing&quot;. Here, &quot;Practice&quot; connects &quot;contradiction&quot; with &quot;class struggle&quot; in the following way, claiming that inside a mode of production, there are three realms where practice functions: economic production, scientific experimentation (which also takes place in economic production and should not be radically disconnected from the former) and finally class struggle. These are the proper objects of economy, scientific knowledge, and politics.

These three spheres deal with matter in its various forms, socially mediated. As a result, they are the only realms where knowledge may arise (since truth and knowledge only make sense in relation to matter, according to Marxist epistemology). Mao emphasises—like Marx in trying to confront the &quot;bourgeois idealism&quot; of his time—that knowledge must be based on empirical evidence. Knowledge results from hypotheses verified in the contrast with a real object; this real object, despite being mediated by the subject&#x27;s theoretical frame, retains its materiality and will offer resistance to those ideas that do not conform to its truth. Thus, in each of these realms (economic, scientific, and political practice), contradictions (principle and secondary) must be identified, explored, and put to function to achieve the communist goal. This involves the need to know &quot;scientifically&quot; how the masses produce (how they live, think and work), to obtain knowledge of how class struggle (the central contradiction that articulates a mode of production in its various realms) expresses itself.

=== Three Worlds Theory ===
In 1974, China announced its Three Worlds Theory at the UN.

Three Worlds Theory states that during the Cold War, two imperialist states formed the &quot;first world&quot;—the United States and the Soviet Union. The second world consisted of the other imperialist states in their spheres of influence. The third world consisted of non-imperialist countries. Both the first and the second world exploit the third world, but the first world is the most aggressive party. The first- and second-world workers are &quot;bought up&quot; by imperialism, preventing socialist revolution. On the other hand, the people of the third world have not even a short-sighted interest in the prevailing circumstances. Hence revolution is most likely to appear in third-world countries, which again will weaken imperialism, opening up for revolutions in other countries too.

=== Agrarian socialism ===
Maoism departs from conventional European-inspired Marxism in that it focuses on the agrarian countryside rather than the urban industrial forces—this is known as agrarian socialism. Notably, Maoist parties in Peru, Nepal, and the Philippines have adopted equal stresses on urban and rural areas, depending on the country&#x27;s focus on economic activity. Maoism broke with the framework of the Soviet Union under Nikita Khrushchev, dismissing it as &quot;state capitalist&quot; and &quot;revisionist&quot;, a pejorative term among communists referring to those who fight for capitalism in the name of socialism and who depart from historical and dialectical materialism.

Although Maoism is critical of urban industrial capitalist powers, it views urban industrialisation as a prerequisite to expanding economic development and the socialist reorganisation of the countryside, with the goal being the achievement of rural industrialisation that would abolish the distinction between town and countryside.

== International influence ==

From 1962 onwards, the challenge to the Soviet hegemony in the world communist movement made by the CCP resulted in various divisions in communist parties around the world. At an early stage, the Albanian Party of Labour sided with the CCP. So did many of the mainstream (non-splinter group) Communist parties in South-East Asia, like the Communist Party of Burma, the Communist Party of Thailand, and the Communist Party of Indonesia. Some Asian parties, like the Communist Party of Vietnam and the Workers&#x27; Party of Korea, attempted to take a middle-ground position.

Cambodia&#x27;s Khmer Rouge could have been considered a replica of the Maoist regime, however Maoists and Marxists generally contend that the CPK strongly deviated from Marxist doctrine and the few references to Maoist China in CPK propaganda were critical of the Chinese.

Various efforts have sought to regroup the international communist movement under Maoism since Mao&#x27;s death in 1976. Many parties and organisations were formed in the West and Third World that upheld links to the CCP. Often, they took names such as Communist Party (Marxist–Leninist) or Revolutionary Communist Party to distinguish themselves from the traditional pro-Soviet communist parties. The pro-CCP movements were, in many cases, based on the wave of student radicalism that engulfed the world in the 1960s and 1970s.

Only one Western classic communist party sided with the CCP, the Communist Party of New Zealand. Under the leadership of the CCP and Mao Zedong, a parallel international communist movement emerged to rival that of the Soviets, although it was never as formalised and homogeneous as the pro-Soviet tendency.
After the death of Mao in 1976 and the resulting power struggles in China that followed, the international Maoist movement was divided into three camps. One group, composed of various ideologically nonaligned groups, gave weak support to the new Chinese leadership under Deng Xiaoping. Another camp denounced the new leadership as traitors to the cause of Marxism–Leninism–Mao Zedong Thought. The third camp sided with the Albanians in denouncing the Three Worlds Theory of the CCP (see the Sino-Albanian split).

The pro-Albanian camp would start to function as an international group as well (led by Enver Hoxha and the APL) and was also able to amalgamate many of the communist groups in Latin America, including the Communist Party of Brazil. Later, Latin American Communists, such as Peru&#x27;s Shining Path, also embraced the tenets of Maoism.

The new Chinese leadership showed little interest in the foreign groups supporting Mao&#x27;s China. Many of the foreign parties that were fraternal parties aligned with the Chinese government before 1975 either disbanded, abandoned the new Chinese government entirely, or even renounced Marxism–Leninism and developed into non-communist, social democratic parties. What is today called the international Maoist movement evolved out of the second camp—the parties that opposed Deng and said they upheld the true legacy of Mao.

=== Afghanistan ===
The Progressive Youth Organization was a Maoist organisation in Afghanistan. It was founded in 1965 with Akram Yari as its first leader, advocating the overthrow of the then-current order through people&#x27;s war.

The Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan was founded in 2004 through the merger of five MLM parties.

=== Australia ===
The Communist Party of Australia (Marxist-Leninist) is a Maoist organisation in Australia. It was founded in 1964 as a pro-Mao split from the Australian Communist Party.

=== Bangladesh ===
The Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party is a Maoist party in Bangladesh. It was founded in 1968 with Siraj Sikder as its first leader. The party played a role in the Bangladesh Liberation War.

=== Belgium ===
The Sino-Soviet split had a significant influence on communism in Belgium. The pro-Soviet Communist Party of Belgium experienced a split of a Maoist wing under Jacques Grippa. The latter was a lower-ranking CPB member before the split, but Grippa rose in prominence as he formed a worthy internal Maoist opponent to the CPB leadership. His followers were sometimes referred to as Grippisten or Grippistes. When it became clear that the differences between the pro-Moscow leadership and the pro-Beijing wing were too significant, Grippa and his entourage decided to split from the CPB and formed the Communist Party of Belgium – Marxist–Leninist (PCBML). The PCBML had some influence, mainly in the heavily industrialised Borinage region of Wallonia, but never managed to gather more support than the CPB. The latter held most of its leadership and base within the pro-Soviet camp. However, the PCBML was the first European Maoist party and was recognised at its foundation as the largest and most important Maoist organisation in Europe outside of Albania.

Although the PCBML never really gained a foothold in Flanders, there was a reasonably successful Maoist movement in this region. Out of the student unions that formed in the wake of the May 1968 protests, Alle Macht Aan De Arbeiders (AMADA), or All Power To The Workers, was formed as a vanguard party under construction. This Maoist group originated primarily from students from the universities of Leuven and Ghent but did manage to gain some influence among the striking miners during the shutdowns of the Belgian stone coal mines in the late 1960s and early 1970s. This group became the Workers&#x27; Party of Belgium (PVDA-PTB) in 1979 and still exists today, although its power base has shifted somewhat from Flanders towards Wallonia. The WPB stayed loyal to the teachings of Mao for a long time, but after a general congress held in 2008, the party formally broke with its Maoist/Stalinist past.

=== Ecuador ===
The Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun, also known as &quot;Puka Inti&quot;, is a small Maoist guerrilla organisation in Ecuador.

=== France ===
After May 68, the cultural influence of French Maoists increased. Maoists became the first group of French intellectuals to emphasize gay and lesbian rights in their publications and contributed to the nascent feminist movement in France.

=== India ===

The Communist Party of India (Maoist) is the leading Maoist organisation in India. The CPI (Maoist) is designated as a terrorist organization in India under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act. Since 1967, there has been an ongoing conflict in India between the Indian government and Maoist insurgents. As of 2018, there have been a total of 13,834 deaths across insurgents, security forces, and civilians. Different separatist movements within India also were influenced by Maoism like the National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN), a militant group promoting Naga nationalism.

=== Iran ===

The Union of Iranian Communists (Sarbedaran) was an Iranian Maoist organisation. The UIC (S) was formed in 1976 after the alliance of Maoist groups carrying out military actions within Iran. In 1982, the UIC (S) mobilised forces in forests around Amol and launched an insurgency against the Islamist Government. The uprising was eventually a failure, and many UIC (S) leaders were shot. The party dissolved in 1982.

Following the dissolution of the Union of Iranian Communists, the Communist Party of Iran (Marxist–Leninist–Maoist) was formed in 2001. The party is a continuation of the Sarbedaran Movement and the Union of Iranian Communists (Sarbedaran). CPI (MLM) believes Iran is a &#x27;semifeudal-semicolonial&#x27; country and is trying to launch a &#x27;People&#x27;s war&#x27; in Iran.

=== Israel ===
The 1970s group Ma&#x27;avak (an offshoot of Matzpen) was influenced by Maoism. After a further split, some of its former members (including Ehud Adiv and Daud Turki) were charged with treason for meeting with Syrian intelligence officials, in a highly-publicized trial.

=== Palestine ===
The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine was initially influenced by Maoism but shifted towards the Soviet Union after 1970.

=== Peru ===
The Maoist-inspired group Shining Path and its leader Abimael Guzmán viewed revolution as requiring prolonged people&#x27;s war. According to academic Carlos Iván Degregori, Shining Path&#x27;s view of violence exceeded the typical Maoist confines, with Shining Path viewing violence as a value in itself instead of a means. In the 1980s and 1990s, it waged an insurgency against the Peruvian state that resulted in tens of thousands of deaths. 

=== Philippines ===

The Communist Party of the Philippines is the largest communist party in the Philippines, active since December 26, 1968 (Mao&#x27;s birthday). It was formed due to the First Great Rectification Movement and a split between the old Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930, which the founders saw as revisionist. The CPP was formed on Maoist lines in stark contrast with the old PKP, which focused primarily on the parliamentary struggle. The CPP was founded by Jose Maria Sison and other cadres from the old party.

The CPP also has an armed wing that it exercises absolute control over, namely the New People&#x27;s Army. It currently wages a guerrilla war against the government of the Republic of the Philippines in the countryside and is still currently active. The CPP and the NPA are part of the National Democratic Front of the Philippines, a consolidation of Maoist sectoral organisations such as Kabataang Makabayan as part of the united front strategy. The NDFP also represents the people&#x27;s democratic government in peace talks.

=== Portugal ===

Maoist movements in Portugal were very active during the 1970s, especially during the Carnation Revolution that led to the fall of the nationalist government (the Estado Novo) in 1974.

Portugal&#x27;s most significant Maoist movement was the Portuguese Workers&#x27; Communist Party. The party was among the most active resistance movements before the Portuguese democratic revolution of 1974, especially among the Marxist–Leninist Students&#x27; Federation in Lisbon. After the revolution, the MRPP achieved fame for its large and highly artistic mural paintings.

Intensely active between 1974 and 1975, during that time, the party had members that later came to be significant in national politics. For example, a future Prime Minister of Portugal, José Manuel Durão Barroso, was active in Maoist movements in Portugal and identified as a Maoist. In the 1980s, the Forças Populares 25 de Abril was another far-left Maoist armed organisation operating in Portugal between 1980 and 1987, aiming to create socialism in post-revolutionary Portugal.

=== Spain ===
The Communist Party of Spain (Reconstituted) was a Spanish clandestine Maoist party. The party&#x27;s armed wing was the First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Groups.

=== Sweden ===
In 1968, a small extremist Maoist sect called Rebels () was established in Stockholm. Led by Francisco Sarrión, the group unsuccessfully demanded that the Chinese embassy admit them into the Chinese Communist Party. The organisation only lasted a few months.

=== Turkey ===

The Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist (TKP/ML) is a Maoist organisation in Turkey currently waging a people&#x27;s war against the Turkish government. It was founded in 1972 as a split from another illegal Maoist party, the Revolutionary Workers&#x27; and Peasants&#x27; Party of Turkey (TİİKP), which Doğu Perinçek founded in 1969, led by İbrahim Kaypakkaya. The party&#x27;s armed wing is named the Workers&#x27; and Peasants&#x27; Liberation Army in Turkey (TİKKO). TİİKP is succeeded by the Patriotic Party, headed by Perinçek. Though Perinçek was significantly influenced by Mao, the Patriotic Party says he&#x27;s not a Maoist, instead saying that he embraced &quot;Mao&#x27;s contributions to the literature of the world revolution and scientific socialism&quot; and &quot;adapted them to Turkey&#x27;s conditions&quot;.

=== United States ===
After the tumultuous 1960s (particularly the events of 1968, such as the launch of the Tet Offensive, the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr., nationwide university protests, and the election of Richard Nixon), proponents of Maoist ideology constituted the &quot;largest and most dynamic&quot; branch of American socialism. From this branch came a collection of &quot;newspapers, journals, books, and pamphlets,&quot; each of which spoke on the unreasonability of the American system and proclaimed the need for a concerted social revolution. Among the many Maoist principles, the group of aspiring American revolutionaries sympathized with the idea of a protracted people&#x27;s war, which would allow citizens to address the oppressive nature of global capitalism martially. Maoism was a major influence on the New Communist movement.

Mounting discontent with racial oppression and socioeconomic exploitation birthed the two largest, officially-organized Maoist groups: the Revolutionary Communist Party and the October League. However, these were not the only groups: a slew of organizations and movements emerged across the globe as well, including I Wor Kuen, the Black Workers Congress, the Puerto Rican Revolutionary Workers Organization, the August Twenty-Ninth Movement, the Workers Viewpoint Organization, and many others—all of which overtly supported Maoist doctrine.

Orchestrated by &quot;The Guardian,&quot; in the spring of 1973, an attempt to conflate the strands of American Maoism was made with a series of sponsored forums titled &quot;What Road to Building a New Communist Party?&quot; The forums drew 1,200 attendees to a New York City auditorium that spring. The central message of the event revolved around &quot;building an anti-revisionist, non-Trotskyist, non-anarchist party&quot;. From this, other forums were held worldwide, covering topics such as &quot;The Role of the Anti-Imperialist Forces in the Antiwar Movement&quot; and &quot;The Question of the Black Nation&quot;—each forum rallying, on average, an audience of 500 activists, and serving as a &quot;barometer of the movement&#x27;s strength.&quot;

The Americans&#x27; burgeoning Maoist and Marxist–Leninist movements proved optimistic for a potential revolution, but &quot;a lack of political development and rampant rightist and ultra-leftist opportunism&quot; thwarted the advancement of the greater communist initiative. In 1972, Richard Nixon made a landmark visit to the People&#x27;s Republic of China to shake hands with Chairman Mao Zedong; this simple handshake marked the gradual pacification of east–west hostility and the re-formation of relations between &quot;the most powerful and most populous&quot; global powers: the United States and China. Nearly a decade after the Sino-Soviet split, this newfound amiability between the two nations quieted American-based counter-capitalist rumblings and marked the steady decline of American Maoism until its unofficial cessation in the early-1980s.

The Black Panther Party (BPP) was another American-based, left-wing revolutionary party to oppose American global imperialism; it was a self-described Black militant organization with metropolitan chapters in Oakland, California, New York, Chicago, Seattle, and Los Angeles, and an overt sympathizer with global anti-imperialistic movements (e.g., Vietnam&#x27;s resistance of American neo-colonial efforts). In 1971, a year before Nixon&#x27;s monumental visit, BPP leader Huey P. Newton landed in China, whereafter he was enthralled with the mystical East and the achievements of the Chinese Communist Revolution. After his return to the United States, Newton said that &quot;[e]verything I saw in China demonstrated that the People&#x27;s Republic is a free and liberated territory with a socialist government&quot; and &quot;[t]o see a classless society in operation is unforgettable&quot;. He extolled the Chinese police force as one that &quot;[served] the people&quot; and considered the Chinese antithetical to American law enforcement, which, according to Newton, represented &quot;one huge armed group that was opposed to the will of the people&quot;. In general, Newton&#x27;s first encounter with anti-capitalist society commenced a psychological liberation and embedded within him the desire to subvert the American system in favor of what the BPP called &quot;revolutionary intercommunalism&quot;. Furthermore, the BPP was founded on a similar politico-philosophical framework as that of Mao&#x27;s CCP, that is, &quot;the philosophical system of dialectical materialism&quot; coupled with traditional Marxist theory. The words of Mao, quoted liberally in BPP speeches and writings, served as a guiding light for the party&#x27;s analysis and theoretical application of Marxist ideology.

In his autobiography &quot;Revolutionary Suicide,&quot; published in 1973, Newton wrote:
Chairman Mao says that death comes to all of us, but it varies in its significance: to die for the reactionary is lighter than a feather; to die for the revolution is heavier than Mount Tai. [...] When I presented my solutions to the problems of Black people, or when I expressed my philosophy, people said, &quot;Well, isn&#x27;t that socialism?&quot; Some of them were using the socialist label to put me down, but I figured that if this was socialism, then socialism must be a correct view. So I read more of the works of the socialists and began to see a strong similarity between my beliefs and theirs. My conversion was complete when I read the four volumes of Mao Tse-tung to learn more about the Chinese Revolution.

== Criticism and implementation ==

Maoism has fallen out of favor within the Chinese Communist Party, beginning with Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s reforms in 1978. Deng believed that Maoism showed the dangers of &quot;ultra-leftism&quot;, manifested in the harm perpetrated by the various mass movements that characterized the Maoist era. In Chinese communism, the term &quot;left&quot; can be considered a euphemism for Maoist policies. However, Deng stated that the revolutionary side of Maoism should be considered separate from the governance side, leading to his famous epithet that Mao was &quot;70% right, 30% wrong&quot;. Chinese scholars generally agree that Deng&#x27;s interpretation of Maoism preserves the legitimacy of Communist rule in China but simultaneously criticizes Mao&#x27;s brand of economic and political governance.

Critic Graham Young says that Maoists see Joseph Stalin as the last true socialist leader of the Soviet Union but allows the Maoist assessments of Stalin to vary between the extremely positive and the more ambivalent. Some political philosophers, such as Martin Cohen, have seen in Maoism an attempt to combine Confucianism and socialism—what one such called &quot;a third way between communism and capitalism&quot;.

Enver Hoxha critiqued Maoism from a Marxist–Leninist perspective, arguing that New Democracy halts class struggle and allows unrestricted capitalist exploitation, that the theory of the three worlds is &quot;counter-revolutionary&quot;, and questioned Mao&#x27;s guerilla warfare methods.

Some say Mao departed from Leninism not only in his near-total lack of interest in the urban working class but also in his concept of the nature and role of the party. On the other hand, for Mao, this question would always be virtually impossible to answer.

Jung Chang and Jon Halliday contend that implementation of Maoist thought in China was responsible for as many as 70 million deaths during peacetime, with the Cultural Revolution, the Anti-Rightist Campaign of 1957–1958, and the Great Leap Forward. Some historians have argued that because of Mao&#x27;s land reforms during the Great Leap Forward which resulted in famines, thirty million perished between 1958 and 1961. By the end of 1961, the birth rate was nearly cut in half because of malnutrition. Critiquing discourses on deaths under Maoism, academics Christian Sorace, Ivan Franeschini, and Nicholas Loubere observe that these discourses attribute responsibility for deaths in manner not typical of discourses on other ideologies, such as liberalism.

Active campaigns, including party purges and &quot;reeducation&quot;, resulted in imprisonment or the execution of those deemed contrary to the implementation of Maoist ideals. The incidents of destruction of cultural heritage, religion, and art remain controversial. Some Western scholars saw Maoism as specifically engaged in a battle to dominate and subdue nature and was a catastrophe for the environment.

=== Populism ===
Mao also believed strongly in the concept of a unified people. These notions prompted him to investigate the peasant uprisings in Hunan while the rest of China&#x27;s communists were in the cities and focused on the orthodox Marxist proletariat. Many of the pillars of Maoism, such as the distrust of intellectuals and the abhorrence of occupational speciality, are typical populist ideas. The concept of &quot;people&#x27;s war&quot;, central to Maoist thought, is directly populist in its origins. Mao believed that intellectuals and party cadres would first become students of the masses and teachers of the masses later. This concept was vital to the aforementioned &quot;people&#x27;s war&quot; strategy.

=== Nationalism ===
Mao&#x27;s nationalist impulses also played a crucially important role in adapting Marxism to the Chinese model and in the formation of Maoism. Mao believed that China was to play a crucial preliminary role in the socialist revolution internationally. This belief, or the fervor with which Mao held it, separated Mao from the other Chinese communists and led Mao onto the path of what Leon Trotsky called &quot;Messianic Revolutionary Nationalism&quot;, which was central to his philosophy. German post–World War II far-right activist Michael Kühnen, a former Maoist, once praised Maoism as a Chinese form of Nazism.

=== Mao-Spontex ===
Mao-Spontex refers to a Maoist interpretation in western Europe that stresses the importance of the cultural revolution and overthrowing hierarchy. A political movement in the Marxist and libertarian movements in Western Europe from 1968 to 1971, Mao-Spontex came to represent an ideology promoting the ideas of Maoism with some influence from Marxism and Leninism, but rejecting the total idea of Marxism–Leninism.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Brown, Jeremy, and Matthew D. Johnson, eds. &quot;Maoism at the Grassroots: Everyday Life in China&#x27;s Era of High Socialism&quot; (Harvard UP, 2015) online review. 
* Cook, Alexander C., ed. &quot;Mao&#x27;s Little Red Book: A Global History&quot; (Cambridge UP, 2014).
* &quot;Marxism in the Chinese Revolution&quot; by Arif Dirlik.
* Feigon, Lee. &quot;Mao: A Reinterpretation&quot;. Ivan R. Dee, Publisher.
* &quot;Trotskyism and Maoism: Theory and Practise in France and the United States&quot;. A. Belden Fields (1988).
* Kang, Liu. &quot;Maoism: Revolutionary globalism for the Third World revisited.&quot; &quot;Comparative Literature Studies&quot; 52.1 (2015): 12–28. online
* &quot;Rethinking Mao: Explorations in Mao Zedong&#x27;s Thought&quot; by Nick Knight.
* Lanza, Fabio. &quot;The end of concern: Maoist China, activism, and Asian studies&quot; (Duke UP, 2017). online review
* Lovell, Julia. &quot;Maoism: A Global History&quot; (2019), a comprehensive scholarly history; excerpt
* Lowe, Donald. &quot;The Function of &quot;China&quot; in Marx, Lenin, and Mao&quot;
* Liu, Elliott. &quot;Maoism and the Chinese Revolution: A Critical Introduction&quot;
* 
* Meisner, Maurice. &quot;Li Ta-chao and the Origins of Chinese Marxism&quot;
* Meisner, Maurice. &quot;Marxism, Maoism, and Utopianism: Eight Essays&quot;
* Mesiner, Maurice.&quot;Mao&#x27;s China and After&quot;
* &quot;Continuity and Rupture: Philosophy in the Maoist Terrain&quot; by J. Moufawad-Paul (2017).
* Palmer, David Scott. ed. &quot;The Shining Path of Peru&quot; (2nd ed 1994) excerpt
* Schram, Stuart, &quot;The Political Thought of Mao Tse-Tung&quot;
* Schram, Stuart. &quot;Mao Tse-Tung Unrehearsed&quot;
* Seth, Sanjay. “India Maoism: The Significance of Naxalbari,” in &quot;Critical Perspectives on Media and Society,&quot; ed. R. Avery and D. Easton (Guilford Press, 1991), 289–313.
* Srivastava, Arun. &quot;Maoism in India&quot; (2015) excerpt
* &quot;Mao Tse-Tung, the Marxist Lord of Misrule: On Practice and Contradiction&quot; by Slavoj Zizek.

== External links ==

* &quot;Guiding thought of revolution: the heart of Maoism&quot; (PDF). international project.
* Marx2Mao.org. Mao Internet Library.
* &quot;The Encyclopedia of Marxism&quot;. Mao Zedong Thought.
* &quot;The Encyclopedia of Marxism&quot;. Mao&#x27;s life.
* &quot;Monthly Review&quot; (January 2005). Text of the leaflets distributed by the Zhengzhou Four.
* World Revolution Media. Maoist revolutionary film, music and art archive.
* Batchelor, J. (2009). &quot;Maoism and Classical Marxism&quot; . &quot;Clio History Journal&quot;.
* &quot;A new economic study says China could grow more quickly by 2036 if Chairman Mao&#x27;s policies were brought back&quot;. &quot;Business Insider&quot;. 10 August 2015.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="0" end="6" title="Maoism" label="Maoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="19" end="37" title="Maoism" label="Mao Zedong Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="55" end="71" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="77" end="87" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="196" end="213" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="228" end="259" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307777" start="332" end="344" title="united front" label="united front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875977" start="399" end="421" title="vanguardism" label="revolutionary vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247560" start="531" end="537" title="Praxis (process)" label="praxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127879" start="916" end="939" title="Marxism–Leninism–Maoism" label="Marxism–Leninism–Maoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="1016" end="1039" title="Chinese economic reform" label="Chinese economic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="1044" end="1057" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="1131" end="1154" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="1211" end="1228" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="1279" end="1314" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="1365" end="1378" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357521" start="1467" end="1482" title="world communism" label="world communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100818" start="1589" end="1609" title="Chinese intellectual" label="Chinese intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="1657" end="1667" title="iconoclasm" label="iconoclasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="1672" end="1683" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="1993" end="2005" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793347" start="2143" end="2158" title="Maurice Meisner" label="Maurice Meisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="2240" end="2246" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="2280" end="2284" title="1911 Revolution" label="fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="2292" end="2304" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="2435" end="2454" title="social conservatism" label="social conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q369681" start="2721" end="2731" title="Chen Duxiu" label="Chen Duxiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q852377" start="2743" end="2763" title="New Culture Movement" label="New Culture Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q617872" start="2940" end="2949" title="New Youth" label="New Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144178" start="3185" end="3201" title="anti-imperialism" label="anti-imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="3479" end="3499" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="3649" end="3657" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="3818" end="3837" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="4431" end="4449" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="4885" end="4895" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970542" start="4965" end="4983" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an Soviet" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="4987" end="4994" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q32993" start="5533" end="5561" title="Chinese Communist Revolution" label="Chinese Communist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132726" start="6354" end="6364" title="Capitalist mode of production (Marxist theory)" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6368" end="6377" title="Communism#Marxist communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970542" start="7586" end="7597" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an Soviet" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148306" start="8059" end="8069" title="Cheng Feng" label="Cheng Feng"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="8482" end="8491" title="dogmatism" label="dogmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="8542" end="8552" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44544" start="8748" end="8773" title="Constitution of the Chinese Communist Party" label="party&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="9889" end="9896" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415843" start="9999" end="10019" title="communist revolution" label="communist revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q191159" start="10063" end="10076" title="working class" label="working class"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="10130" end="10141" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="10152" end="10161" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29502" start="10595" end="10617" title="proletarian revolution" label="proletarian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433881" start="10739" end="10756" title="productive forces" label="productive forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548084" start="10765" end="10783" title="mode of production" label="mode of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q260747" start="10879" end="10898" title="means of production" label="means of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154552" start="10997" end="11014" title="communist society" label="communist society"/>
<link wikidata="Q431420" start="11671" end="11691" title="Deng Xiaoping Theory" label="Deng Xiaoping Theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12078" end="12102" title="Generations of Chinese leadership#First generation" label="first-generation leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301091" start="13441" end="13479" title="socialism with Chinese characteristics" label="socialism with Chinese characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11127665" start="13502" end="13510" title="Death and state funeral of Mao Zedong" label="Mao died"/>
<link wikidata="Q847856" start="13782" end="13803" title="seek truth from facts" label="seek truth from facts"/>
<link wikidata="Q10893860" start="14264" end="14381" title="Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="15279" end="15297" title="Reform and Opening" label="Reform and Opening"/>
<link wikidata="Q21822" start="15671" end="15679" title="Bo Xilai" label="Bo Xilai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="15683" end="15692" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q118886" start="15753" end="15777" title="Four Cardinal Principles" label="Four Cardinal Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908597" start="16141" end="16167" title="primary stage of socialism" label="primary stage of socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q332967" start="17092" end="17111" title="Sino-Albanian split" label="Sino-Albanian split"/>
<link wikidata="Q53783" start="17133" end="17144" title="Enver Hoxha" label="Enver Hoxha"/>
<link wikidata="Q589468" start="17351" end="17359" title="Hoxhaism" label="Hoxhaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436683" start="17520" end="17545" title="Japanese fascism" label="Japanese fascist invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="17862" end="17881" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q196341" start="17950" end="17962" title="Gang of Four (China)" label="Gang of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q41570" start="18030" end="18041" title="Hua Guofeng" label="Hua Guofeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q197170" start="18083" end="18097" title="Zhang Chunqiao" label="Zhang Chunqiao"/>
<link wikidata="Q236017" start="18102" end="18112" title="Jiang Qing" label="Jiang Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="18253" end="18291" title="Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="Tiananmen Square protests and massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q56209446" start="18508" end="18522" title="Jasic incident" label="Jasic incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015070" start="18556" end="18574" title="income inequality in China" label="growing wealth gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q62568684" start="18583" end="18606" title="996 working hour system" label="996 working hour system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987589" start="18662" end="18674" title="generation Z" label="generation Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q108920230" start="18784" end="18905" title="Resolution on the Major Achievements and Historical Experience of the Party over the Past Century" label="&amp;quot;Resolution&amp;quot; &amp;quot;on the Major Achievements and Historical Experience of the Party over the Past Century&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578512" start="19236" end="19249" title="New Democracy" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704432" start="19374" end="19383" title="Socialist mode of production" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239769" start="19573" end="19621" title="political power grows out of the barrel of a gun" label="political power grows out of the barrel of a gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289477" start="19801" end="19818" title="people&amp;#x27;s war" label="people&amp;#x27;s war"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="19928" end="19945" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q876830" start="20180" end="20191" title="First World" label="First World"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="20231" end="20242" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="20459" end="20470" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920297" start="20557" end="20576" title="National liberation (Marxism)" label="national liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875977" start="20657" end="20671" title="vanguard party" label="vanguard party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="20675" end="20689" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907518" start="20709" end="20718" title="mass line" label="mass line"/>
<link wikidata="Q118365" start="20808" end="20839" title="dictatorship of the proletariat" label="dictatorship of the proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704432" start="20892" end="20901" title="Socialist mode of production" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="22652" end="22708" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution of the 1960s-1970s"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="25829" end="25845" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="25851" end="25865" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090941" start="26041" end="26057" title="On Contradiction" label="On Contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q55696966" start="26074" end="26132" title="On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People" label="On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="27017" end="27031" title="class struggle" label="class struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452861" start="27672" end="27683" title="On Practice" label="On Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809037" start="29415" end="29434" title="Three Worlds Theory" label="Three Worlds Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="29490" end="29498" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981930" start="30434" end="30452" title="agrarian socialism" label="agrarian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="30686" end="30703" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q548235" start="30728" end="30744" title="state capitalist" label="state capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083688" start="30761" end="30772" title="Marxist revisionism" label="revisionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q190004" start="30904" end="30914" title="Historical materialism" label="historical"/>
<link wikidata="Q181207" start="30919" end="30942" title="dialectical materialism" label="dialectical materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="31027" end="31044" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="31076" end="31096" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q777074" start="31649" end="31673" title="Communist Party of Burma" label="Communist Party of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359816" start="31679" end="31706" title="Communist Party of Thailand" label="Communist Party of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q157744" start="31716" end="31744" title="Communist Party of Indonesia" label="Communist Party of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q427325" start="31775" end="31801" title="Communist Party of Vietnam" label="Communist Party of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q49623" start="31810" end="31838" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="31901" end="31912" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3896732" start="32755" end="32785" title="Communist Party of New Zealand" label="Communist Party of New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633149" start="32908" end="32915" title="Soviets" label="Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809037" start="33448" end="33467" title="Three Worlds Theory" label="Three Worlds Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q332967" start="33488" end="33507" title="Sino-Albanian split" label="Sino-Albanian split"/>
<link wikidata="Q161395" start="33619" end="33622" title="Albanian Party of Labour" label="APL"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="33688" end="33701" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q504000" start="33717" end="33742" title="Communist Party of Brazil" label="Communist Party of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q207854" start="33798" end="33810" title="Shining Path" label="Shining Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257409" start="33988" end="34005" title="fraternal party" label="fraternal parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="34188" end="34205" title="social democratic" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248831" start="34401" end="34431" title="Progressive Youth Organization" label="Progressive Youth Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116632" start="34502" end="34512" title="Akram Yari" label="Akram Yari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430405" start="34617" end="34656" title="Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan" label="Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229890" start="34740" end="34787" title="Communist Party of Australia (Marxist-Leninist)" label="Communist Party of Australia (Marxist-Leninist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120586" start="34878" end="34904" title="Australian Communist Party" label="Australian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260861" start="34930" end="34959" title="Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party" label="Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349910" start="35021" end="35033" title="Siraj Sikder" label="Siraj Sikder"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="35086" end="35111" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q537850" start="35220" end="35246" title="Communist Party of Belgium" label="Communist Party of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q535680" start="35290" end="35304" title="Jacques Grippa" label="Jacques Grippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154336" start="35729" end="35774" title="Communist Party of Belgium – Marxist–Leninist" label="Communist Party of Belgium – Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q182920" start="35851" end="35859" title="Borinage" label="Borinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="35870" end="35878" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="36178" end="36185" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="36241" end="36249" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="36588" end="36594" title="Leuven" label="Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="36599" end="36604" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q925616" start="36779" end="36809" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Belgium" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q598453" start="37113" end="37149" title="Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun" label="Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="37232" end="37239" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="37263" end="37269" title="May 68" label="May 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457856" start="37391" end="37413" title="LGBT history in France" label="gay and lesbian rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092684" start="37467" end="37494" title="Feminism in France" label="feminist movement in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2941659" start="37516" end="37549" title="Communist Party of India (Maoist)" label="Communist Party of India (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258610" start="37673" end="37709" title="Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act" label="Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q979845" start="37749" end="37766" title="Naxalite-Maoist insurgency" label="conflict in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="37779" end="37796" title="Indian government" label="Indian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246849" start="38008" end="38046" title="National Socialist Council of Nagaland" label="National Socialist Council of Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958308" start="38082" end="38098" title="Naga nationalism" label="Naga nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551114" start="38119" end="38159" title="Union of Iranian Communists (Sarbedaran)" label="Union of Iranian Communists (Sarbedaran)"/>
<link wikidata="Q331078" start="38362" end="38366" title="Amol" label="Amol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154407" start="38598" end="38647" title="Communist Party of Iran (Marxist–Leninist–Maoist)" label="Communist Party of Iran (Marxist–Leninist–Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370968" start="38819" end="38831" title="semicolonial" label="semicolonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720606" start="38943" end="38955" title="Ma&amp;#x27;avak" label="Ma&amp;#x27;avak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301644" start="38972" end="38979" title="Matzpen" label="Matzpen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348677" start="39068" end="39077" title="Ehud Adiv" label="Ehud Adiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227862" start="39082" end="39092" title="Daud Turki" label="Daud Turki"/>
<link wikidata="Q818618" start="39221" end="39269" title="Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine" label="Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207854" start="39394" end="39406" title="Shining Path" label="Shining Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q321322" start="39422" end="39436" title="Abimael Guzmán" label="Abimael Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481971" start="39519" end="39540" title="Carlos Iván Degregori" label="Carlos Iván Degregori"/>
<link wikidata="Q47010195" start="40005" end="40039" title="First Great Rectification Movement" label="First Great Rectification Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712402" start="40068" end="40103" title="Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930" label="Partido Komunista ng Pilipinas-1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q736833" start="40293" end="40309" title="Jose Maria Sison" label="Jose Maria Sison"/>
<link wikidata="Q866709" start="40431" end="40453" title="New People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="New People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707111" start="40634" end="40678" title="National Democratic Front of the Philippines" label="National Democratic Front of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q47004842" start="40737" end="40756" title="Kabataang Makabayan" label="Kabataang Makabayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="40981" end="41001" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="41058" end="41069" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054628" start="41138" end="41178" title="Portuguese Workers&amp;#x27; Communist Party" label="Portuguese Workers&amp;#x27; Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10280778" start="41311" end="41353" title="Marxist–Leninist Students&amp;#x27; Federation" label="Marxist–Leninist Students&amp;#x27; Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15849" start="41648" end="41673" title="José Manuel Durão Barroso" label="José Manuel Durão Barroso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031598" start="41764" end="41792" title="Forças Populares 25 de Abril" label="Forças Populares 25 de Abril"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175770" start="41963" end="42003" title="Communist Party of Spain (Reconstituted)" label="Communist Party of Spain (Reconstituted)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147068" start="42080" end="42127" title="First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Groups" label="First of October Anti-Fascist Resistance Groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="42220" end="42229" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483942" start="42238" end="42255" title="Francisco Sarrión" label="Francisco Sarrión"/>
<link wikidata="Q771163" start="42425" end="42467" title="Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist" label="Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812333" start="42561" end="42579" title="Cabinet of Turkey" label="Turkish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083578" start="42654" end="42716" title="Revolutionary Workers&amp;#x27; and Peasants&amp;#x27; Party of Turkey" label="Revolutionary Workers&amp;#x27; and Peasants&amp;#x27; Party of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q548064" start="42732" end="42745" title="Doğu Perinçek" label="Doğu Perinçek"/>
<link wikidata="Q343327" start="42770" end="42788" title="İbrahim Kaypakkaya" label="İbrahim Kaypakkaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19341987" start="42925" end="42940" title="Patriotic Party (Turkey)" label="Patriotic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q548064" start="42969" end="42977" title="Doğu Perinçek" label="Perinçek"/>
<link wikidata="Q82542" start="43368" end="43381" title="Tet Offensive" label="Tet Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q757963" start="43387" end="43426" title="assassination of Martin Luther King Jr." label="assassination of Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5149908" start="43428" end="43458" title="Columbia University protests of 1968" label="nationwide university protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870925" start="43589" end="43607" title="American socialism" label="American socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006653" start="44098" end="44120" title="New Communist movement" label="New Communist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181825" start="44262" end="44291" title="Revolutionary Communist Party, USA" label="Revolutionary Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154318" start="44300" end="44314" title="Communist Party (Marxist–Leninist) (United States)" label="October League"/>
<link wikidata="Q15427995" start="44439" end="44449" title="I Wor Kuen" label="I Wor Kuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922183" start="44455" end="44477" title="Black Workers Congress" label="Black Workers Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820616" start="44536" end="44564" title="August Twenty-Ninth Movement" label="August Twenty-Ninth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614020" start="44689" end="44701" title="National Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="46289" end="46308" title="Black Panther Party" label="Black Panther Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="46494" end="46513" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q360570" start="46759" end="46773" title="Huey P. Newton" label="Huey P. Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149081" start="46838" end="46842" title="Eastern world" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q108085601" start="47673" end="47689" title="intercommunalism" label="intercommunalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318868" start="48115" end="48136" title="Revolutionary Suicide" label="Revolutionary Suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="49020" end="49033" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="50065" end="50074" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q53783" start="50155" end="50166" title="Enver Hoxha" label="Enver Hoxha"/>
<link wikidata="Q235291" start="50704" end="50714" title="Jung Chang" label="Jung Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q967307" start="50719" end="50731" title="Jon Halliday" label="Jon Halliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="50863" end="50882" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357324" start="50888" end="50910" title="Anti-Rightist Campaign" label="Anti-Rightist Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="50933" end="50951" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="51008" end="51019" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="51069" end="51075" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="53009" end="53021" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q69753" start="53159" end="53173" title="Michael Kühnen" label="Michael Kühnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="53233" end="53239" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312119" start="53262" end="53273" title="Mao-Spontex" label="Mao-Spontex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="53450" end="53461" title="anarchist" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="53606" end="53613" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="53618" end="53626" title="Leninism" label="Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="53660" end="53676" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306544" start="54630" end="54643" title="Julia Lovell" label="Lovell, Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995037" start="55090" end="55116" title="Mao&amp;#x27;s China and After" label="Mao&amp;#x27;s China and After"/>
<link wikidata="Q59268385" start="55131" end="55187" title="Continuity and Rupture" label="Continuity and Rupture: Philosophy in the Maoist Terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q59268385" start="55197" end="55213" title="J. Moufawad-Paul" label="J. Moufawad-Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626981" start="55310" end="55324" title="Stuart Schram" label="Schram, Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q286707" start="56472" end="56488" title="Business Insider" label="Business Insider"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46637" wikidata="Q422655" url="?curid=46637" title="Dow">
<text>Dow may refer to:
==Business==
* Dow Jones Industrial Average, or simply the Dow, an American stock market index
* Dow Inc., an American commodity chemical company
** Dow Chemical Company, a subsidiary, an American multinational chemical corporation 
* Dow Breweries, a former Canadian brewing company

== Ethnicities and languages ==
* Dow people, an ethnic group of Brazil
* Dow language of the Dow people 
* codice_1, the ISO 639-3 code for the Doyayo language of Cameroon

==Places==
* County Down, Northern Ireland, Chapman code DOW
* Dow, Illinois, U.S.
* Dow City, Iowa, U.S.
* Dow, Kentucky, U.S.
* Dow Village (disambiguation), two places in Trinidad and Tobago
* Downingtown station, Pennsylvania, U.S., Amtrak station code DOW
* Dow Nunatak, Antarctica
* Dow Peak, Antarctica

==Other uses ==
* Dow (surname), including a list of people with the name
* Dow Finsterwald (1929–2022), American golfer
* Dow Tennis Classic, an ITF Women&#x27;s Circuit tennis tournament
* Dow University of Health Sciences, in Pakistan
* Deep ocean water, a marine term
* Died of wounds, a military casualty classification
* Doppler on Wheels, devices used for meteorological research
* Down Orange Welfare, Ulster loyalist vigilante group in Northern Ireland
* Dow Cook, a fictional character in the &quot;Fusion&quot; comics series
* United States Department of War, an extinct department of the United States government
===Division of Wildlife===
* Colorado Division of Wildlife now part of Colorado Parks and Wildlife
* Utah Division of Wildlife Resources
* Florida Division of Wildlife, now merged into the Fish and Wildlife Research Institute
* Nevada Department of Wildlife
* For Alabama Division of Wildlife see Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources#Wildlife and Freshwater Fisheries
* Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries

==See also==

* Dhow, a traditional sailing ship
* Dow process (disambiguation)
* Dowe (disambiguation)
* Dow Jones (disambiguation)
* &quot;Dow v. United States&quot;, a 1915 United States Court of Appeals case</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q422655" start="0" end="3" title="Dow" label="Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q180816" start="33" end="61" title="Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Dow Jones Industrial Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="115" end="123" title="Dow Inc." label="Dow Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="167" end="187" title="Dow Chemical Company" label="Dow Chemical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924000" start="253" end="266" title="Dow Breweries" label="Dow Breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252992" start="337" end="347" title="Dow people" label="Dow people"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042278" start="377" end="389" title="Dow language" label="Dow language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35299" start="448" end="463" title="Doyayo language" label="Doyayo language"/>
<link wikidata="Q190684" start="490" end="501" title="County Down" label="County Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302593" start="540" end="553" title="Dow, Illinois" label="Dow, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873381" start="562" end="576" title="Dow City, Iowa" label="Dow City, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302594" start="585" end="598" title="Dow, Kentucky" label="Dow, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q29644095" start="607" end="635" title="Dow Village (disambiguation)" label="Dow Village (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303213" start="673" end="692" title="Downingtown station" label="Downingtown station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800906" start="740" end="751" title="Dow Nunatak" label="Dow Nunatak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421399" start="766" end="774" title="Dow Peak" label="Dow Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869647" start="806" end="819" title="Dow (surname)" label="Dow (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405509" start="864" end="879" title="Dow Finsterwald" label="Dow Finsterwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q886519" start="911" end="929" title="Dow Tennis Classic" label="Dow Tennis Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302638" start="979" end="1012" title="Dow University of Health Sciences" label="Dow University of Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250420" start="1028" end="1044" title="Deep ocean water" label="Deep ocean water"/>
<link wikidata="Q210392" start="1062" end="1076" title="Died of wounds" label="Died of wounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036935" start="1115" end="1132" title="Doppler on Wheels" label="Doppler on Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302844" start="1177" end="1196" title="Down Orange Welfare" label="Down Orange Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510250" start="1297" end="1303" title="Fusion (Eclipse Comics)" label="Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="1326" end="1357" title="United States Department of War" label="United States Department of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148857" start="1484" end="1511" title="Colorado Parks and Wildlife" label="Colorado Parks and Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7902354" start="1514" end="1549" title="Utah Division of Wildlife Resources" label="Utah Division of Wildlife Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461376" start="1602" end="1638" title="Fish and Wildlife Research Institute" label="Fish and Wildlife Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003423" start="1641" end="1670" title="Nevada Department of Wildlife" label="Nevada Department of Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1710" end="1800" title="Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources#Wildlife and Freshwater Fisheries" label="Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources#Wildlife and Freshwater Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689107" start="1803" end="1849" title="Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries" label="Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q171799" start="1867" end="1871" title="Dhow" label="Dhow"/>
<link wikidata="Q125407805" start="1902" end="1930" title="Dow process (disambiguation)" label="Dow process (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253049" start="1933" end="1954" title="Dowe (disambiguation)" label="Dowe (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148932" start="1957" end="1983" title="Dow Jones (disambiguation)" label="Dow Jones (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302641" start="1992" end="2012" title="Dow v. United States" label="Dow v. United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46638" wikidata="Q1126244" url="?curid=46638" title="Dow Jones &amp; Company">
<text>Dow Jones &amp; Company, Inc. (also known simply as Dow Jones) is an American publishing firm owned by News Corp and led by CEO Almar Latour.

The company publishes &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, &quot;Barron&#x27;s&quot;, &quot;MarketWatch&quot;, &quot;Mansion Global&quot;, &quot;Financial News&quot; and &quot;Private Equity News&quot;. It published the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) from 1882 until 2010, when News Corp then sold 90% ownership of the Dow Jones stock market indices business to CME Group; News Corp sold CME its remaining 10% in 2013.

==History==
The company was founded in 1882 by three reporters: Charles Dow, Edward Jones, and Charles Bergstresser. Charles Dow was widely known for his ability to break down and convey what was often considered very convoluted financial information and news to the general public – this is one of the reasons why Dow Jones &amp; Company is well known for their publications and transferring of important and sometimes difficult to understand financial information to people across the globe. Nevertheless, the three reporters were joined in control of the organization by Thomas F. Woodlock.

Dow Jones was acquired in 1902 by Clarence Barron, the leading financial journalist of the day, after the death of co-founder Charles Dow. Upon Barron&#x27;s death in 1928, control of the company passed to his stepdaughters Jane and Martha Bancroft. The company was led by the Bancroft family, which effectively controlled 64% of all voting stock, until 2007 when an extended takeover battle saw News Corporation acquire the business. The company then became a subsidiary of News Corporation. It was reported on August 1, 2007, that the bid had been successful after an extended period of uncertainty about shareholder agreement, with the transaction finalized on December 13, 2007. It was worth US$5 billion or $60 a share, giving News Corp control of &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; and ending the Bancroft family&#x27;s 105 years of ownership.

The company was best known for the publication of the Dow Jones Industrial Average and related market statistics, Dow Jones Newswire, and a number of financial publications. In 2010 the Dow Jones Indexes subsidiary was sold to the CME Group and the company focused on financial news publications, including its flagship publication &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; and providing financial news and information tools to financial companies.

In 2005, together with FTSE, Dow Jones launched the Industry Classification Benchmark, a taxonomy used to segregate markets into sectors.

In April 2020, Dow Jones CEO William Lewis announced he would be stepping down from his position after nearly six years in the role.

On May 7, 2020 News Corp announced that Almar Latour would assume the CEO role on May 15, 2020.

In 2021, Dow Jones acquired OPIS and Base Chemicals from IHS Markit for $1.4 billion dollars.

==Products==
===Consumer media===
Its flagship publication, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, is a daily newspaper in print and online covering business, financial national and international news and issues around the globe. It began publishing on July 8, 1889. There are 12 versions of the Journal in nine languages, including English, Chinese, Japanese, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Malay, Turkish and Korean. The Journal has won 35 Pulitzer Prizes for outstanding journalism.

Other consumer-oriented publications of Dow Jones include &quot;Barron&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, a weekly overview of the world economy and markets, MarketWatch, an online financial news site, and &quot;Investor&#x27;s Business Daily&quot;, a newspaper and website covering the stock market, international business, finance and economics. &quot;Financial News&quot; provides news on investment banking, securities, and asset management. BigCharts, provided by MarketWatch&#x27;s Virtual Stock Exchange Games, includes stock charts, screeners, interactive charting, and research tools. &quot;Professor Journal&quot; is a &quot;Journal&quot; in education program for professors to integrate into curriculum.

In 2017, Dow Jones launched Moneyish, a lifestyle and personal finance website aimed at millennial readers.

Dow Jones also published Heat Street, an online news and opinion website launched in February 2016 that was later folded into MarketWatch.

The monthly journal &quot;Far Eastern Economic Review&quot; closed in September 2009.

===Enterprise media===
Dow Jones serves corporate markets and financial markets clients with financial news and information products and services. Dow Jones owns more than 20 products that combine content and technology to help drive decisions, which include:
* Dow Jones Newswires;
* Dow Jones Factiva, a database that provides a curated basis for making decisions through search results, alerts, newsletters, and charts about companies, topics, and people;
* Dow Jones FX Select, delivers real-time, breaking global FX news, expert trend analysis and in-depth policy commentary in 13 languages;
* Dow Jones VentureSource, provides data on venture-backed companies and helps find deal and partnership opportunities, perform comprehensive due diligence and examine trends in venture capital investment, fund-raising and liquidity;
* Private Equity Analyst, timely news and critical analysis of private equity and venture capital activity, offering insight and breaking news on developments in fund-raising, investment, deal finance, liquidity, returns, and executive moves;
* Dow Jones Risk &amp; Compliance, on risk management, regulatory compliance or corporate governance content for Anti-Corruption, Anti-Money Laundering, and Payments and Sanctions.

===Dow Jones Newswires===
&quot;Dow Jones Newswires&quot; is the real-time financial news organization founded in 1882, its primary competitors are Bloomberg L.P. and Thomson Reuters. The company reports more than 600,000 subscribers – including brokers, traders, analysts, world leaders, and finance officials and fund managers – as of July 2011.
===Ventures===
In 2009 Dow Jones Ventures launched FINS.com, a standalone resource for financial professionals with information about finance careers and the finance industry. In 2012, the site was acquired by Dice.com.

===Broadcasting===
In broadcasting, Dow Jones provides news content to CNBC in the U.S. It produced two shows for commercial radio, &quot;The Wall Street Journal Report&quot; on the Wall Street Journal Radio Network and &quot;The Dow Jones Report&quot;. The network was shut down in 2014.

Dow Jones also launched WSJ Live an interactive video website that provides live and on demand videos from The Wall Street Journal Video Network. Programs included &quot;News Hub&quot;, &quot;MoneyBeat&quot;, and &quot;Lunch Break&quot; among others. WSJ Live was shut down in 2017.

===Indices===
In February 2010, Dow Jones sold a 90% stake in its Index business for $607.5million to Chicago-based CME Group, which owns the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. A few of the most widely used included:

*Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA, &quot;Dow 30&quot;, or often simply &quot;The Dow&quot;)
*Dow Jones Transportation Average
*Dow Jones Utility Average
*Dow Jones Composite Average
*The Global Dow
*Dow Jones Global Titans 50 Index
*Dow Jones Total Stock Market Index
*Dow Jones Sustainability Indexes
*Dow Jones-UBS Commodity Indexes
*Dow Jones Target Date Indexes

In July 2012, Dow Jones &amp; Company and CME Group contributed the Dow Jones Indices to the formation of the S&amp;P Dow Jones Indices joint venture, with McGraw–Hill&#x27;s Standard and Poor&#x27;s (S&amp;P) subsidiary holding 73.0%, the CME Group holding 24.4%, and Dow Jones &amp; Company holding an indirect 2.6% ownership interest in the joint venture.

In April 2013, CME Group purchased the Dow Jones &amp; Company interest in the S&amp;P Dow Jones Indices joint venture for $80.0million, increasing CME Group&#x27;s interest to 27.0% and removing Dow Jones &amp; Company from all involvement with its namesake indices.

===NewsPicks USA===

In March 2017, Dow Jones and NewsPicks Inc., a Japanese firm that develops and operates a business news platform of the same name, established a joint venture called NewsPicks USA, LLC. The joint venture is headed by CEO Ken Breen, who is currently the Senior Vice President, Commercial, for the Dow Jones Media Group, together with Chairman Yusuke Umeda, who is also the Director of NewsPicks Inc.

The joint venture launched the English version of the NewsPicks platform for the US market on November 13, 2017. Similar to the original Japanese edition, the US edition of NewsPicks combines business news from sources like &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, Bloomberg, and Reuters with social networking features, such as comments on news articles from top-ranked business professionals from around the world (&quot;ProPickers&quot;). The platform currently has a smartphone app for the iPhone with plans for release on Android in the future.

The venture was dissolved in October 2018 with the Japanese parent company retaining full ownership.

== Ownership ==
The company&#x27;s foundation was laid by Charles Dow, Edward Jones and Charles Bergstresser who, over two decades, conceived and promoted the three products which define Dow Jones and financial journalism: &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, Dow Jones Newswires and the Dow Jones Industrial Average.

Dow Jones was acquired in 1902 by the leading financial journalist of the day, Clarence Barron.

In 2007, Dow Jones was acquired by News Corp., a leading global media company.

The Bancroft family and heirs of Clarence W. Barron effectively controlled the company&#x27;s class B shares, each with a voting power of ten regular shares, prior to its sale to News Corp. At one time, they controlled 64% of Dow Jones voting stock.

Currently, Dow Jones is owned by Rupert Murdoch, owner of News Corp and several other major media companies.

=== Buyout offer ===
On May 1, 2007, Dow Jones released a statement confirming that News Corporation, led by Rupert Murdoch, had made an unsolicited offer of $60 per share, or $5 billion, for Dow Jones. Stock was briefly halted for a pending press release. The halt lasted under 10 minutes while CNBC was receiving data. It was suggested that the buyout offer was related to Murdoch&#x27;s new cable business news channel Fox Business, which launched in 2007, and that the Dow Jones brand would bring instant credibility to the project.

On June 6, 2007, Brian Tierney, CEO and founder of Philadelphia Media Holdings, which then owned &quot;The Philadelphia Inquirer&quot;, &quot;Philadelphia Daily News&quot; and Philly.com, went public in an article on Philly.com expressing interest in &quot;joining with outside partners to buy Dow Jones.&quot; Tierney said, &quot;We would participate as Philadelphia Media Holdings, along with other investors. We wouldn&#x27;t do it alone.&quot;

In June, MySpace co-founder Brad Greenspan put forth a bid to buy 25% of Dow Jones for $60 a share, the same price per share as News Corporation&#x27;s bid, giving the existing shareholders a $1.25 billion cash infusion while maintaining overall ownership of the company.

On July 17, 2007, &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, a unit of Dow Jones, reported that the company and News Corporation had agreed in principle on a US$5 billion takeover, that the offer would be put to the full Dow Jones board on the same evening in New York, and that the offer valued the company at 70% more than the company&#x27;s market value.

====Insider trading scandal====
Upon investigating suspicious share price movements in the run-up to the announcement, the United States Securities and Exchange Commission alleged that board member Sir David Li, one of Hong Kong&#x27;s most prominent businessmen, had informed his close friend and business associate Michael Leung of the impending offer. Leung acted on this information by telling his daughter and son-in-law, who reaped a US$8.2 million profit from an insider trading transaction.

==Corporate governance==
Prior to its sale to News Corp, the last members of the board of directors of the company were Christopher Bancroft, Lewis B. Campbell, Michael Elefante, John Engler, Harvey Golub, Leslie Hill, Irvine Hockaday, Peter Kann, David Li, M. Peter McPherson (chairman), Frank Newman, James Ottaway, Elizabeth Steele, and William Steere.

==See also==

*Closing milestones of the Dow Jones Industrial Average
*List of assets owned by Dow Jones

==References==
==External links==
*Dow Jones corporate history
*Dow Jones Indexes corporate site. .
*Dow Jones Stock Indexes averages research site
*Dow Jones Indexes video on indexing using Latin America as an example
*Yahoo! Finance – Dow Jones &amp; Company, Inc. Company Profile
*Overview of company history &quot;Dow Jones Saga Reflects The Forces That Shaped The Wall Street Journal&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1126244" start="0" end="29" title="Dow Jones &amp;amp; Company" label="Dow Jones &amp;amp; Company, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1126244" start="52" end="61" title="Dow Jones &amp;amp; Company" label="Dow Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q14289857" start="103" end="112" title="News Corp" label="News Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q97453234" start="128" end="140" title="Almar Latour" label="Almar Latour"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="171" end="194" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863797" start="208" end="221" title="Barron&amp;#x27;s (newspaper)" label="Barron&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068426" start="235" end="246" title="MarketWatch" label="MarketWatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449624" start="288" end="302" title="Financial News" label="Financial News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246077" start="319" end="338" title="Private Equity News" label="Private Equity News"/>
<link wikidata="Q180816" start="363" end="391" title="Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Dow Jones Industrial Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q223371" start="477" end="497" title="stock market indices" label="stock market indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023876" start="510" end="519" title="CME Group" label="CME Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q472182" start="632" end="643" title="Charles Dow" label="Charles Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048584" start="645" end="657" title="Edward Jones (statistician)" label="Edward Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958536" start="663" end="683" title="Charles Bergstresser" label="Charles Bergstresser"/>
<link wikidata="Q56650935" start="1142" end="1160" title="Thomas F. Woodlock" label="Thomas F. Woodlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126794" start="1197" end="1212" title="Clarence Barron" label="Clarence Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854169" start="1440" end="1455" title="Bancroft family" label="Bancroft family"/>
<link wikidata="Q185278" start="1559" end="1575" title="News Corporation" label="News Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14289857" start="1895" end="1904" title="News Corp" label="News Corp"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="1922" end="1945" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180816" start="2069" end="2097" title="Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Dow Jones Industrial Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253020" start="2201" end="2218" title="Dow Jones Indexes" label="Dow Jones Indexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023876" start="2246" end="2255" title="CME Group" label="CME Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317652" start="2511" end="2544" title="Industry Classification Benchmark" label="Industry Classification Benchmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014540" start="2627" end="2640" title="William Lewis (journalist)" label="William Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q97453234" start="2772" end="2784" title="Almar Latour" label="Almar Latour"/>
<link wikidata="Q30601683" start="2857" end="2861" title="Oil Price Information Service" label="OPIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662481" start="2886" end="2896" title="IHS Markit" label="IHS Markit"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="2990" end="3013" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="3032" end="3041" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="3362" end="3377" title="Pulitzer Prizes" label="Pulitzer Prizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863797" start="3471" end="3493" title="Barron&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Barron&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068426" start="3553" end="3564" title="MarketWatch" label="MarketWatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060911" start="3607" end="3637" title="Investor&amp;#x27;s Business Daily" label="Investor&amp;#x27;s Business Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q319845" start="3787" end="3805" title="investment banking" label="investment banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="3807" end="3817" title="Security (finance)" label="securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q873442" start="3823" end="3839" title="asset management" label="asset management"/>
<link wikidata="Q253613" start="4165" end="4181" title="personal finance" label="personal finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q277633" start="4199" end="4209" title="millennial" label="millennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q24590031" start="4245" end="4256" title="Heat Street" label="Heat Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396038" start="4386" end="4413" title="Far Eastern Economic Review" label="Far Eastern Economic Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139962" start="4742" end="4749" title="Factiva" label="Factiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="5851" end="5865" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg L.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q1141267" start="5870" end="5885" title="Thomson Reuters" label="Thomson Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q160117" start="5949" end="5955" title="broker" label="broker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424605" start="5958" end="5964" title="Trader (finance)" label="trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416279" start="5967" end="5974" title="Financial analyst" label="analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q14864997" start="6018" end="6031" title="Investment management" label="fund managers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272335" start="6261" end="6269" title="Dice.com" label="Dice.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023912" start="6343" end="6347" title="CNBC" label="CNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="6397" end="6402" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773318" start="6410" end="6440" title="The Wall Street Journal Report" label="The Wall Street Journal Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962617" start="6454" end="6487" title="Wall Street Journal Radio" label="Wall Street Journal Radio Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996812" start="6732" end="6740" title="News Hub" label="News Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="6948" end="6955" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023876" start="6962" end="6971" title="CME Group" label="CME Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071967" start="6988" end="7015" title="Chicago Mercantile Exchange" label="Chicago Mercantile Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q180816" start="7059" end="7087" title="Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Dow Jones Industrial Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q688712" start="7153" end="7185" title="Dow Jones Transportation Average" label="Dow Jones Transportation Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q688556" start="7187" end="7212" title="Dow Jones Utility Average" label="Dow Jones Utility Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q696830" start="7214" end="7241" title="Dow Jones Composite Average" label="Dow Jones Composite Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640735" start="7243" end="7257" title="The Global Dow" label="The Global Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253025" start="7329" end="7361" title="Dow Jones Sustainability Indexes" label="Dow Jones Sustainability Indexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253020" start="7537" end="7562" title="S&amp;amp;P Dow Jones Indices" label="S&amp;amp;P Dow Jones Indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q868587" start="7583" end="7594" title="S&amp;amp;P Global" label="McGraw–Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8419" end="8431" title="Yusuke Umeda" label="Yusuke Umeda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8531" end="8540" title="NewsPicks" label="NewsPicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126794" start="9655" end="9673" title="Clarence W. Barron" label="Clarence W. Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q185278" start="10067" end="10083" title="News Corporation" label="News Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="10092" end="10106" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735740" start="10405" end="10417" title="Fox Business" label="Fox Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965476" start="10538" end="10551" title="Brian Tierney" label="Brian Tierney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182741" start="10572" end="10599" title="Philadelphia Media Holdings" label="Philadelphia Media Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q600111" start="10624" end="10649" title="The Philadelphia Inquirer" label="The Philadelphia Inquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378849" start="10663" end="10686" title="Philadelphia Daily News" label="Philadelphia Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q40629" start="10979" end="10986" title="MySpace" label="MySpace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8251552" start="10998" end="11012" title="Brad Greenspan" label="Brad Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="11267" end="11290" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="11719" end="11767" title="United States Securities and Exchange Commission" label="United States Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236581" start="11794" end="11806" title="Sir David Li" label="Sir David Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="11815" end="11824" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q854623" start="12066" end="12081" title="insider trading" label="insider trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="12177" end="12195" title="board of directors" label="board of directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536281" start="12238" end="12255" title="Lewis B. Campbell" label="Lewis B. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q735182" start="12275" end="12286" title="John Engler" label="John Engler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677222" start="12288" end="12300" title="Harvey Golub" label="Harvey Golub"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12315" end="12330" title="Irvine Hockaday" label="Irvine Hockaday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077682" start="12332" end="12342" title="Peter Kann" label="Peter Kann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713002" start="12354" end="12372" title="M. Peter McPherson" label="M. Peter McPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q99669316" start="12436" end="12450" title="William C. Steere, Jr." label="William Steere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176887" start="12468" end="12522" title="Closing milestones of the Dow Jones Industrial Average" label="Closing milestones of the Dow Jones Industrial Average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329921" start="12524" end="12557" title="List of assets owned by Dow Jones" label="List of assets owned by Dow Jones"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46639" wikidata="Q283639" url="?curid=46639" title="World Council of Churches">
<text>The World Council of Churches (WCC) is a worldwide Christian inter-church organization founded in 1948 to work for the cause of ecumenism. Its full members today include the Assyrian Church of the East, most jurisdictions of the Eastern Orthodox Church (including the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople), the Oriental Orthodox Churches, the Union of Utrecht, the Lutheran World Federation, the Anglican Communion, the Mennonite churches, the World Methodist Council, the Baptist World Alliance, the World Communion of Reformed Churches, several Pentecostal churches, the Moravian Church, and the Malankara Mar Thoma Syrian Church. Notably, the Catholic Church is not a full member, although it sends delegates who have observer status to meetings.

The WCC describes itself as &quot;a worldwide fellowship of 352 global, regional and sub-regional, national and local churches seeking unity, a common witness and Christian service&quot;. It has no head office as such, but its administrative centre is at the Ecumenical Centre in Geneva, Switzerland. The organization&#x27;s members include denominations which claim to collectively represent over 600 million people across the world in more than 110 countries.

Many regional affiliates of the World Council of Churches, such as the Middle East Council of Churches and National Council of Churches in Australia, work for the cause of Christian unity at the domestic level, with member denominations including the Oriental Orthodox Churches, Lutheran churches, Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox churches, Methodist churches, Anglican Communion, Reformed churches, among others.

==History==
The Ecumenical Movement met with initial successes in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including the Edinburgh Missionary Conference of 1910 (chaired by future WCC Honorary President John R. Mott). In 1920, the former Patriarch of Constantinople, Germanus V, wrote a letter &quot;addressed &#x27;To all the Churches of Christ, wherever they may be&#x27;, urging closer co-operation among separated Christians, and suggesting a &#x27;League of Churches&#x27;, parallel to the newly founded League of Nations&quot;. Church leaders agreed in 1937 to establish a World Council of Churches, based on a merger of the &quot;Faith and Order Movement&quot; (under Charles Brent of the Episcopal Church of the United States) and &quot;Life and Work Movement&quot; (under Nathan Söderblom of the Lutheran Church of Sweden) organisations.

Its official establishment was deferred with the outbreak of World War II until 23 August 1948. Delegates of 147 churches assembled in Amsterdam to merge the Faith and Order Movement and Life and Work Movement. This was consolidated by a second meeting at Lund in 1950, for which the British Methodist Robert Newton Flew edited an influential volume of studies, &quot;The Nature of the Church&quot;. Subsequent mergers were with the International Missionary Council in 1961 and the World Council of Christian Education, with its roots in the 18th century Sunday School movement, in 1971.

WCC member churches include the Assyrian Church of the East and the Oriental Orthodox Churches, almost all of the Eastern Orthodox Churches and Lutheran Churches; the Moravian Church; the Anglican Communion; some Old Catholic Churches; the Methodist churches; the Presbyterian and other Reformed churches, a sampling of united and independent churches, and some Baptist and Pentecostal churches.

Many churches who refused to join the WCC joined to form the World Evangelical Alliance.

Neither the WCC nor the U.S.-based National Council of Churches (NCC) include denominations such as Jehovah’s Witnesses, Mormons, The Church of Scientology, and other groups which have historically refused to affirm biblical Christianity and the widely accepted creeds of Christendom (for example, the Holy Trinity as canonized by the Nicene Creed).
Delegates sent from the member churches meet every seven or eight years in an Assembly, which elects a Central Committee that governs between Assemblies. A variety of other committees and commissions answer to the Central Committee and its staff. Assemblies have been held since 1948.

The &quot;human rights abuses in communist countries evoked grave concern among the leaders of the World Council of Churches.&quot; However, historian Christopher Andrew claims that, during the Cold War, a number of important WCC representatives of the Orthodox Church in Eastern Europe had been working for the KGB, and that they influenced the policy of the WCC. From 1955 to 1958, Robert S. Bilheimer co-chaired a WCC international commission to prepare a document addressing the threat of nuclear warfare during the Cold War.

At the 1961 conference, a 32-year-old Russian Orthodox Bishop named Aleksey Ridiger was sent as delegate to the assembly, and then appointed to the WCC&#x27;s central committee. He was later elected as Russian patriarch in 1990 as Alexei II.

The ninth assembly took place in Porto Alegre, Brazil in February 2006, under the theme &quot;God, in your grace, transform the world&quot;. During the first Assemblies, theologians Vasileios Ioannidis and Amilkas Alivizatos contributed significantly to the debates that led to the drafting of the &quot;Toronto Statement&quot;, a foundational document which facilitated Eastern Orthodox participation in the organization and today it constitutes its ecclesiological charter.

The 10th Assembly was held in Busan, Republic of Korea, from 30 October to 8 November 2013.

In 2013 Dr. Agnes Abuom of Nairobi, from the Anglican Church of Kenya, was elected as moderator of the Central Committee of the World Council of Churches; she is the first woman and the first African to hold this position.

The 11th Assembly of the World Council of Churches took place in Karlsruhe, Germany, from 31 August to 8 September 2022, under the theme &quot;Christ&#x27;s love moves the world to reconciliation and unity&quot;.

==Events and presidents==

===Assemblies===
The World Council of Churches has held 11 Assemblies to date, starting with the founding assembly in 1948:
#Amsterdam, Netherlands, 22 August – 4 September 1948
#Evanston, Illinois, United States, 15–31 August 1954
#New Delhi, India, 19 November – 5 December 1961
#Uppsala, Sweden, 4–20 July 1968
#Nairobi, Kenya, 23 November – 10 December 1975
#Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 24 July – 10 August 1983
#Canberra, ACT, Australia, 7–21 February 1991
#Harare, Zimbabwe, 3–14 December 1998
#Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, 14–23 February 2006
#Busan, South Korea, 30 October – 8 November 2013
#Karlsruhe, Germany, 31 August – 8 September 2022

=== Presidents ===

Presidents elected at the 11th Assembly are:
* Africa: Rev. Dr. Rufus Okikiola Ositelu, (Church of the Lord (Aladura))
* Asia: Rev. Dr Henriette Hutabarat-Lebang (Gereja Toraja) 
* Europe: Rev. Dr. Susan Durber (United Reformed Church)
* Latin America and Caribbean: Rev. Philip Silvin Wright (Anglican Diocese of Belize, Church in the Province of the West Indies) 
* North America: Rev. Angelique Walker-Smith (National Baptist Convention USA)
* Pacific: Rev. François Pihaatae (Maòhi Protestant Church)
* Eastern Orthodox: H.E. Metropolitan Dr. Vasilios of Constantia – Ammochostos, Church of Cyprus
* Oriental Orthodox: H.H. Catholicos Aram I (Armenian Apostolic Church of Cilicia)

Former presidents of the World Council of Churches include:
* The Rev. Gloria Nohemy Ulloa Alvarado (Presbyterian Church in Colombia)
* Chang Sang (Presbyterian Church in the Republic of Korea)
* T. C. Chao, Chinese theologian
* Ignatius Zakka I Iwas (Patriarch of Antioch and all of the East Syriac Orthodox Church)
* John X of Antioch (Patriarch of the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch)
* Karekin II (Catholicos of the Armenian Apostolic Church)
* Rev. Dr. S.A.E. Nababan, Indonesian theologian
* Rev. Martin Niemöller, the famous Protestant anti-Nazi theologian
* Mele&#x27;ana Puloka (Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga)
* Mary-Anne Plaatjies van Huffel (Uniting Reformed Church in Southern Africa)
* Archbishop Anders Wejryd (Church of Sweden)

===General secretaries===
Since the World Council of Churches was officially founded in 1948, the following men have served as general secretary:

==Commissions and teams==
There are two complementary approaches to ecumenism: dialogue and action. The &quot;Faith and Order Movement&quot; and &quot;Life and Work Movement&quot; represent these approaches. These approaches are reflected in the work of the WCC in its commissions, these being:
*Echos – Commission on Youth (ages 18–30)
*Commission of the Churches on Diakonia and Development
*Commission on Education and Ecumenical Formation
*Commission of the Churches on International Affairs
*Commission on Justice, Peace and Creation
*Commission on World Mission and Evangelism
*Faith and Order Plenary Commission and the Faith and Order Standing Commission
*Joint Consultative Group with Pentecostals
*Joint Working Group WCC – Catholic Church (Vatican)
*Reference Group on the Decade to Overcome Violence
*Reference Group on Inter-Religious Relations
*Special Commission on Orthodox Participation in the WCC

===Diakonia and development and international relations commissions===
The WCC acts through both its member churches and other religious and social organizations to coordinate ecumenical, evangelical, and social action.

Current WCC programs include a Decade to Overcome Violence, an international campaign to combat AIDS/HIV in Africa and the &quot;Justice, Peace and Integrity of Creation (JPIC)&quot; initiative.

===Faith and Order Commission===

WCC&#x27;s Faith and Order Commission has been successful in working toward consensus on Baptism, Eucharist, and Ministry, on the date of Easter, on the nature and purpose of the church (ecclesiology), and on ecumenical hermeneutics.

====Texts====
* &quot;Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry&quot; (Faith and Order Paper No. 111, the “Lima Text”; 1982)
* &quot;The Churchː Towards a Common Vision&quot; (Faith and Order Paper no. 214; 2013) after &quot;The Nature and Mission of the Church – A Stage on the Way to a Common Statement&quot; (Faith and Order Paper no. 198; 2005) and &quot;The Nature and Purpose of the Church&quot; (Faith and Order Paper no. 181; 1998)
* &quot;Towards a Common Date of Easter&quot;

===Justice, Peace and Creation Commission===
Justice, Peace and Integrity of Creation (JPIC) has drawn many elements together with an environmental focus. Its mandate is:

Focal issues have been globalization and the emergence of new social movements (in terms of people &quot;bonding together&quot; in the struggle for justice, peace, and the protection of creation).

Attention has been given to issues around:
*economy
*environment
*Indigenous Peoples
*peace
*people with disabilities
*racism
*women
*youth

===Relations with the Roman Catholic Church===

The largest Christian body, the Roman Catholic Church, is not a member of the WCC, but has worked closely with the council for more than three decades and sends observers to all major WCC conferences as well as to its Central Committee meetings and the Assemblies (cf. Joint Working Group).

The Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity also nominates 12 members to the WCC&#x27;s &quot;Faith and Order Commission&quot; as full members. While not a member of the WCC, the Catholic Church is a member of some other ecumenical bodies at regional and national levels, for example, the National Council of Churches in Australia and the National Council of Christian Churches in Brazil (CONIC).

Pope Pius XI stated in 1928, that the only means by which the world Christian community was to return to faith, was to return to Roman Catholic worship. In this regard, the Papacy rejected, to a great extent, the idea of the participation of the Catholic Church within the World Council of Churches.

Pius XI stated that the ‘One True Church’ was that of the Roman Catholic denomination, and therefore there was the implication that the Catholic Church was not permitted at this stage to engage with other denominations, which the Papacy considered to be irrelevant. A similar policy was followed by his successor, Pope Pius XII; the Catholic Church, therefore, did not attend the 1948 meeting of the WCC, in addition to the idea that all members of the Church were barred from attending WCC conferences.

Pope John XXIII took a different stance however, and in 1958 he was elected as the head of the Catholic Church. Ecumenism was a new element of Catholic ideology which had been permitted, which was signified to a great extent, when John XXIII met with the then Archbishop of Canterbury, Geoffrey Fisher. This was the first meeting between an Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Pope in the Vatican for 600 years. John XXIII later developed the office of the Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity; which symbolised a dramatic shift in support for the ecumenical movement, from the Catholic Church, led from the Vatican. 1961 saw Catholic members attend the Delhi conference of the WCC, which marked a significant shift in attitude toward the WCC from the Papacy. There was the idea in addition to this, that the Pope invited non-Catholics to attend the Vatican II Council. This new approach to inter-denominational relations was marked within the &quot;Unitatis Redintegratio&quot; decree.

This document marked several key reforms within the Catholic approach:

I. ‘Separated brethren’ was the new term for non-Catholics, as opposed to the previously used ‘heretics’ 

II. Both Catholic and non-Catholic elements are held responsible for the schism between Catholicism and the Protestant movement 

III. Non-Catholics are recognised to the contributions that they make to Christian belief overall 

Further reforms have been enacted with regard to the nature of the Catholic Church on the world stage, for instance the 1965 union with the Patriarch of Constantinople, whereby the 1054 schism was undermined. In addition to this, Michael Ramsay, the then Archbishop of Canterbury, received an episcopal ring in 1966; a mark of union which had not been seen since prior to the Reformation. Moreover, the Anglican, Roman Catholic International Committee was additionally established as a means of promoting communication and cohesion between the two denominations. This has since marked a new level of participation of the Catholic Faith in the aforementioned ecumenical movement, and therefore is the basis for increased participation from the faith, in the WCC.

===Special Commission on Orthodox Participation in the WCC===
A &quot;Special Commission&quot; was set up by the eighth Harare Assembly in December 1998 to address Orthodox concerns about WCC membership and the council&#x27;s decision-making style, public statements, worship practices, and other issues. It issued its final report in 2006. Specific issues that it clarified were that the WCC does not formulate doctrine, does not have authority to rule on moral issues, nor does it have any ecclesiastical authority. Such authority is entirely internal to each individual member church. It proposed that the WCC adopt a consensus method of decision making. It proposed that Orthodox members be brought in parity with non-Orthodox members. It further proposed clarification that inter-confessional prayer at WCC events is not worship, particularly &quot;it should avoid giving the impression of being the worship of a church&quot;, and confessional and inter-confessional prayer each be specifically identified as such at WCC events.

==Peace journalism==
The WCC is also a prominent supporter and practitioning body for Peace journalism: journalism practice that aims to avoid a value bias in favor of violence that often characterizes coverage of conflict.

==Spin-offs and related organizations==
The ACT Alliance, bringing together over 100 church-backed relief and development organizations worldwide, was born out of the merger of ACT International (Action by Churches Together International) and ACT Development (Action by Churches Together for Development) in March 2010. Both ACT International, established in 1995, and ACT Development (2007) were created through the leadership of the World Council of Churches (WCC). The two bodies coordinated the work of agencies related to the member churches of the WCC and the Lutheran World Federation in the areas of humanitarian emergencies and poverty reduction respectively.

The Ecumenical Advocacy Alliance was officially founded in December 2000 at a meeting convened by the WCC. There are currently 73 churches and Christian organizations that are members of the Alliance, from Catholic, Evangelical, Orthodox and Protestant traditions. These members, representing a combined constituency of tens of millions of people around the world, are committed to working together in public witness and action for justice on defined issues of common concern. Current campaigns are on Food and on HIV and AIDS.

The Ecumenical Church Loan Fund (ECLOF) was founded in 1946 as one of the world&#x27;s first international micro-credit institutions in the service of the poor. Willem Visser &#x27;t Hooft, then general secretary of the &quot;WCC in process of formation&quot; played an important role in founding ECLOF. It was he who sketched the prospects and challenges for the proposed institution and gave specific ideas on potential sources of funds. His inspiration and teamwork marked the beginning of a long and fruitful cooperation between ECLOF and the WCC.

The Ecumenical Development Cooperative Society U.A (now known as Oikocredit) was developed from discussions at the 1968 Uppsala 4th Assembly, regarding church divestment from financial institutions supporting apartheid-era South Africa and the war in Vietnam. After several years of planning, the cooperative society was founded in 1975 in the Netherlands to provide an alternative ethical investment vehicle to church institutions, by providing credit to productive enterprises serving economically disadvantaged populations. Originally organized for large institutional members of the WCC, by 1976 local congregations developed Support Associations to enable congregations as well as individuals to participate. EDCS became independent from the WCC in 1977.

Ecumenical News International (ENI) was launched in 1994 as a global news service reporting on ecumenical developments and other news of the Christian churches, and giving religious perspectives on news developments worldwide. The joint sponsors of ENI, which was based at the Ecumenical Centre in Geneva, Switzerland, were the World Council of Churches, the Lutheran World Federation, the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, and the Conference of European Churches, which also had their headquarters at the Ecumenical Centre. A shortage of funds led to the suspension of the work of ENI in 2012. As of 2024 ENI remains closed.

==Regional/national councils==
The WCC has not sought the organic union of different Christian denominations, but it has, however, facilitated dialogue and supported local, national, and regional dialogue and cooperation.

Membership in a regional or national council does not mean that the particular group is also a member of the WCC.
*Africa
**All Africa Conference of Churches
** Organization of African Instituted Churches
*Asia (including Australia and New Zealand)
**Christian Conference of Asia (CCA), Hong Kong
**National Council of Churches in Australia
**National Council of Churches in the Philippines
*Caribbean
**Caribbean Conference of Churches
*Europe
**Conference of European Churches, Geneva, Switzerland
**Council of Christian Churches of an African Approach in Europe
*Latin America
**Latin American Council of Churches
*Middle East
**Middle East Council of Churches
*North America
**Canadian Council of Churches
**National Council of the Churches of Christ in the USA
*Pacific
**Pacific Conference of Churches, Suva, Fiji

==Criticism==
===Alleged neglect of suffering church in Eastern Europe===

Some historians, the U.S. State Department and former KGB officers themselves have alleged and provided corroborating evidence that the KGB&#x27;s influence directly, or through lobbying by means of a front organization, the Christian Peace Conference, resulted in the WCC&#x27;s failure to recognize or act on calls for help from persecuted East European Christians at the 1983 Vancouver General Assembly.

===Claims of infiltration and influence by the KGB===
It is claimed the KGB has infiltrated and influenced past WCC councils and policy. In 1992, Father Gleb Yakunin, a vice Chairman of a Russian parliamentary commission that investigated the activities of the KGB, citing verbatim KGB reports, claimed that its Fifth Directorate was actively involved in influencing WCC policy from 1967 to 1989. For example, in the 1983 WCC General Assembly in Vancouver, one cited document described the presence and activities of 47 KGB agents to secure the election of an &quot;acceptable&quot; candidate as General Secretary. The Mitrokhin Archive reveals more about the depth of the penetration and influence wielded by the KGB over the WCC. Metropolitan Nikodim was a KGB agent, codenamed SVYATOSLAV, who served as one of six WCC Presidents from 1975 until his death. His earlier intervention had resulted in the WCC making no comment on the invasion of Czechoslovakia. As a result of his influence and that of other agents, it is claimed the USSR was rarely publicly criticised. In 1989, copies of the KGB documents claim &quot;the WCC executive and central committee adopted public statements (eight) and messages (three)&quot; which corresponded to its own political direction. Appeals from suffering dissidents both from within the Russian Orthodox Church and Protestants were ignored in 1983. Metropolitan Aleksi Ridiger of Tallinn and Estonia was repeatedly alleged to be a KGB agent codenamed DROZDOV, who in 1988 was awarded an honorary citation for services to the KGB by its chairman. Despite official disavowals, The Guardian described the evidence as &quot;compelling&quot;. In 1990 he became Alexius II, the 15th Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church. Upon his death in 2008, the WCC&#x27;s official tribute, by its Council officers, described him as &quot;courageous&quot;, &quot;supportive and constructive&quot; and the recipient of &quot;abundant blessing&quot;, no reference was made to the allegations.

===Attitude towards Israel===
The World Council of Churches has been described as taking an adversarial position toward the state of Israel. It has also been claimed the council has focused particularly on activities and publications criticizing Israel in comparison with other human rights issues. It is similarly claimed that it downplayed appeals from Egyptian Copts about human rights abuses under Sadat and Mubarak, in order to focus on its neighbour. In 2009, the Council called for an international boycott on goods produced in Israeli settlements, which it described as &#x27;illegal, unjust&#x27; and &#x27;incompatible with peace&#x27;. In 2013, the General Secretary was reported to claim in Cairo, &quot;We support the Palestinians. The WCC supports the Palestinians, because they are in the right.&quot; The WCC&#x27;s Ecumenical Accompaniment Programme in Palestine and Israel (EAPPI) has been criticised by the Board of Deputies of British Jews for promoting &quot;an inflammatory and partisan programme at the expense of its interfaith relations&quot;. The WCC secretariat was involved in preparing and helped disseminate the Kairos Palestine Document, which declares “the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land is a sin against God and humanity because it deprives the Palestinians of their basic human rights”, and in the view of one critic, its &quot;authors want to see a single state&quot;.
On the other hand, the WCC claims &quot;Antisemitism is sin against God and man&quot;.

=== Opposition to Christian Zionism ===
Christian Zionism, which has long represented a major thread of historic and contemporary Protestants, is characterised as a view which &quot;distort(s) the interpretation of the Word of God&quot; and &quot;damage(s) intra-Christian relations&quot;.

Frank Chikane, moderator of the Commission of the Churches on International Affairs (CCIA) of the World Council of Churches (WCC), was criticised for using the term &#x27;demons&#x27; to describe advocacy for Zionism in 2021.

On January 4, 2023, World Council of Churches general secretary Jerry Pillay joined the Episcopal Diocese of Jerusalem and all the churches of the Holy Land in condemning the desecration of the historic Protestant cemetery on Mount Zion.

==See also==

*Lima Liturgy
*John R. Mott
*John Romanides
*Joseph Oldham
*Jeanne Audrey Powers
*Nathan Soderblom
*Charles Henry Brent
*Christian ecumenism
*Ecumenical Association of Third World Theologians
*World Summit of Religious Leaders
*Programme to Combat Racism
*Authorship of the Bible
*List of the largest Protestant bodies
*Jennifer Marianne Hart
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* World Council of Churches. Members by country and by church Retrieved 2010-03-31.
== Further reading ==
* W. A. Visser &#x27;t Hooft, &quot;The Genesis of the World Council of Churches&quot;, in: &quot;A History of The Ecumenical Movement 1517–1948&quot;, R. Rose, S. Ch. Neill (ed.), London: SPCK 1967, second edition with revised bibliography, pp. 697–724.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="4" end="29" title="World Council of Churches" label="World Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="31" end="34" title="World Council of Churches" label="WCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="51" end="60" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="128" end="137" title="ecumenism" label="ecumenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="174" end="201" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="Assyrian Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="229" end="252" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q211004" start="268" end="309" title="Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="316" end="342" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental Orthodox Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q201507" start="348" end="364" title="Union of Utrecht (Old Catholic)" label="Union of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q942284" start="370" end="395" title="Lutheran World Federation" label="Lutheran World Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="401" end="419" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="425" end="443" title="Mennonites" label="Mennonite churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641470" start="449" end="472" title="World Methodist Council" label="World Methodist Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929251" start="478" end="500" title="Baptist World Alliance" label="Baptist World Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246720" start="506" end="542" title="World Communion of Reformed Churches" label="World Communion of Reformed Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="552" end="572" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostal churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="578" end="593" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827463" start="603" end="636" title="Malankara Mar Thoma Syrian Church" label="Malankara Mar Thoma Syrian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="651" end="666" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334436" start="1015" end="1032" title="Ecumenical Centre" label="Ecumenical Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="1036" end="1042" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1044" end="1055" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="1097" end="1110" title="Christian denomination" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745008" start="1290" end="1321" title="Middle East Council of Churches" label="Middle East Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955128" start="1326" end="1367" title="National Council of Churches in Australia" label="National Council of Churches in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="1651" end="1670" title="Christian ecumenism" label="Ecumenical Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655650" start="1755" end="1786" title="Edinburgh Missionary Conference" label="Edinburgh Missionary Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q159726" start="1837" end="1849" title="John R. Mott" label="John R. Mott"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="1872" end="1899" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374911" start="1901" end="1911" title="Germanus V of Constantinople" label="Germanus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="2143" end="2160" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="2271" end="2295" title="Faith and Order Movement" label="Faith and Order Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075765" start="2309" end="2322" title="Charles Brent" label="Charles Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="2330" end="2346" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q10681145" start="2379" end="2401" title="Life and Work (conference)" label="Life and Work Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q159723" start="2415" end="2431" title="Nathan Söderblom" label="Nathan Söderblom"/>
<link wikidata="Q749243" start="2448" end="2464" title="Church of Sweden" label="Church of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2543" end="2555" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2617" end="2626" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="2640" end="2664" title="Faith and Order Movement" label="Faith and Order Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167" start="2738" end="2742" title="Lund" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348022" start="2784" end="2802" title="Robert Newton Flew" label="Robert Newton Flew"/>
<link wikidata="Q12308360" start="2915" end="2947" title="International Missionary Council" label="International Missionary Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="3037" end="3050" title="Sunday School" label="Sunday School"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="3103" end="3130" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="Assyrian Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="3139" end="3163" title="Oriental Orthodox Church" label="Oriental Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="3185" end="3208" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="3215" end="3230" title="Lutheran Church" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="3238" end="3253" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="3259" end="3277" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="3284" end="3303" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="3335" end="3347" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="3358" end="3375" title="Reformed churches" label="Reformed churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q966577" start="3391" end="3397" title="United and uniting churches" label="united"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="3433" end="3440" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="3445" end="3456" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421189" start="3529" end="3555" title="World Evangelical Alliance" label="World Evangelical Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q31870" start="3593" end="3621" title="National Council of Churches" label="National Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="3658" end="3677" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah’s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="3679" end="3686" title="Mormons" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820380" start="3688" end="3713" title="The Church of Scientology" label="The Church of Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="3860" end="3872" title="Trinity" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="3893" end="3905" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158699" start="4578" end="4597" title="Robert S. Bilheimer" label="Robert S. Bilheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="4687" end="4702" title="nuclear warfare" label="nuclear warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q151040" start="4956" end="4965" title="Alexy II of Moscow" label="Alexei II"/>
<link wikidata="Q40269" start="5001" end="5021" title="Porto Alegre, Brazil" label="Porto Alegre, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916661" start="5150" end="5169" title="Vasileios Ioannidis" label="Vasileios Ioannidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16520" start="5475" end="5480" title="Busan" label="Busan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148604" start="5550" end="5561" title="Agnes Abuom" label="Agnes Abuom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="5827" end="5836" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="6128" end="6137" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="6139" end="6150" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q462799" start="6182" end="6190" title="Evanston, Illinois" label="Evanston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="6192" end="6200" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6202" end="6215" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="6236" end="6245" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6247" end="6252" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q25286" start="6285" end="6292" title="Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="6294" end="6300" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870" start="6318" end="6325" title="Nairobi" label="Nairobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="6327" end="6332" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="6366" end="6375" title="Vancouver, British Columbia" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="6377" end="6393" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="6395" end="6401" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="6428" end="6436" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="6438" end="6441" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6443" end="6452" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3921" start="6474" end="6480" title="Harare" label="Harare"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="6482" end="6490" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q40269" start="6512" end="6524" title="Porto Alegre" label="Porto Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="6526" end="6543" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="6545" end="6551" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16520" start="6574" end="6579" title="Busan" label="Busan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="6581" end="6592" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="6624" end="6633" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="6635" end="6642" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001761" start="6783" end="6811" title="Church of the Lord (Aladura)" label="Church of the Lord (Aladura)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825375" start="6857" end="6870" title="Toraja Church" label="Gereja Toraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458238" start="6906" end="6928" title="United Reformed Church" label="United Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184585" start="6966" end="6986" title="Philip S. Wright" label="Philip Silvin Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763459" start="6988" end="7014" title="Anglican Diocese of Belize" label="Anglican Diocese of Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q635553" start="7016" end="7057" title="Church in the Province of the West Indies" label="Church in the Province of the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q113841153" start="7082" end="7104" title="Angelique Walker-Smith" label="Angelique Walker-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q496651" start="7106" end="7137" title="National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc." label="National Baptist Convention USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q13399337" start="7174" end="7197" title="Maòhi Protestant Church" label="Maòhi Protestant Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q59776" start="7279" end="7295" title="Church of Cyprus" label="Church of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q625676" start="7333" end="7339" title="Aram I" label="Aram I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7451" end="7479" title="Gloria Nohemy Ulloa Alvarado" label="Gloria Nohemy Ulloa Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q456584" start="7516" end="7526" title="Chang Sang" label="Chang Sang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13378291" start="7528" end="7572" title="Presbyterian Church in the Republic of Korea" label="Presbyterian Church in the Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668170" start="7576" end="7586" title="T. C. Chao" label="T. C. Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q982936" start="7609" end="7630" title="Ignatius Zakka I Iwas" label="Ignatius Zakka I Iwas"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="7673" end="7695" title="Syriac Orthodox Church" label="Syriac Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146609" start="7699" end="7716" title="John X of Antioch" label="John X of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q323301" start="7735" end="7767" title="Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch" label="Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q270978" start="7771" end="7781" title="Karekin II" label="Karekin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="7801" end="7826" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="Armenian Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12509233" start="7839" end="7853" title="S.A.E. Nababan" label="S.A.E. Nababan"/>
<link wikidata="Q153839" start="7884" end="7900" title="Martin Niemöller" label="Martin Niemöller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="7929" end="7933" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="7934" end="7944" title="theology" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500150" start="7969" end="7998" title="Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga" label="Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206525" start="8002" end="8032" title="Mary-Anne Plaatjies van Huffel" label="Mary-Anne Plaatjies van Huffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893691" start="8034" end="8076" title="Uniting Reformed Church in Southern Africa" label="Uniting Reformed Church in Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q491326" start="8091" end="8104" title="Anders Wejryd" label="Anders Wejryd"/>
<link wikidata="Q749243" start="8106" end="8122" title="Church of Sweden" label="Church of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183555" start="9440" end="9467" title="Decade to Overcome Violence" label="Decade to Overcome Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="9505" end="9513" title="AIDS" label="AIDS/HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="9517" end="9523" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q442693" start="9650" end="9676" title="Faith and Order Commission" label="Faith and Order Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="9728" end="9735" title="Baptism" label="Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="9737" end="9746" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729207" start="9752" end="9760" title="Christian ministry" label="Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="9777" end="9783" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="9818" end="9824" title="Christian church" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q223693" start="9826" end="9838" title="ecclesiology" label="ecclesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="9859" end="9871" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q390610" start="9896" end="9927" title="Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry" label="Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="10485" end="10498" title="environment (biophysical)" label="environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="10546" end="10559" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979837" start="10581" end="10601" title="new social movements" label="new social movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248467" start="10840" end="10846" title="Programme to Combat Racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10942" end="10963" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11179" end="11198" title="Joint Working Group between the Catholic Church and the World Council of Churches" label="Joint Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q778660" start="11206" end="11254" title="Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity" label="Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955128" start="11500" end="11541" title="National Council of Churches in Australia" label="National Council of Churches in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="11609" end="11621" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="12224" end="12237" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="12415" end="12430" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="12527" end="12536" title="Ecumenism" label="Ecumenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q335473" start="12701" end="12716" title="Geoffrey Fisher" label="Geoffrey Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q778660" start="12870" end="12911" title="Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity" label="Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q283037" start="13368" end="13390" title="Unitatis redintegratio" label="Unitatis Redintegratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632883" start="13482" end="13500" title="Separated brethren" label="Separated brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="13654" end="13712" title="Reformation" label="the schism between Catholicism and the Protestant movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q336569" start="14045" end="14059" title="Michael Ramsey" label="Michael Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q651813" start="14108" end="14122" title="Ecclesiastical ring" label="episcopal ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="14191" end="14202" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188577" start="15199" end="15208" title="Consensus decision-making" label="consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456753" start="15699" end="15715" title="Peace journalism" label="Peace journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650878" start="15882" end="15894" title="ACT Alliance" label="ACT Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16098" end="16141" title="Action by Churches Together for Development" label="Action by Churches Together for Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858969" start="16163" end="16180" title="ACT International" label="ACT International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650878" start="16207" end="16222" title="ACT Development" label="ACT Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824165" start="16475" end="16492" title="poverty reduction" label="poverty reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334429" start="16512" end="16540" title="Ecumenical Advocacy Alliance" label="Ecumenical Advocacy Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q574414" start="17198" end="17225" title="Willem Visser &amp;#x27;t Hooft" label="Willem Visser &amp;#x27;t Hooft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417993" start="17655" end="17665" title="Oikocredit" label="Oikocredit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334444" start="18351" end="18380" title="Ecumenical News International" label="Ecumenical News International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623337" start="19328" end="19361" title="All Africa Conference of Churches" label="All Africa Conference of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q10611382" start="19365" end="19408" title="Organization of African Instituted Churches" label="Organization of African Instituted Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109455" start="19455" end="19483" title="Christian Conference of Asia" label="Christian Conference of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="19491" end="19500" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955128" start="19503" end="19544" title="National Council of Churches in Australia" label="National Council of Churches in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971914" start="19547" end="19594" title="National Council of Churches in the Philippines" label="National Council of Churches in the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639522" start="19608" end="19640" title="Caribbean Conference of Churches" label="Caribbean Conference of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q688236" start="19651" end="19682" title="Conference of European Churches" label="Conference of European Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="19684" end="19703" title="Geneva, Switzerland" label="Geneva, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22032071" start="19706" end="19768" title="Council of Christian Churches of an African Approach in Europe" label="Council of Christian Churches of an African Approach in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9852842" start="19786" end="19820" title="Latin American Council of Churches" label="Latin American Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745008" start="19836" end="19867" title="Middle East Council of Churches" label="Middle East Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993676" start="19885" end="19913" title="Canadian Council of Churches" label="Canadian Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q31870" start="19916" end="19969" title="National Council of Churches" label="National Council of the Churches of Christ in the USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124607" start="19981" end="20011" title="Pacific Conference of Churches" label="Pacific Conference of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q38807" start="20013" end="20017" title="Suva" label="Suva"/>
<link wikidata="Q712" start="20019" end="20023" title="Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q80919" start="20580" end="20583" title="KGB" label="KGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q705873" start="20661" end="20673" title="Gleb Yakunin" label="Gleb Yakunin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20820" end="20837" title="KGB#Directorates" label="Fifth Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21127" end="21144" title="Mitrokhin Archive#Penetration of churches" label="Mitrokhin Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q249159" start="21240" end="21260" title="Nikodim Rotov" label="Metropolitan Nikodim"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="22123" end="22135" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q151040" start="22204" end="22214" title="Patriarch Alexy II of Moscow" label="Alexius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q895904" start="23031" end="23038" title="Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334430" start="23357" end="23415" title="Ecumenical Accompaniment Programme in Palestine and Israel" label="Ecumenical Accompaniment Programme in Palestine and Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q887527" start="23451" end="23484" title="Board of Deputies of British Jews" label="Board of Deputies of British Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q14633235" start="23667" end="23692" title="Kairos Palestine" label="Kairos Palestine Document"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084152" start="24065" end="24082" title="Christian Zionism" label="Christian Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24129" end="24166" title="Christian Zionism#Protestant Reformation" label="historic and contemporary Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q112632608" start="24607" end="24619" title="Jerry Pillay" label="Jerry Pillay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12351569" start="24797" end="24809" title="Lima Liturgy" label="Lima Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159726" start="24811" end="24823" title="John R. Mott" label="John R. Mott"/>
<link wikidata="Q965165" start="24825" end="24839" title="John Romanides" label="John Romanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105891" start="24841" end="24854" title="J. H. Oldham" label="Joseph Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q116923754" start="24856" end="24876" title="Jeanne Audrey Powers" label="Jeanne Audrey Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q159723" start="24878" end="24894" title="Nathan Soderblom" label="Nathan Soderblom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075765" start="24896" end="24915" title="Charles Henry Brent" label="Charles Henry Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="24917" end="24936" title="Christian ecumenism" label="Christian ecumenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273866" start="24938" end="24987" title="Ecumenical Association of Third World Theologians" label="Ecumenical Association of Third World Theologians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127413" start="24989" end="25022" title="World Summit of Religious Leaders" label="World Summit of Religious Leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248467" start="25024" end="25050" title="Programme to Combat Racism" label="Programme to Combat Racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178041" start="25052" end="25075" title="Authorship of the Bible" label="Authorship of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643081" start="25077" end="25114" title="List of the largest Protestant bodies" label="List of the largest Protestant bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q116458540" start="25116" end="25138" title="Jennifer Marianne Hart" label="Jennifer Marianne Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q574414" start="25299" end="25325" title="W. A. Visser &amp;#x27;t Hooft" label="W. A. Visser &amp;#x27;t Hooft"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46641" wikidata="Q130734" url="?curid=46641" title="Nicholas I of Russia">
<text>Nicholas I ( – ) was Emperor of Russia, King of Congress Poland, and Grand Duke of Finland from 1825 to 1855. He was the third son of Paul I and younger brother of his predecessor, Alexander I. Nicholas&#x27;s thirty-year reign began with the failed Decembrist revolt. He is mainly remembered as a reactionary whose controversial reign was marked by geographical expansion, centralisation of administrative policies, and repression of dissent both in Russia and among its neighbors. Nicholas had a happy marriage that produced a large family, with all of their seven children surviving childhood.

Nicholas&#x27;s biographer Nicholas V. Riasanovsky said that he displayed determination, singleness of purpose, and an iron will, along with a powerful sense of duty and a dedication to very hard work. He saw himself as a soldier—a junior officer consumed by spit and polish. A handsome man, he was highly nervous and aggressive. Trained as a military engineer, he was a stickler for minute detail. In his public persona, stated Riasanovsky, &quot;Nicholas I came to represent autocracy personified: infinitely majestic, determined and powerful, hard as stone, and relentless as fate.&quot;

Nicholas I was instrumental in helping to create an independent Greek state and resumed the Russian conquest of the Caucasus by seizing Iğdır Province and the remainder of modern-day Armenia and Azerbaijan from Qajar Iran during the Russo-Persian War (1826–1828). He ended the Russo-Turkish War (1828–1829) successfully as well. He crushed the November Uprising in Poland in 1831 and decisively aided Austria during the Hungarian Revolution of 1848. Later on, however, he led Russia into the Crimean War (1853–1856), with disastrous results. Historians emphasize that his micromanagement of the armies hindered his generals, as did his misguided strategy. Several historians have concluded that &quot;the reign of Nicholas I was a catastrophic failure in both domestic and foreign policy.&quot; On the eve of his death, the Russian Empire reached its geographical zenith, spanning over 20 million square kilometers ( million square miles), but had a desperate need for reform.

==Early life and road to power==
Nicholas was born at Gatchina Palace in Gatchina, the ninth child of Grand Duke Paul, heir to the Russian throne, and Grand Duchess Maria Feodorovna of Russia (née Sophie Dorothea of Württemberg). He had six older sisters and two older brothers, namely the future Emperor Alexander I of Russia and Grand Duke Constantine Pavlovich of Russia.

Four months after Nicholas&#x27;s birth, his grandmother, Catherine the Great, died and his parents became Emperor and Empress of Russia. In 1800, at the age of four years, Nicholas was named Grand Prior of Russia and entitled to wear the Maltese cross. Nicholas grew up to be a fine young man. Riasanovsky says of him that he is &quot;the most handsome man in Europe, but also a charmer who enjoyed feminine company and was often at his best with the men.&quot;
On 13 July 1817, Nicholas married Princess Charlotte of Prussia (1798–1860), who took the name Alexandra Feodorovna when she converted to Orthodoxy. Charlotte&#x27;s parents were Frederick William III of Prussia and Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. Nicholas and Charlotte were third cousins, as they were both great-great-grandchildren of Frederick William I of Prussia.

With two older brothers, it initially seemed unlikely Nicholas would ever become Tsar. However, as Alexander and Constantine both failed to produce legitimate sons, Nicholas first came to attention as being likely to rule one day, or at least that his children may succeed. In 1825, when Tsar Alexander died suddenly of typhus, Nicholas was caught between swearing allegiance to Constantine and accepting the throne for himself. The interregnum lasted until Constantine, who was in Warsaw at that time, officially forfeited his right to succession. This had been required by Tsar Alexander as a condition of Constantine&#x27;s marriage to his second wife Joanna Grudzinska. On 25 (13 Old Style) December, Nicholas issued the manifesto proclaiming his accession to the throne. That manifesto retroactively named 1 December (19 November Old Style), the date of Alexander I&#x27;s death, as the beginning of his reign. During this confusion, a plot was hatched by some members of the military to overthrow Nicholas and seize power. This led to the Decembrist Revolt on 26 (14 Old Style) December 1825, an uprising Nicholas quickly suppressed.

==Emperor and principles==
===Early reign===
Nicholas completely lacked his brother&#x27;s spiritual and intellectual breadth; he saw his role simply as that of a paternal autocrat ruling his people by whatever means necessary. Nicholas I began his reign on 14 December 1825 (old style), which fell on a Monday; Russian superstition held that Mondays were unlucky days. This particular Monday dawned very cold, with temperatures of −8 degrees Celsius. This was regarded by the Russian people as a bad omen for the coming reign.

The accession of Nicholas I was marred by a demonstration of 3000 young army officers and other liberal-minded citizens. This demonstration was an attempt to force the government to accept a constitution and a representative form of government. Nicholas ordered the Imperial Russian Army to smash the demonstration. The &quot;uprising&quot; was quickly put down and became known as the Decembrist revolt. Having experienced the trauma of the Decembrist revolt on the first day of his reign, Nicholas I was determined to restrain Russian society. The Third Section of the Imperial Chancellery ran a huge network of spies and informers with the help of Gendarmes. The government exercised censorship and other forms of control over education, publishing, and all manifestations of public life.

Nicholas appointed Alexander Benckendorff to head this Chancellery. Benckendorff employed 300 gendarmes and 16 staff in his office. He began collecting informers and intercepting mail. Soon, the saying that &quot;it was impossible to sneeze in one&#x27;s house before it is reported to the emperor&quot; became Benckendorff&#x27;s creed.

===Local policies===

Tsar Nicholas abolished several areas of local autonomy. Bessarabia&#x27;s autonomy was removed in 1828, Poland&#x27;s in 1830 and the Jewish Qahal was abolished in 1843. As an exception to this trend, Finland was able to keep its autonomy partly due to Finnish soldiers&#x27; loyal participation in crushing the November Uprising in Poland.

Russia&#x27;s first railway was opened in 1837, a line between St. Petersburg and the suburban residence of Tsarskoye Selo. The second was the Saint Petersburg–Moscow railway, built-in 1842–51. Nevertheless, by 1855 there were only of Russian railways.

In 1833, Sergey Uvarov, of the Ministry of National Education, devised a program of &quot;Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality&quot; as the guiding principle of the regime. It was a reactionary policy based on orthodoxy in religion, autocracy in government, and the state-founding role of the Russian nationality and equal citizen rights for all other peoples inhabiting Russia, with the exclusion of Jews. The people were to show loyalty to the unrestricted authority of the tsar, to the traditions of the Russian Orthodox Church, and the Russian language. These romantic and conservative principles outlined by Uvarov were also espoused by Vasily Zhukovsky, one of the tutors of the Grand Duke Alexander. The results of these Slavophile principles led, broadly speaking, to increasing repression of all classes, excessive censorship, and surveillance of independent-minded intellectuals like Pushkin and Lermontov and to the persecution of non-Russian languages and non-Orthodox religions. Taras Shevchenko, later to become known as the national poet of Ukraine, was exiled to Siberia by a direct order of Tsar Nicholas after composing a poem that mocked the Tsar, his wife, and his domestic policies. By order of the Tsar, Shevchenko was kept under strict surveillance and prevented from writing or painting.

From 1839, Tsar Nicholas also used a former Byzantine Catholic Bishop named Joseph Semashko as his agent to re-unite Orthodoxy with the Eastern Rite Catholics of Ukraine, Belarus, and Lithuania with the Synod of Polotsk. This caused Tsar Nicholas to be condemned by a succession of Roman Pontiffs, the Marquis de Custine, Charles Dickens, and many Western governments. (See also Cantonists.)

Nicholas disliked serfdom and toyed with the idea of abolishing it in Russia, but declined to do so for reasons of state. He feared the aristocracy and believed they might turn against him if he abolished serfdom. However, he did make some efforts to improve the lot of the Crown Serfs (serfs owned by the government) with the help of his minister Pavel Kiselyov. During most of his reign he tried to increase his control over the landowners and other influential groups in Russia. In 1831, Nicholas restricted the votes in the Noble Assembly to those with over 100 serfs, leaving 21,916 voters. In 1841, landless nobles were banned from selling serfs separate from the land. From 1845, attainment of the 5th highest rank (out of 14) in the Table of Ranks was required to be ennobled, previously it had been the 8th rank.

== King of Poland ==
Nicholas was crowned King of Poland in Warsaw on 12 (24) May 1829, per the Polish Constitution, a document he would not respect thereafter. He is the only Russian monarch ever crowned King of Polandalthough not the only one bestowed with the title.

==Culture==
The official emphasis on Russian nationalism fueled a debate on Russia&#x27;s place in the world, the meaning of Russian history, and the future of Russia. One group, the westernizers, believed that Russia remained backward and primitive and could progress only through adopting European culture and institutions. Another group, the Slavophiles, enthusiastically favored Slavic culture and customs, and disdained the West.

The Slavophiles viewed Slavic philosophy as a source of wholeness in Russia and were sceptical of Western rationalism and materialism. Some of them believed that the Russian peasant commune, or Mir, offered an attractive alternative to Western capitalism and could save Europe from social and moral revolution, thus representing a form of Russian messianism. However the ministry of education had a policy of closing philosophy faculties to curb destabilizing speculation.

In the wake of the Decembrist revolt, the tsar moved to protect the status quo by centralizing education. He wanted to neutralize the threat of foreign ideas and &quot;pseudo-knowledge&quot;. However, his minister of education, Sergei Uvarov, quietly promoted academic freedom and autonomy, raised academic standards, improved facilities, and opened higher education to the middle classes. By 1848 the tsar, fearing that political upheavals in the West might spread to Russia, ended Uvarov&#x27;s innovations. The universities were small and closely monitored, especially the potentially dangerous philosophy departments. Their main mission was to train a loyal, vigorous, manly senior bureaucracy unspoiled by effeminate office work.

The Imperial Academy of Fine Arts in St. Petersburg became the main source of recognition and support for artists. Nicholas I decided to control it personally, reserving the final say on artistic honors. As the tsar reprimanded and humiliated artists whose works he found distasteful, the result was fear, insecurity, and artistic mediocrity.

Despite the repressions of this period, Russians outside official control produced a flowering of literature and the performing arts. Through the works of Aleksandr Pushkin, Nikolai Gogol, Ivan Turgenev and numerous others, Russian literature gained international stature and recognition. Ballet took root in Russia after its importation from France, and classical music became firmly established with the compositions of Mikhail Glinka (1804–1857).

Minister of Finance Georg von Cancrin persuaded the emperor of the benefits of inviting Prussian scientist Alexander von Humboldt to Russia to investigate regions that could produce mineral wealth. The Russian government financed Humboldt&#x27;s eight-month expedition through Russia in 1829, which resulted in diamond finds in the Ural mountains. Humboldt published multiple volumes on his Russian expedition, which he dedicated to Nicholas despite his increasing disapproval of the tsar&#x27;s policies.

== Treatment of Jews ==
In 1851 the Jewish population numbered at 2.4 million, including 212,000 in Russian-controlled Poland. This made them one of the largest &quot;inorodtsy&quot; (non-Slavic) minorities in the Russian Empire.

On 26 August 1827 the edict of military conscription (&quot;Ustav rekrutskoi povinnosti&quot;) was introduced, which required Jewish boys to serve in the Russian military for 25 years from the age of 18. Before that many of them were forcibly conscripted into Cantonist schools from the age of 12, while being a Cantonist did not count into the time of military service. They were sent far away from their families to serve in the military so that they would have difficulty practising Judaism and become Russified, and sometimes compelled to convert to Christianity. The poorer village Jews, those without families, and unmarried Jews were especially targeted for military service. Between 1827 and 1854 it is estimated that there were 70,000 Jews conscripted. 

Under Nicholas I, the Jewish agricultural colonisation of Ukraine continued with the transfer of Siberian Jews to Ukraine. In Ukraine, Jews were offered the opportunity to buy land, which left very little to support their families. On the other hand, these Jews were exempt from forced military conscription.

Under Nicholas I there were attempts to reform the education of Jews with the object of Russification. Study of the Talmud was disfavored. Nicholas I further toughened censorship of Jewish books in Yiddish and Hebrew by allowing these to be printed only in Zhitomir and Vilna.

==Military and foreign policy==
Nicolas&#x27; aggressive foreign policy involved many expensive wars, having a disastrous effect on the empire&#x27;s finances. Nicholas lavished attention on his very large army; of a population of 60–70 million people, the army counted one million men. They had outdated equipment and tactics, but the tsar, who dressed like a soldier and surrounded himself with officers, gloried in the victory over Napoleon in 1812 and took enormous pride in its smartness on parade. The cavalry horses, for example, were only trained in parade formations, and did poorly in battle. The glitter and braid masked profound weaknesses that he did not see. He put generals in charge of most of his civilian agencies regardless of their qualifications. An agnostic who won fame in cavalry charges was made supervisor of Church affairs. The army became the vehicle of upward social mobility for noble youths from non-Russian areas, such as Poland, the Baltic, Finland, and Georgia. On the other hand, many miscreants, petty criminals, and undesirables were punished by local officials by being enlisted for life in the Army. The conscription system was highly unpopular with people, as was the practice of forcing peasants to house the soldiers for six months of the year. Curtiss finds that &quot;The pedantry of Nicholas&#x27;s military system, which stressed unthinking obedience and parade ground evolutions rather than combat training, produced ineffective commanders in time of war.&quot; His commanders in the Crimean War were old and incompetent, and indeed so were his muskets as the colonels sold the best equipment and the best food.

For much of Nicholas&#x27; reign, Russia was seen as a major military power, with considerable strength. The Crimean War, fought shortly before Nicholas&#x27; death, demonstrated to both Russia and the world what few had previously realized: Russia was militarily weak, technologically backward, and administratively incompetent. Despite his grand ambitions toward the south and Turkey, Russia had not built railroad network in that direction, and communications were bad. The bureaucracy was unprepared for war being riddled with graft, corruption, and inefficiency. The Navy had few competent officers, the rank and file were poorly trained and most importantly of its vessels were outdated; the army, although very large, was good only for parades, suffered from colonels who pocketed their men&#x27;s pay, poor morale, and was even more out of touch with the latest technology as developed by Britain and France. By the war&#x27;s end, Russia&#x27;s leaders were determined to reform their military and society. As Fuller notes, &quot;Russia had been beaten on the Crimean Peninsula, and the military feared that it would inevitably be beaten again unless steps were taken to surmount its military weakness.&quot;
An intensely militaristic man, Nicholas regarded the Army as the best and greatest institution in Russia and as a model for society, saying:
Nicholas was often exasperated by the slow pace of the Russian bureaucracy and had a marked preference for appointing generals and admirals to high government rank because of their perceived efficiency, overlooking or ignoring whether or not they were actually qualified for the role. Of the men who served as Nicholas&#x27;s ministers, 61% had previously served as a general or an admiral. Nicholas liked to appoint generals who had seen combat, and at least 30 of the men who served as a minister under him had seen action in the wars against France, the Ottoman Empire, and Sweden. This proved to be something of a handicap in the sense that the sort of qualities that could make a man distinguished on the battlefields such as bravery did not necessarily make a man capable of running a ministry. The most notorious case was Prince Alexander Sergeyevich Menshikov, a competent brigade commander in the Imperial Army who proved himself out of his depth as a Navy minister. Of the Emperor&#x27;s ministers, 78% were ethnic Russians, 9.6% were Baltic Germans while the rest were foreigners in Russian service. Of the men who served as ministers under Nicholas, 14 had graduated from university while another 14 had graduated from a &quot;lycée&quot; or a &quot;gymnasium&quot;, the rest had all been educated by private tutors.

=== Europe ===

In foreign policy, Nicholas I acted as the protector of ruling legitimism and as guardian against revolution. It has often been noted that such policies were linked with the Metternich counter-revolutionary system through the Austrian ambassador Count Karl Ludwig von Ficquelmont. Nicholas&#x27;s offers to suppress revolution on the European continent, trying to follow the pattern set by his eldest brother, Alexander I, earned him the label of &quot;gendarme of Europe&quot;.

Immediately on his succession Nicholas began to limit the liberties that existed under the constitutional monarchy in Congress Poland. Nicholas was outraged when he learned of the Belgian revolt against the Dutch in 1830 and ordered the Imperial Russian Army to mobilize. Nicholas then petitioned the Prussian ambassador for Russian troops to be granted transit rights in order to march across Europe and restore Dutch hegemony over Belgium. But at the same time, a cholera epidemic was decimating Russian troops and the revolt in Poland tied down Russian soldiers which might have been deployed against the Belgians. It seems likely that Nicholas&#x27;s hawkish stance was not a sincere prelude towards invasion of the Low Countries, but rather an attempt to apply pressure on the other European powers. Nicholas made it clear he would only act if Prussia and Britain also participated as he feared that a Russian invasion of Belgium would cause a war with France. Even before the Poles rose up, Nicholas had cancelled his plans for invading Belgium as it became clear that neither Britain nor Prussia would join in while the French openly threatened war if Nicholas should march. In 1815, Nicholas arrived in France, where he stayed with the Duke of Orleans, Louis Philippe, who soon become one of his best friends, with the grand duke being impressed with duke&#x27;s personal warmth, intelligence, manners and grace. For Nicholas the worst sort of characters were nobility who supported liberalism, and when the duc d&#x27;Orleans become the king of the French as Louis Philippe I in the July revolution of 1830, Nicholas took this as a personal betrayal, believing his friend had gone over as he saw it to the dark side of revolution and liberalism. Nicholas hated Louis-Philippe, the self-styled &quot;Le roi citoyen&quot; (&quot;the Citizen King&quot;) as a renegade nobleman and a &quot;usurper&quot;, and his foreign policy starting in 1830 was primarily anti-French, based upon reviving the coalition that had existed during the Napoleonic era of Russia, Prussia, Austria and Britain, to isolate France. Nicholas detested Louis-Philippe to the point that he refused to use his name, referring to him merely as &quot;the usurper&quot;. Britain was unwilling to join the anti-French coalition, but Nicholas was successful in cementing existing close ties with Austria and Prussia and the three imperial states regularly held joint military reviews during this time. For much of the 1830s, a sort of &quot;cold war&quot; existed between the liberal &quot;western bloc&quot; of France and Britain vs. the reactionary &quot;eastern bloc&quot; of Austria, Prussia and Russia.

After the November Uprising broke out, in 1831 the Polish parliament deposed Nicholas as king of Poland in response to his repeated curtailment of its constitutional rights. Nicholas reacted by sending Russian troops into Poland and brutally crushed the rebellion. Nicholas then proceeded to abrogate the Polish constitution in virtual entirety and reduced Poland to the status of a province called Vistula Land. Soon after, Nicholas embarked on a policy of repressing Polish culture beginning with suppressing the Polish Catholic Church. In the 1840s, Nicholas reduced 64,000 Polish nobles to commoner status.

In 1848, when a series of revolutions convulsed Europe, Nicholas was at the forefront of reactionism. In 1849, he helped the Habsburgs to suppress the revolution in Hungary, and he also urged Prussia not to adopt a liberal constitution.

=== Ottoman Empire and Persia ===
While Nicholas was attempting to maintain the status quo in Europe, he followed a somewhat more aggressive policy toward the neighbouring empires to the south, the Ottoman Empire and Persia. Nicholas was widely believed at the time to be following the traditional Russian policy of resolving the so-called Eastern Question by seeking to partition the Ottoman Empire and establish a protectorate over the Orthodox population of the Balkans, still largely under Ottoman control in the 1820s. In fact, Nicholas was deeply committed to upholding the status quo in Europe and feared any attempt to devour the decaying Ottoman Empire would both upset his ally Austria, which also had interests in the Balkans, and bring about an Anglo-French coalition in defense of the Ottomans. Furthermore, in the war of 1828–29, the Russians defeated the Ottomans in every battle fought in the field and advanced deep into the Balkans, but the Russians discovered that they lacked the necessary logistical strength to take Constantinople.

Nicholas&#x27; policy towards the Ottoman Empire was to use the 1774 Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca which gave Russia a vague right as protector of Orthodox peoples in the Balkans, as a way of placing the Ottoman Empire into the Russian sphere of influence, which was felt to be a more achievable goal than conquering the entire Ottoman Empire. Nicholas actually wanted to preserve the Ottoman Empire as a stable but weak state that would be unable to stand up to Russia, which was felt to serve Russia&#x27;s interests. Nicholas always thought of Russia as first and foremost a European power and regarded Europe as more important than the Middle East. The Russian Foreign Minister Karl Nesselrode wrote in letter to his ambassador in Constantinople Nikolai Muravyov that the victory of Muhammad Ali of Egypt over Mahmud II would lead to a new dynasty ruling the Ottoman Empire. Nesselrode continued that if the able Muhammad Ali became sultan then it &quot;could, with the elevation of a new personage to the Turkish throne, revive new strength in that declining empire and distract our attention and forces from European affairs, and thus the monarch [Nicholas] is especially concerned to keep the sultan on his tottering throne.&quot; At the same time, Nicholas argued that because of the economic importance to Russia of the Turkish straits, through which Russia exports its grain, that Russia had the &quot;right&quot; to intervene in Ottoman affairs. In 1833, Nicholas told the Austrian ambassador Karl Ludwig von Ficquelmont that &quot;Oriental affairs are above all a matter for Russia.&quot; At the same time that Nicholas claimed the Ottoman Empire was within the Russian sphere of influence, he made it clear that he had no interest in annexing the empire. At another meeting with Ficquelmont in 1833, Nicholas, speaking with the &quot;Greek Project&quot; of Catherine the Great in mind said: &quot;I know everything that has been said of the projects of the Empress Catherine, and Russia has renounced the goal she had set out. I wish to maintain the Turkish empire... It if falls, I do not desire its debris. I need nothing.&quot; Ultimately, Nicholas&#x27;s policies in the Near East proved to be both costly and largely futile.

In 1826–28, Nicholas fought the Russo-Persian War (1826–28), which ended with Persia forced to cede its last remaining territories in the Caucasus. Russia had conquered all the territories of Iran in both the North Caucasus and South Caucasus, comprising modern-day Georgia, Dagestan, Armenia, and Azerbaijan, through the course of the 19th century. The treaty further conceded extraterritoriality to Russian subjects in Iran (capitulation). As Professor Virginia Aksan adds, the 1828 Treaty of Turkmenchay &quot;removed Iran from the military equation.&quot;

Russia fought a successful war against the Ottomans in 1828–29, but it did little to increase Russian power in Europe. Only a small Greek state became independent in the Balkans, with limited Russian influence. In 1833, Russia negotiated the Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi with the Ottoman Empire. The major European parties mistakenly believed that the treaty contained a secret clause granting Russia the right to transit warships through the Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits. This misconception led to the London Straits Convention of 1841, which affirmed Ottoman control over the straits and forbade any power, including Russia, from sending warships through them. Buoyed by his role in suppressing the revolutions of 1848 as well as his mistaken belief he could rely on British diplomatic support, Nicholas moved against the Ottomans, who declared war on Russia on 8 October 1853. On 30 November, Russian Admiral Nakhimov caught the Turkish fleet in the harbor at Sinope and destroyed it.

Fearing the results of a total Ottoman defeat by Russia, in 1854 Britain, France, the Kingdom of Sardinia formed a military coalition and joined forces with the Ottoman Empire against Russia. The preceding conflict became known as the Crimean War in the Ottoman Empire and Western Europe, but was labelled in Russia the &quot;Eastern War&quot; (Russian: Восточная война, &quot;Vostochnaya Vojna&quot;). In April 1854, Austria signed a defensive pact with Prussia. Thus, Russia found herself in a war with every Great Power of Europe either allied against her militarily or diplomatically.

In 1853 Mikhail Pogodin, professor of history at Moscow University, wrote a memorandum to Nicholas. Nicholas himself read Pogodin&#x27;s text and approvingly commented: &quot;That is the whole point.&quot; According to historian Orlando Figes, &quot;The memorandum clearly struck a chord with Nicholas, who shared Pogodin&#x27;s sense that Russia&#x27;s role as the protector of the Orthodox had not been recognized or understood and that Russia was unfairly treated by the West.&quot; Pogodin wrote:
Austria offered the Ottomans diplomatic support, and Prussia remained neutral, thus leaving Russia without any allies on the continent. The European allies landed in Crimea and laid siege to the well-fortified Russian Sevastopol Naval Base. The Russians lost battles at Alma in September 1854 and then at Inkerman. After the prolonged Siege of Sevastopol (1854–55) the base fell, exposing Russia&#x27;s inability to defend a major fortification on its own soil. On the death of Nicholas I, Alexander II became emperor. On 15 January 1856, the new emperor took Russia out of the war on very unfavorable terms, which included the loss of a naval fleet on the Black Sea.

==Death==

Nicholas died on 2 March 1855, during the Crimean War, at the Winter Palace in St. Petersburg. He caught a chill, refused medical treatment and died of pneumonia, although there were rumors he was committing a passive suicide by refusing treatment. He was buried in the Peter and Paul Cathedral in St. Petersburg. He reigned for 30 years, and was succeeded by his son Alexander II.

==Legacy==
There have been many damning verdicts on Nicholas&#x27; rule and legacy, despite occasional efforts to revive his reputation. At the end of his life, one of his most devoted civil servants, Aleksandr Nikitenko, opined, &quot;the main failing of the reign of Nicholas Pavlovich was that it was all a mistake.&quot;
In 1891 Lev Tolstoy popularised the nickname Николай Палкин (Nicholas the Stick) in reference to the late emperor&#x27;s passion for military discipline.

Historian Barbara Jelavich points to many failures, including the &quot;catastrophic state of Russian finances&quot;, the badly-equipped army, the inadequate transportation system, and a bureaucracy &quot;characterized by graft, corruption, and inefficiency&quot;.

Kiev University was founded in 1834 by Nicholas. In 1854, there were 3600 university students in Russia, 1000 fewer than in 1848. Censorship was omnipresent; historian Hugh Seton-Watson writes: &quot;the intellectual atmosphere remained oppressive until the end of the reign.&quot;

The Frenchman Marquis de Custine wrote the widely-read travel book &quot;La Russie en 1839&quot; (&quot;Empire of the Czar: A Journey Through Eternal Russia&quot;). He speculated that Nicholas had a kind heart, but his sincere sense of duty forced him to impose severe discipline: &quot;If the Emperor has no more of mercy in his heart than he reveals in his policies, then I pity Russia; if, on the other hand, his true sentiments are really superior to his acts, then I pity the Emperor.&quot;

According to a popular legend, when the Saint Petersburg–Moscow Railway was planned in 1842, Nicholas drew a straight line between the cities on a map, and decreed this as the path of the new rail line. Some ridiculed this as the epitome of Nicholas&#x27; mindless despotism, while others praised the tsar for overcoming local interests that wanted the railway diverted their own way. In fact, however, the tsar had merely endorsed the straight path recommended by engineers.

==Honours==


== Issue ==
Nicholas I had seven legitimate children with his wife, Alexandra Feodorovna.
Many sources state that Nicholas did not have an extramarital affair until after 25 years of marriage, in 1842, when the Empress&#x27;s doctors prohibited her from having sexual intercourse, due to her poor health and recurring heart attacks. Many facts dispute this claim. Nicholas fathered three known children with mistresses prior to 1842, including one with his most famous and well documented mistress, Varvara Nelidova.

With Anna-Maria Charlota de Rutenskiold (1791–1856)

*Joséphine or Youzia Koberwein (12 May 1825 – 23 February 1893)

With Varvara Yakovleva (1803–1831)

*Olga Carlovna Albrecht (10 July 1828 – 20 January 1898)

With Varvara Nelidova (d.1897)

*Alexis Pashkine (17 April 1831 – 20 June 1863)

== Ancestry ==

==See also==
* History of Russia
* Imperial Russia
* &quot;La Russie en 1839&quot;
* The Third Section
* Tsars of Russia family tree

==Notes==


==References==
* The first draft of this article was taken with little editing from the Library of Congress Federal Research Division&#x27;s Country Studies series. As their home page at http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/cshome.html says, &quot;Information contained in the Country Studies On-Line is not copyrighted and thus is available for free and unrestricted use by researchers. As a courtesy, however, appropriate credit should be given to the series.&quot; Please leave this statement intact so that credit can be given.

==Further reading==

* Bolsover, George H. &quot;Nicholas I and the Partition of Turkey.&quot; &quot;Slavonic and East European Review&quot; (1948): 115–145 online.
* Cannady, Sean, and Paul Kubicek. &quot;Nationalism and legitimation for authoritarianism: A comparison of Nicholas I and Vladimir Putin.&quot; &quot;Journal of Eurasian Studies&quot; 5.1 (2014): 1–9 online.
* Crisp, Olga. &quot;The state peasants under Nicholas I.&quot; &quot;Slavonic and East European Review&quot; 37.89 (1959): 387–412 online.
* Curtiss, John Shelton. &quot;The Army of Nicholas I: Its Role and Character.&quot; &quot;American Historical Review&quot; 63.4 (1958): 880–889 online.
* Hamlin, Cyrus. &quot;The Political Duel Between Nicholas, the Czar of Russia, and Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, the Great English Ambassador.&quot; &quot;Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society&quot; Vol. 9. (1893) online.
* Hosking, Geoffrey A. &quot;Russia: People and Empire, 1552–1917&quot;, (Harvard University Press, 1997)
* Kagan, Frederick W. &quot;The military reforms of Nicholas I&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan US, 1999).
* Kutscheroff, Samuel. &quot;Administration of Justice under Nicholas I of Russia.&quot; &quot;American Slavic and East European Review&quot; (1948): 125–138. in JSTOR
* Lincoln, W. Bruce. &quot;Nicholas I: Russia&#x27;s Last Absolute Monarch,&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (1971) 21 #2 pp. 79–88.
* Lincoln, W. Bruce. &quot;Nicholas I: Emperor and Autocrat of All the Russias&quot; (1989) online
* Monas, Sidney. &quot;The Third Section: police and society in Russia under Nicholas I&quot; (Harvard University Press, 1961)
* Presni͡akov, A. E. &quot;Emperor Nicholas I of Russia: the apogee of autocracy, 1825/1855&quot; (1974) online
* Pintner, Walter McKenzie. &quot;Russian economic policy under Nicholas I&quot; (1967) online
* Rendall, Matthew. &quot;Restraint or Self-Restraint of Russia: Nicholas I, the Treaty of Unkiar Skelessi, and the Vienna System, 1832–1841.&quot; &quot;International History Review&quot; 24.1 (2002): 37–63.
*Rebecchini, Damiano. (2010). &quot;An influential collector: Tsar Nicholas I of Russia.&quot; &quot;Journal of the History of Collections.&quot; V. 22, Issue 1, (May): 45–67.
* Riasanovsky, Nicholas V. &quot;&#x27;Nationality&#x27; in the State Ideology during the Reign of Nicholas I.&quot; &quot;Russian Review&quot; (1960): 38–46 online.
* Riasanovsky, Nicholas V. &quot;Nicholas I and Official Nationality in Russia, 1825–1855&quot; (1967) online
* Roberts, Ian W. &quot;Nicholas I and the Russian intervention in Hungary&quot; (Springer, 1991).
* Stanislawski, Michael. &quot;Tsar Nicholas I and the Jews : the transformation of Jewish society in Russia, 1825–1855&quot; (1983) online

==External links==
* – Historical reconstruction &quot;The Romanovs&quot;. StarMedia. Babich-Design(Russia, 2013)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="0" end="10" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618625" start="21" end="38" title="Emperor of Russia" label="Emperor of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40" end="63" title="List of rulers of Partitioned Poland#Kings of the Kingdom of Poland" label="King of Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257510" start="69" end="90" title="Grand Duke of Finland" label="Grand Duke of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189" start="134" end="140" title="Paul I of Russia" label="Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="181" end="192" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q126306" start="250" end="267" title="Decembrist revolt" label="Decembrist revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="298" end="309" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899269" start="421" end="442" title="repression of dissent" label="repression of dissent"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="451" end="457" title="Imperial Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074674" start="625" end="648" title="Nicholas V. Riasanovsky" label="Nicholas V. Riasanovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057121" start="1075" end="1084" title="Tsarist autocracy" label="autocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="1242" end="1253" title="Greek War of Independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="1254" end="1265" title="Kingdom of Greece" label="Greek state"/>
<link wikidata="Q23039096" start="1282" end="1314" title="Russian conquest of the Caucasus" label="Russian conquest of the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125506" start="1326" end="1340" title="Iğdır Province" label="Iğdır Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="1373" end="1380" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="1385" end="1395" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="1401" end="1411" title="Qajar Iran" label="Qajar Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420115" start="1423" end="1452" title="Russo-Persian War (1826–1828)" label="Russo-Persian War (1826–1828)"/>
<link wikidata="Q287942" start="1467" end="1496" title="Russo-Turkish War (1828–1829)" label="Russo-Turkish War (1828–1829)"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="1534" end="1551" title="November Uprising" label="November Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="1555" end="1561" title="Congress Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="1591" end="1598" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="1610" end="1630" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1659" end="1672" title="Foreign policy of the Russian Empire#Nicholas I, 1825–1855" label="he led Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="1682" end="1693" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933932" start="1762" end="1777" title="micromanagement" label="micromanagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2014" end="2028" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7461" start="2222" end="2237" title="Gatchina Palace" label="Gatchina Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436" start="2241" end="2249" title="Gatchina" label="Gatchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189" start="2270" end="2285" title="Paul I of Russia" label="Grand Duke Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q57632" start="2365" end="2395" title="Maria Feodorovna (Sophie Dorothea of Württemberg)" label="Sophie Dorothea of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="2465" end="2494" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Emperor Alexander I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161106" start="2499" end="2541" title="Grand Duke Constantine Pavlovich of Russia" label="Grand Duke Constantine Pavlovich of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="2602" end="2621" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q952136" start="2783" end="2796" title="List of Grand Masters of the Knights Hospitaller" label="Maltese cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q57207" start="3041" end="3070" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Charlotte of Prussia)" label="Princess Charlotte of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37134" start="3186" end="3218" title="Frederick William III of Prussia" label="Frederick William III of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156723" start="3223" end="3253" title="Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q105013" start="3345" end="3375" title="Frederick William I of Prussia" label="Frederick William I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="3698" end="3704" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="3860" end="3866" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q433967" start="4033" end="4050" title="Joanna Grudzinska" label="Joanna Grudzinska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="4062" end="4071" title="Old Style" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="4213" end="4222" title="Old Style" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q126306" start="4423" end="4440" title="Decembrist Revolt" label="Decembrist Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="4451" end="4460" title="Old Style" label="Old Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057121" start="4691" end="4699" title="Tsarist autocracy" label="autocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="5120" end="5132" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="army officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="5314" end="5335" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q126306" start="5434" end="5451" title="Decembrist revolt" label="Decembrist revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q9362215" start="5598" end="5611" title="Third Section of His Imperial Majesty&amp;#x27;s Own Chancellery" label="Third Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409012" start="5619" end="5639" title="His Imperial Majesty&amp;#x27;s Own Chancellery" label="Imperial Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416089" start="5699" end="5708" title="Separate Corps of Gendarmes" label="Gendarmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503889" start="5735" end="5745" title="Censorship in Russia" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q25672" start="5860" end="5882" title="Alexander Benckendorff" label="Alexander Benckendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="6259" end="6269" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q778305" start="6344" end="6349" title="Qahal" label="Qahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="6404" end="6411" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="6515" end="6532" title="November Uprising" label="November Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="6608" end="6622" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621200" start="6653" end="6667" title="Tsarskoye Selo" label="Tsarskoye Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178843" start="6688" end="6719" title="Saint Petersburg–Moscow railway" label="Saint Petersburg–Moscow railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q704501" start="6808" end="6821" title="Sergey Uvarov" label="Sergey Uvarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294463" start="6830" end="6860" title="Ministry of National Education (Russian Empire)" label="Ministry of National Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455145" start="6889" end="6926" title="Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality" label="Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="6982" end="6993" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="7276" end="7280" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="7307" end="7330" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="7340" end="7356" title="Russian language" label="Russian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q157623" start="7442" end="7458" title="Vasily Zhukovsky" label="Vasily Zhukovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q46699" start="7528" end="7538" title="Slavophile" label="Slavophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="7694" end="7701" title="Pushkin" label="Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46599" start="7706" end="7715" title="Lermontov" label="Lermontov"/>
<link wikidata="Q134958" start="7792" end="7808" title="Taras Shevchenko" label="Taras Shevchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q381062" start="7839" end="7852" title="List of national poets" label="national poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="7856" end="7863" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="7879" end="7886" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546359" start="8157" end="8175" title="Byzantine Catholic" label="Byzantine Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989980" start="8189" end="8204" title="Joseph Semashko" label="Joseph Semashko"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="8249" end="8271" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Rite Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="8275" end="8282" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="8284" end="8291" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="8297" end="8306" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370735" start="8316" end="8332" title="Synod of Polotsk" label="Synod of Polotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="8395" end="8408" title="Roman Pontiff" label="Roman Pontiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q727056" start="8415" end="8433" title="Marquis de Custine" label="Marquis de Custine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="8435" end="8450" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728097" start="8492" end="8501" title="Cantonist" label="Cantonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="8524" end="8531" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q717801" start="8854" end="8868" title="Pavel Kiselyov" label="Pavel Kiselyov"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="9152" end="9157" title="serfs" label="serfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q929093" start="9247" end="9261" title="Table of Ranks" label="Table of Ranks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="9557" end="9569" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="not the only"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354258" start="9637" end="9656" title="Russian nationalism" label="Russian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q370870" start="9783" end="9795" title="westernizers" label="westernizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q46699" start="9945" end="9956" title="Slavophiles" label="Slavophiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="9983" end="9989" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="10025" end="10033" title="Western world" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="10059" end="10065" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="10142" end="10153" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038910" start="10230" end="10233" title="mir (social)" label="Mir"/>
<link wikidata="Q630281" start="10383" end="10393" title="messianism" label="messianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q704501" start="10738" end="10751" title="Sergei Uvarov" label="Sergei Uvarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200" start="11745" end="11762" title="Aleksandr Pushkin" label="Aleksandr Pushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43718" start="11764" end="11777" title="Nikolai Gogol" label="Nikolai Gogol"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="11779" end="11792" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q41425" start="11879" end="11885" title="Ballet" label="Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11933" end="11939" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="11945" end="11960" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q181885" start="12012" end="12026" title="Mikhail Glinka" label="Mikhail Glinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q67147" start="12061" end="12078" title="Georg von Cancrin" label="Georg von Cancrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="12148" end="12170" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="12352" end="12359" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="12648" end="12673" title="Congress Poland" label="Russian-controlled Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996898" start="12715" end="12724" title="inorodtsy" label="inorodtsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728097" start="13039" end="13048" title="Cantonist" label="Cantonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="13265" end="13272" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="13284" end="13293" title="Russification" label="Russified"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="13333" end="13345" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173140" start="13565" end="13608" title="Jewish agricultural colonisation of Ukraine" label="Jewish agricultural colonisation of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="13941" end="13954" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="13969" end="13975" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="14051" end="14058" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="14063" end="14069" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q156713" start="14110" end="14118" title="Zhitomir" label="Zhitomir"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="14123" end="14128" title="Vilna" label="Vilna"/>
<link wikidata="Q181648" start="14188" end="14202" title="foreign policy" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="14902" end="14910" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="16688" end="16695" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="16700" end="16706" title="Second French Empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q374393" start="17986" end="18017" title="Alexander Sergeyevich Menshikov" label="Alexander Sergeyevich Menshikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="18670" end="18709" title="Klemens von Metternich" label="Metternich counter-revolutionary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q78673" start="18748" end="18775" title="Karl Ludwig von Ficquelmont" label="Karl Ludwig von Ficquelmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="19067" end="19090" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="19094" end="19109" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q223933" start="19156" end="19196" title="Belgian Revolution" label="Belgian revolt against the Dutch in 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="19213" end="19234" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="19442" end="19449" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="20544" end="20560" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis Philippe I"/>
<link wikidata="Q909355" start="20940" end="20951" title="Anti-French sentiment" label="anti-French"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="21667" end="21684" title="November Uprising" label="November Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447085" start="21708" end="21725" title="Sejm of Congress Poland" label="Polish parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157186" start="21962" end="21981" title="Constitution of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Polish constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068091" start="22056" end="22068" title="Vistula Land" label="Vistula Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152005" start="22172" end="22194" title="Catholic Church in Poland" label="Polish Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="22285" end="22306" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="series of revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="22394" end="22403" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="22420" end="22441" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="revolution in Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="22461" end="22468" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="22705" end="22719" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q63158027" start="22724" end="22730" title="Qajar Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q735165" start="22847" end="22863" title="Eastern Question" label="Eastern Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="22972" end="22979" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q123227" start="23626" end="23655" title="Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca" label="1774 Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q314196" start="24239" end="24254" title="Karl Nesselrode" label="Karl Nesselrode"/>
<link wikidata="Q182781" start="24344" end="24365" title="Muhammad Ali of Egypt" label="Muhammad Ali of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q78673" start="25061" end="25088" title="Karl Ludwig von Ficquelmont" label="Karl Ludwig von Ficquelmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420115" start="25833" end="25860" title="Russo-Persian War (1826–28)" label="Russo-Persian War (1826–28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="25939" end="25947" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8543350" start="25956" end="25969" title="Russo-Persian Wars" label="had conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q37736" start="26010" end="26024" title="North Caucasus" label="North Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="26029" end="26043" title="South Caucasus" label="South Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="26067" end="26074" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="26076" end="26084" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="26086" end="26093" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="26099" end="26109" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q875512" start="26286" end="26307" title="Treaty of Turkmenchay" label="Treaty of Turkmenchay"/>
<link wikidata="Q287942" start="26417" end="26424" title="Russo-Turkish War (1828–29)" label="1828–29"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051748" start="26604" end="26629" title="Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi" label="Treaty of Unkiar-Skelessi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="26802" end="26811" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="26816" end="26827" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q700363" start="26867" end="26892" title="London Straits Convention" label="London Straits Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q345365" start="27268" end="27284" title="Pavel Nakhimov" label="Admiral Nakhimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="27418" end="27425" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="27427" end="27433" title="French Second Empire" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577303" start="27439" end="27458" title="Kingdom of Sardinia (1720–1861)" label="Kingdom of Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="27588" end="27599" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093709" start="27951" end="27966" title="Mikhail Pogodin" label="Mikhail Pogodin"/>
<link wikidata="Q513285" start="28172" end="28185" title="Orlando Figes" label="Orlando Figes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="28610" end="28616" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411903" start="28662" end="28683" title="Sevastopol Naval Base" label="Sevastopol Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q815216" start="28779" end="28808" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1854–55)" label="Siege of Sevastopol (1854–55)"/>
<link wikidata="Q182147" start="29186" end="29199" title="Winter Palace" label="Winter Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="29203" end="29217" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="29276" end="29285" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q736587" start="29394" end="29418" title="Saints Peter and Paul Cathedral, Saint Petersburg" label="Peter and Paul Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995744" start="29708" end="29727" title="Aleksandr Nikitenko" label="Aleksandr Nikitenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="29840" end="29851" title="Lev Tolstoy" label="Lev Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859028" start="29997" end="30013" title="Barbara Jelavich" label="Barbara Jelavich"/>
<link wikidata="Q84151" start="30253" end="30268" title="Kiev University" label="Kiev University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120972" start="30421" end="30438" title="Hugh Seton-Watson" label="Hugh Seton-Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q727056" start="30550" end="30568" title="Marquis de Custine" label="Marquis de Custine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074136" start="30609" end="30626" title="La Russie en 1839" label="La Russie en 1839"/>
<link wikidata="Q189349" start="31056" end="31062" title="urban legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178843" start="31073" end="31104" title="Saint Petersburg–Moscow Railway" label="Saint Petersburg–Moscow Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q57207" start="31592" end="31612" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Charlotte of Prussia)" label="Alexandra Feodorovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4316746" start="32023" end="32039" title="Varvara Nelidova" label="Varvara Nelidova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291307" start="32047" end="32081" title="Marianne Koberwein" label="Anna-Maria Charlota de Rutenskiold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291307" start="32096" end="32125" title="Joséphine Koberwein" label="Joséphine or Youzia Koberwein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32197" end="32219" title="Olga Carlovna Albrecht" label="Olga Carlovna Albrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q4316746" start="32259" end="32275" title="Varvara Nelidova" label="Varvara Nelidova"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32287" end="32302" title="Alexis Pashkine" label="Alexis Pashkine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161414" start="32366" end="32383" title="History of Russia" label="History of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="32386" end="32401" title="Imperial Russia" label="Imperial Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074136" start="32410" end="32427" title="La Russie en 1839" label="La Russie en 1839"/>
<link wikidata="Q9362215" start="32436" end="32453" title="Third Section of His Imperial Majesty&amp;#x27;s Own Chancellery" label="The Third Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379009" start="32456" end="32483" title="Tsars of Russia family tree" label="Tsars of Russia family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="32585" end="32604" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q15817564" start="33338" end="33365" title="Journal of Eurasian Studies" label="Journal of Eurasian Studies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="46642" wikidata="Q283302" url="?curid=46642" title="Grep">
<text>grep is a command-line utility for searching plaintext datasets for lines that match a regular expression. Its name comes from the ed command codice_1 (global regular expression search and print), which has the same effect. grep was originally developed for the Unix operating system, but later became available for all Unix-like systems and some others such as OS-9.

==History==
Before it was named, grep was a private utility written by Ken Thompson to search files for certain patterns. Doug McIlroy, unaware of its existence, asked Thompson to write such a program. Responding that he would think about such a utility overnight, Thompson actually corrected bugs and made improvements for about an hour on his own program called &quot;s&quot; (short for &quot;search&quot;). The next day he presented the program to McIlroy, who said it was exactly what he wanted. Thompson&#x27;s account may explain the belief that grep was written overnight.

Thompson wrote the first version in PDP-11 assembly language to help Lee E. McMahon analyze the text of &quot;The Federalist Papers&quot; to determine authorship of the individual papers. The ed text editor (also authored by Thompson) had regular expression support but could not be used to search through such a large amount of text, as it loaded the entire file into memory to enable random access editing, so Thompson excerpted that regexp code into a standalone tool which would instead process arbitrarily long files sequentially without buffering too much into memory. He chose the name because in ed, the command codice_1 would print all lines featuring a specified pattern match. grep was first included in Version 4 Unix. Stating that it is &quot;generally cited as &quot;the&quot; prototypical software tool&quot;, McIlroy credited grep with &quot;irrevocably ingraining&quot; Thompson&#x27;s tools philosophy in Unix.

==Implementations==
A variety of grep implementations are available in many operating systems and software development environments. Early variants included egrep and fgrep, introduced in Version 7 Unix. The egrep variant supports an extended regular expression syntax added by Alfred Aho after Ken Thompson&#x27;s original regular expression implementation. The &quot;fgrep&quot; variant searches for any of a list of &quot;fixed&quot; strings using the Aho–Corasick string matching algorithm. Binaries of these variants exist in modern systems, usually linking to grep or calling grep as a shell script with the appropriate flag added, e.g. codice_3. egrep and fgrep, while commonly deployed on POSIX systems, to the point the POSIX specification mentions their widespread existence, are actually not part of POSIX.

Other commands contain the word &quot;grep&quot; to indicate they are search tools, typically ones that rely on regular expression matches. The pgrep utility, for instance, displays the processes whose names match a given regular expression.

In the Perl programming language, codice_4 is a built-in function that finds elements in a list that satisfy a certain property. This higher-order function is typically named codice_5 or codice_6 in other languages.

The pcregrep command is an implementation of grep that uses Perl regular expression syntax. Similar functionality can be invoked in the GNU version of grep with the codice_7 flag.

Ports of grep (within Cygwin and GnuWin32, for example) also run under Microsoft Windows. Some versions of Windows feature the similar qgrep or findstr command.

A grep command is also part of ASCII&#x27;s &quot;MSX-DOS2 Tools&quot; for MSX-DOS version 2.

The grep, egrep, and fgrep commands have also been ported to the IBM i operating system.

The software Adobe InDesign has functions GREP (since CS3 version (2007)), in the &quot;find/change&quot; dialog box &quot;GREP&quot; tab, and introduced with InDesign CS4 in &quot;paragraph styles&quot; &quot;GREP styles&quot;.

===agrep===

agrep (approximate grep) is an open-source approximate string matching program, developed by Udi Manber and Sun Wu between 1988 and 1991, for use with the Unix operating system. It was later ported to OS/2, DOS, and Windows.

&quot;a&quot;grep matches even when the text only &quot;approximately&quot; fits the search pattern.

This following invocation finds codice_8 in file codice_9, but also any other word that can be derived from it, given no more than two substitutions.

This example generates a list of matches with the closest, that is those with the fewest, substitutions listed first. The command flag codice_10 means &quot;best&quot;:
==Usage as a verb==
In December 2003, the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary Online&quot; added &quot;grep&quot; as both a noun and a verb.

A common verb usage is the phrase &quot;You can&#x27;t grep dead trees&quot;—meaning one can more easily search through digital media, using tools such as grep, than one could with a hard copy (i.e. one made from &quot;dead trees&quot;, which in this context is a dysphemism for paper).

==See also==

* Boyer–Moore string-search algorithm
* agrep, an approximate string-matching command
* find (Windows) or Findstr, a DOS and Windows command that performs text searches, similar to a simple grep
* find (Unix), a Unix command that finds files by attribute, very different from grep
* List of Unix commands
* vgrep, or &quot;visual grep&quot;
* ngrep, the network grep

==References==

;Notes
* Hume, Andrew &quot;Grep wars: The strategic search initiative.&quot; In Peter Collinson, editor, &quot;Proceedings of the EUUG Spring 88 Conference&quot;, pages 237–245, Buntingford, UK, 1988. European UNIX User Group.


==External links==

* GNU Grep official website
* GNU Grep manual
* 
* &quot;why GNU grep is fast&quot; - implementation details from GNU grep&#x27;s author.
* Command Grep – 25 practical examples</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q283302" start="0" end="4" title="Grep" label="grep"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="10" end="22" title="command line interface" label="command-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="87" end="105" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q283992" start="131" end="133" title="ed (text editor)" label="ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="262" end="266" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="320" end="329" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008085" start="362" end="366" title="OS-9" label="OS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107006" start="440" end="452" title="Ken Thompson" label="Ken Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q92881" start="491" end="503" title="Doug McIlroy" label="Doug McIlroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="986" end="992" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="993" end="1010" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513516" start="1019" end="1033" title="Lee E. McMahon" label="Lee E. McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q858036" start="1060" end="1081" title="The Federalist Papers" label="The Federalist Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q283992" start="1142" end="1156" title="ed (text editor)" label="ed text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q185612" start="1189" end="1207" title="regular expression" label="regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="1336" end="1349" title="random access" label="random access"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666693" start="1665" end="1679" title="Version 4 Unix" label="Version 4 Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14652" start="1853" end="1869" title="tools philosophy" label="tools philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740168" start="2068" end="2082" title="Version 7 Unix" label="Version 7 Unix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2114" end="2141" title="Regular expression#POSIX basic and extended" label="extended regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q62898" start="2158" end="2168" title="Alfred Aho" label="Alfred Aho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107006" start="2175" end="2187" title="Ken Thompson" label="Ken Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q402342" start="2335" end="2373" title="Aho–Corasick string matching algorithm" label="Aho–Corasick string matching algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q286117" start="2843" end="2848" title="pgrep" label="pgrep"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="2949" end="2953" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474542" start="3076" end="3097" title="higher-order function" label="higher-order function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3219" end="3242" title="Regular expression#Perl and PCRE" label="Perl regular expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="3340" end="3345" title="Porting" label="Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q216192" start="3362" end="3368" title="Cygwin" label="Cygwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q847208" start="3373" end="3381" title="GnuWin32" label="GnuWin32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="3411" end="3428" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450018" start="3484" end="3491" title="findstr" label="findstr"/>
<link wikidata="Q297303" start="3533" end="3538" title="ASCII Corporation" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445525" start="3577" end="3584" title="MSX-DOS" label="MSX-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637561" start="3662" end="3667" title="IBM i" label="IBM i"/>
<link wikidata="Q218924" start="3700" end="3714" title="Adobe InDesign" label="Adobe InDesign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="3961" end="3972" title="open-source software" label="open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798621" start="3973" end="4000" title="approximate string matching" label="approximate string matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903143" start="4023" end="4033" title="Udi Manber" label="Udi Manber"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="4085" end="4089" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="4131" end="4135" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="4137" end="4140" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="4146" end="4153" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="4626" end="4651" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q844782" start="4980" end="4990" title="dysphemism" label="dysphemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q895984" start="5020" end="5055" title="Boyer–Moore string-search algorithm" label="Boyer–Moore string-search algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693816" start="5058" end="5063" title="agrep" label="agrep"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449853" start="5106" end="5120" title="find (Windows)" label="find (Windows)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450018" start="5124" end="5131" title="Findstr" label="Findstr"/>
<link wikidata="Q114633" start="5215" end="5226" title="find (Unix)" label="find (Unix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q839478" start="5301" end="5322" title="List of Unix commands" label="List of Unix commands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5325" end="5330" title="Visual inspection#Humorous terminology" label="vgrep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022653" start="5361" end="5366" title="ngrep" label="ngrep"/>
</links>
</doc>
